


















































December 19, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 19, 1986 
  
 
 

377 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to introduce to you, and through you to the legislature, six 
students. They are adults and they are from the “English as a 
Second Language” course from the Regina Plains Community 
College. They’re with their teacher, Roberta Kullman. They’re 
going to spend most of the morning with us, and I look forward 
to meeting with them at about 11:30 for a break for them, and 
we’ll get some pictures and drinks. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and the Assembly to welcome these 
students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Conditions of Sale for PAPCO 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is — would 
have been directed to the minister in charge of Saskatchewan 
Forest Products Corporation and PAPCO, but in view of the 
fact that PAPCO was owned by CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), or CICIII, I direct my questions 
to the minister in charge of CIC, and it deals with the 
documents released last week by the government respecting its 
various arrangements with the Weyerhaeuser corporation, 
documents which show just how badly the government opposite 
botched up its negotiations for the sale of the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company and its assets. 
 
The documents show that Weyerhaeuser was not required to put 
up any money down when it acquired the $248 million of public 
assets; in fact the acquisition agreement shows that upon 
closing, far from putting any money down, Weyerhaeuser will 
— according to my reading of the documents — receive over 
$7 million from PAPCO and from the Crown. 
 
Can the minister explain why, in divesting yourself of a pulp 
mill, you would not ask for any down payment but in fact 
would give a reverse down payment of over $7 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t profess to know the 
full details of that. The member from Meadow Lake handled 
that, I would defer the specifics and the details of that particular 
question to the Minister of Health, who can respond to it. 
Suffice it to say though, Mr. Speaker, the following — and I 
think this has been widely debated in the province; widely 
debated during the last provincial election campaign. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You lost some seats over it, too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, the member of Quill Lakes  

says we lost some seats. Well we have a member from 
Shellbrook-Torch River where the pulp mill is located; he is on 
this side of the House. We have the member from Turtleford 
where the project is located; he’s on this side of the House. So 
we’re quite proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me get back to the question and that is this: the member 
opposite talks about the particular deal. The particular deal was 
as follows: that corporation, Mr. Speaker, that corporation was 
losing the people of Saskatchewan $91,000 a day, $91,000 a 
day from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan because, Mr. Speaker, 
of a bad deal made by the members opposite when they were in 
government — because of a bad deal. 
 
The second thing, Mr. Speaker, is he says, and has said for a 
long time during the debate and the election campaign, that 
Weyerhaeuser would not in fact build a paper plant. The 
Minister of Health stood in this institution yesterday, stood in 
this Assembly yesterday, indicated that Weyerhaeuser were 
proceeding with the building of that paper plant, creating new 
jobs, creating new products, diversifying the economy of this 
province, and that’s what the election was about. We’re proud 
of that; we’re proud of Weyerhaeuser; we’re proud of the 
Weyerhaeuser deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will 
either of the ministers acknowledge that when PAPCO was sold 
to Weyerhaeuser, it was not losing $91,000 a day or anything 
like it, and that anyone who says it was losing $91,000 a day 
when that sale was made is uttering a flat falsehood? Would he 
agree with that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The minister says that PAPCO was 
losing $91,000 a day at the time of the sale. Is that a fair 
interpretation of your monosyllabic answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member well 
knows, $91,000 a day during the debate last spring, and it was 
clearly pointed out in this House by myself and by other 
members of the House that the $91,000 a day was over a period 
of five years, and that was every single day over a period of 
about five years that PAPCO lost that much for the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, that very fact and that hemorrhaging of 
money, which is exactly what was happening, was one of the 
motivations for this government in operating in an efficient and 
a reasonable way, on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 
to say we must get out of public ownership of this — okay? — 
number one. So we did that. 
 
And not only did we get out of public ownership of the public 
or the government running a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr.   



 
December 19, 1986 

 

378 
 
 

Speaker. Not only did we move the pulp operation in 
Saskatchewan out of the public domain and over into the 
private sector where it can operate more efficiently; not only did 
we do that, Mr. Speaker, but as a very significant added bonus, 
we encouraged a paper-mill to come to Saskatchewan, 
something that is not anywhere else in the prairie provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The second largest paper-mill in the 
dominion of Canada will be in Shellbrook-Torch River 
constituency in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, there is no question in the 
minds of any thinking people in Saskatchewan that the building 
of a paper-mill and its contribution to the diversification of the 
economy of this province is in fact a very good deal for 
Saskatchewan and all of its citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, and I will refrain from 
replying to the minister’s speech and direct a question to him — 
a narrow question. Do you agree that in the transfer of the pulp 
mill Weyerhaeuser paid no money down but in fact the Crown 
is paying Weyerhaeuser more than $7 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In the deal, Mr. Speaker . . . Let me 
submit this to the House and to the hon. member, the Leader of 
the Opposition. Weyerhaeuser will pay $248 million for the 
present installation which is there — $248 million by way of a 
debenture which is held by the province. That was the 
mechanism chosen, that was the mechanism negotiated, and I 
submit to you and to this House those members opposite . . .  
 
And you will remember the debate, Mr. Speaker; many others 
in this province will remember the debate. Prior to the election, 
and, I might add, during the election, this was to some extent an 
issue during the election as I recall, Mr. Speaker. And as I also 
recall, the people of Saskatchewan spoke on this issue and they 
spoke fairly loudly and clearly across the forested belt in 
Saskatchewan where this is most significant. And let me just 
name the constituencies where forests are: Kelsey-Tisdale, 
Nipawin, Shellbrook-Torch River, Meadow Lake . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I asked a 
very simple question, Mr. Minister. You obviously don’t want 
to answer it. But will you, if you don’t want to answer it, then 
hold your seat and not waste the time of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — My question to you is this: is it not true 
that Weyerhaeuser paid no down payment, but in  

fact the Crown paid Weyerhaeuser over $7 million at the 
closing of the transfer of the mill to Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it is true that 
Weyerhaeuser will pay the Government of Saskatchewan $248 
million for the pulp mill and the chemical plant and the Bodmin 
sawmill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the fact. That is the fact. That is the . . . The 
documents will show. And might I add, Mr. Speaker, the 
documents which the members have been studying for whatever 
period of time — three weeks, I believe, ago that I put them on 
the table — and they’ve looked at them for two or three weeks. 
The most extensive set of documents ever tabled in this 
legislature relating to a commercial transaction . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The minister is 
attempting to answer the question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s not answering it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: —. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I might submit to you that 
you cannot take the documents as you will have all seen, the 
thick documents that go with something in that order and break 
them down into a simplified question. And I will not submit to a 
very simplistic question. So I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
$248 million is what they’re paying for the pulp mill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It is 
obvious the minister will not answer the question, because he 
knows that he is giving 7 million to Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Supply of Natural Gas to the Pulp Mill 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Will he answer another question? Why 
does the agreement allow Weyerhaeuser to bypass the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation for its natural gas supply? 
And what advantage will that give to Weyerhaeuser over other 
industrial producers in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What other paper-mills are there in this 
province, I would ask, Mr. Speaker? I notice in the news release 
of the member, of the hon. member opposite, and he says: “. . . 
because the corporation will have to make up the lost revenue.” 
 
And I say, which lost revenue could he possibly be referring to? 
The lost revenue to SPC now, I believe that he is referring to in 
this news release of the member of the opposition. Make up for 
lost revenue. And I would say, what lost revenue can there be if, 
under his administration or under the philosophy which he 
espouses, there would not be a paper-mill, so there would be no 
revenue whatever? What can you lose from that? 
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

379 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do I take 
it from the minister’s remarks that there’s no natural gases 
consumed in the pulp mill? Do you . . . Are you asking this 
House to believe that the pulp mill consumes no natural gas? 
And are you asking us to believe that natural gas previously 
supplied by the power corporation to that mill, but now possibly 
supplied to Weyerhaeuser not by SPC, will not result in a loss 
to SPC? Are you saying that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I’m not saying that, Mr. Speaker. 
What I’m saying is that this paper-mill, integrated with the pulp 
mill which is presently in Saskatchewan, will make money in 
the long term for the province of Saskatchewan. There is no 
question in my mind about that. There is no question in the 
minds of anybody across the forested belt of Saskatchewan. 
They will make money for Saskatchewan in the long term. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary. We are not discussing 
whether or not the mill would make money. I asked you: what 
is the policy of the government with respect to natural gas 
supply to this industrial customer? And I ask you now, sir, will 
you extend the same policy to other industrial customers, and 
will you not concede that that means higher gas rates for 
consumers and others who will not get the benefit of the profits 
made from supplying this natural gas customer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, if you take the Leader of 
the Opposition’s argument to its logical conclusion, he would 
say that — he says that there are higher . . . there would be 
higher gas rates for consumers in Saskatchewan if there was not 
this deal with the paper-mill. That’s what he said. And what I 
say, Mr. Speaker, is that if there was no paper-mill, which there 
certainly would not be under his administration, how would that 
affect the gas rates? It does not affect the consumers’ gas rates. 
I will say that to the hon. member, and the Leader of the 
Opposition, and all members of the House. What this will do is 
make money for the people of Saskatchewan over a period of 
time. It will not hemorrhage taxpayers’ money to the extent of 
$91,000 a day as it did in the other administrations when they 
were in power. 
 

Interpretation of Commercial Necessity 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister. 
And I want to deal with the question of a paper-mill and ask the 
Minister whether he is aware of the fact that the development 
agreement contains an out, which is available to Weyerhaeuser 
if they deem that for reasons of commercial necessity they 
ought not to go ahead with it, and that Weyerhaeuser is the sole 
judge of whether such commercial necessity exists. 
 
Now, Minister, if this is such a sure thing project, why was this 
kind of an out necessary? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what the New 
Democratic Party opposition calls an out, I believe was  

answered yesterday when it was announced here and by 
Weyerhaeuser across Saskatchewan and across Canada, as a 
matter of fact, that they had signed the first contract for $40 
million to build a paper machine which will be installed in 
Prince Albert, and the construction of that paper-mill begins in 
April of this year . . . of next year, I’m sorry — April of 1987. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker the out that the people are hoping for across 
here . . . You know, they write the obituary of Supercart; they 
write the obituary of the upgrader. We heard it the other day — 
they’re writing the obituary of the upgrader in Regina, and yet 
tomorrow the biggest bit of freight that ever hit Saskatchewan is 
coming to serve that upgrader. But they say it still won’t happen 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I think we should have a little order on 
both sides of the House. Order! Order! I reiterate — I think we 
should have order on both sides of the House. Hollering 
raucously so that they can hear you on Albert Street does not 
add to the dignity of this House. Order! And I’m warning the 
member for Quill Lakes for the last time. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not hoping for an out. Our 
problem is that there is an out, and we can’t understand why 
there is one. Is the minister now telling . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Is the minister now telling the House that this 
out, this commercial necessity provision in the agreement is no 
longer operative and that the pulp mill is a guaranteed go, a 
guaranteed project . . . pardon me, the paper-mill is a 
guaranteed project? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What I’m saying to the member from 
Fairview and to all members opposite is that I invite them to 
Prince Albert and to the Shellbrook-Torch River constituency 
where the paper-mill will be built in April to watch the ground 
breaking of the new paper-mill in that area. I invite all members 
to be there, the citizens of Saskatchewan, as a matter of fact. 
Because the citizens of Saskatchewan who live across the 
forested belt know that that paper-mill is coming, and they’re 
very pleased about it because of what it does to diversify this 
economy and what it does for the forest industry across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. All we know is 
what we read in the agreement, and we certainly hope that the 
minister is right, and better be right considering the very many 
serious questions that are raised in this agreement. Now we 
pointed out some of them in this House. Many of them were 
pointed out last spring. And in light of these serious questions 
which the Saskatchewan people have about this deal, will you 
agree to the creation of a special legislative committee with the 
power to call witnesses and hold public hearings to review this 
deal and to recommend any possible improvements? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

380 
 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, two questions here. First 
of all, I would say to the member — and he says he hopes that 
I’m right and that he hopes that the paper-mill will be there — 
well I would say to the hon. member he’s the first New 
Democratic member who has ever expressed a hope that the 
paper-mill would be a reality in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — So I congratulate him for that. 
Secondly, I would say to the hon. member from Fairview, and 
to other members of the House, that this project, when it goes 
ahead, will the hon. members acknowledge that there is to be a 
paper-mill when the paper-mill is up and built. I would just ask 
them that question: when the paper-mill is operating, will you 
acknowledge that there is one? When the upgrader is operating 
in Saskatchewan, will the members acknowledge that yes, there 
is an upgrader in southern Saskatchewan? That’s the question. 
 
And as it relates to the committee, to the committee requested 
by the member from Fairview, as I mentioned before: the 
documents that I tabled in this House on the first possible 
opportunity in this session are three very thick volumes, as you 
know. And as all members know, Mr. Speaker, they are put out 
there for the scrutiny of the public of Saskatchewan, for the 
scrutiny of the public of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, Mr. Speaker, the member is asking for a 
legislative committee to inquire into the deal. What I’m saying 
is we put the total deal before the public of Saskatchewan so the 
public of Saskatchewan, those who are interested, can inquire 
into the deal by seeing every shred of paper. That’s what that 
deal was about. And I must say to you, Mr. Speaker, potash 
take-over . . . you can go back over and over and over different 
deals. When did they ever table that kind of document? 
 

Twinning of Yellowhead Highway 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the hon. member from Melfort, the minister in charge of 
pot-holes and broken bridges, and I was wondering: as the 
member would know, Mr. Speaker, during the provincial 
election campaign the federal government announced $50 
million towards the twinning of the Yellowhead Highway. And 
my question to the hon. minister is whether or not you’ve 
communicated to the federal government that you will in fact be 
contributing towards the twinning of the Yellowhead in 
Saskatchewan, and how much are you committed to twinning 
on the Yellowhead? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
answer to the hon. member’s question, I think it’s a very good 
question that you have brought up here today, and the whole 
subject, the whole subject of the commitment by the federal 
government of a good number of funds — I believe it is $50 
million towards the improvement son the Yellowhead Highway 
throughout western Canada — is but one example of the 
co-operation that this government has had with the federal 
government. And I am extremely pleased with the  

announcement that came a few months ago. 
 
As far as the specifics, you were asking me here today to make 
commitments regarding specific areas that we will be 
improving on the Yellowhead, and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m not prepared to do that today. I can tell you that the matter 
is under review. I can tell you that we have received 
representations from a large number of communities all across 
the Yellowhead, and of course in today’s economy all 
communities are trying to get as much of the share of the pie as 
possible, and we’re listening to those representations from a 
large number of communities. And after I have listened to all 
the representations we will, in a fair, an above-board manner, 
make our best sound judgements on where the money shall be 
best spent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I was asking how much money the 
government has committed to twinning the Yellowhead. And 
obviously you’re not willing to make that commitment here 
today in this House. And I submit to you, Mr. Minister, that one 
of the reasons you can’t make a commitment to twinning the 
Yellowhead and doing adequate work on Saskatchewan 
highways is because of the fact you have to contribute a 
substantial portion of your budget to build roads for the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just maybe 
review the commitment made by the federal government and 
the program that is in effect for the Yellowhead. And it is a 
$100 million program that stretches across the four western 
provinces. 
 
And I find it very, very strange, and I’m very, very saddened, 
and I’m disappointed that the members of the opposition, after a 
considerable amount of hard work by this Progressive 
Conservative administration to attempt to negotiate with the 
federal government, and after months of negotiations by myself 
and by my predecessor and by other provinces in western 
Canada — after all those negotiations are through and we get 
the federal government committed to a program for the 
betterment of the Yellowhead highway, at long last we have 
recognition by the federal government for cost-sharing on the 
Yellowhead highway — the members of the opposition have to 
whine and complain about when are you going to spend the 
money and where are you going to spend the money? 
 
My friends, it is a prime example of the NDP’s attitude of 
“nothing is ever good enough.” I don’t know what — for the 
life of me I don’t know what would satisfy you people. Here is 
an excellent example of co-operation between our government 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financing of School Construction Costs 
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

381 
 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. My 
question is directed to the Minister of Education and it relates 
with the issue raised yesterday by my colleague from Prince 
Albert. 
 
I was rather amazed that the minister knew nothing of meetings 
held this month by his deputy minister and associate deputy in 
regards to capital financing and the proposals which your 
department is putting forward in changing the capital funding 
for schools’ construction. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you, now that you’ve had some time to 
consult and confer with your department, would you please 
inform this Assembly what the effects of your proposal are 
going to have on local school boards; and why, at this particular 
time when school boards are really pressed for money, you are 
trying to shift the burden from your government to local school 
boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of that 
question yesterday. My officials have been advised of it. They 
are going to meet with me and brief me on the consultations 
that they have had. 
 
And the reason, Mr. Speaker, I was unaware of the 
consultations that the member referred to was the perspective he 
put on the consultations in his question was so entirely different 
and absolutely different than the consultations that I was aware 
of that the question, in fact, was caught totally by surprise by 
the question. 
 
And I have yet to have a chance to meet with my officials to 
discuss what the consultations have been, except to say that I 
am of the view that they are to the betterment of education, 
quite simply, to the betterment of education. And when I have 
had a chance to be fully briefed by my officials, I will report to 
the House. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I have a letter here signed by Mr. 
Drozda who is the regional director of education, wherein he 
outlines that meetings shall take place and they will be chaired 
by your associate deputy, Mr. Penner, and spoken through by 
your deputy, Mr. Wickstrom. And one of the purpose of the 
meeting, Mr. Speaker, just to enlighten the minister, is to solicit 
input on potential changes to the financing of school 
construction programs; secondly, to discuss the role of the 
property management corporation in the financing of school 
construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is: I think these things 
are very closely related, and why is he, at this particular time, 
trying to change the financing formula for school construction 
when school boards are finding themselves in financial 
difficulties and property taxes are increasing because this 
government is denying the finances necessary for quality 
education? Why are you shifting the responsibility to the local 
school boards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I have already said I  

will take notice of this question and give the full answer. And 
I’m not going to take debate on specific points that the hon. 
member might raise, except to say that my understanding is that 
anything that was discussed was relative to preferred financing, 
not deterrent kinds of financing for school boards. 
 
And the other point that this question raises, Mr. Speaker, is 
this: our government, quite frankly, believes in consultation. 
We are not a government that sits in Regina and designs some 
kind of policy in the dark of night, hidden away somewhere. 
Our style is to go out and talk with the people. I suspect that’s 
what’s being going on here, and I suspect it’s been for the better 
of education, not for the worse of education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My point of order, Mr. Speaker, has two 
aspects, if you like . . . I seek a ruling on two different 
questions. One . . . the first has to do with some questions asked 
by the Leader of the Opposition, some tightly-focused questions 
to the Minister of Health. The Minister of Health then responds 
. . . talked about everything but the question that was asked. At 
one point in time, he went on and referred to a press release 
which the Leader of the Opposition had issued this morning 
which was only in the most indirect sense related to the 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rules of the Assembly do not require the 
Minister of Health to answer a question. I think public opinion 
is going to be less generous, but the rules to the question Mr. 
Deputy Speaker don’t require him to answer it. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the rules of this Assembly do 
prohibit the Minister from responding by launching into attack 
on an unrelated issue, which is what I suggest the Minister of 
Health did this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I asked you to rule on that question, as well as the 
Minister of Highways, who took notice and took a minute and 
fifteen seconds, because I timed him — a minute and fifteen 
seconds — to take notice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second part of my point of order is: I would 
ask you, Mr. Speaker, to tell us what you think the 
responsibility of the Chair is in keeping order during question 
period? Mr. Speaker, we cannot call points of order. We depend 
upon you to keep order in the question period. And I’d ask you, 
Mr. Speaker, as well, to rule on what you think your 
responsibility is when you see blatant abuses such as we got 
from the Minister of Health this morning. I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, to define your responsibility in question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, if I might speak to the 
point of order by the member from Regina Centre. First of all, I 
believe in his point of order he’s suggesting that I did not 
answer questions that were asked today. I would say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, in going through the record and reviewing this in order 
to make a ruling on the point of  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

382 
 
 

order, that you take into consideration the following: that the 
traditions of the House and the way in which question period is 
conducted in a sense that it’s a very . . . that you get on to a 
topic, whatever that topic may be. Question period has not been 
a place for very specific sort of detailed questions, and I would 
say that it is not that. But I would say as well, Mr. Speaker, that 
it is certainly a place to discuss the broad issues which are 
pertinent to the day, and I’d just like to ask to check into that. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, the other point that I would make 
is, as it relates to the member’s suggestion about the Minister of 
Highways, he said in his statement, I believe, that the Minister 
of Highways took notice of a question. I don’t believe that 
that’s the case. The Minister of Highways did not take notice of 
a question. And so I would just say to you, Mr. Speaker, please 
take into consideration the traditions of question period and the 
way in which question period is conducted in a broad 
discussion of broad issues. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, may I just make one 
clarification. I referred to the Minister of Highways; I did 
indeed intend to refer to the Minister of Education. It took a 
minute and 15 seconds to take notice of a question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have heard the point of order and the views 
of the opposition, and I will defer my ruling on that. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Special Committee 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move and seconded by 
my seat mate, the member from Kindersley: 
 

That a special committee, composed of Mr. Speaker as 
Chairman and members Andrew, Brockelbank, 
Gerich, Muller, Koskie, Kowalsky, McLaren, 
McLeod, Shillington and Taylor be appointed to 
examine such matters as it deems advisable with 
respect to the rules, procedures, practices and powers 
of the Legislative Assembly, its operation and 
organization, and the facilities and services provided 
to the Assembly, its committees and members; 
 
That this special committee be instructed to include in 
its report, drafts of proposed rules to give effect, if 
adopted by the Assembly, to any change or changes 
that may be proposed by the committee; 
 
That the committee have the power to sit during the 
intersessional period and during sessions except when 
the Assembly is sitting; and that the committee have 
the power to send for persons, papers, and records, 
and to examine witnesses under oath, to receive 
representations from interested parties and individuals, 
and to hold meetings away from the seat of 
government in order that provisions in other 
legislatures can be studied; 

That this committee be instructed to submit its report 
to the Assembly at such time as the Assembly resumes 
regular sitting in 1987. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, just a few words on this 
motion. First of all, the opposition welcomes the opportunity to 
take a look at the rules. We expect that this is a practice which 
is very much worth while and in keeping with the tradition of 
the Assembly. 
 
One aspect of this motion, however, does raise a small degree 
of concern on our part, and I think it should be accommodated 
by the government, and that is the last sentence of the proposed 
motion which says: 
 

That this committee be instructed to submit its report 
to the Assembly at such time as the Assembly resumes 
regular sittings in 1987. 

 
I’m sure that what the government intends, and what the hon. 
government House Leader intends by this, is that that phrase is 
to be interpreted to mean that there will be a report, but not 
necessarily the report, because it would be confining the House 
to a very strict timetable, and may be an unreasonable timetable 
by which the committee will complete its job and review of the 
various procedures involved. 
 
I’m sure that this is what the hon. House Leader intended. I 
don’t think you, sir, as a chairman of the committee would want 
to be put on such a strict and narrow timetable. I know that we 
wouldn’t want to be, and I’m sure that the members opposite 
would want a full and frank discussion about the rules, because 
what we effect by way of change will obviously have a great 
deal of impact on the way we operate for quite some time to 
come. 
 
So in order just to clarify this situation totally, I’ll be proposing 
an amendment to this motion which in effect will clarify the 
reporting time. We’d like to have this committee act in all due 
dispatch and reasonable speed, but obviously to be free to report 
as its deliberations permit it to report. 
 
And so accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move, seconded by 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition, that with respect to motion 
no. 1, amendment be made: 
 

That in the second last line we delete the word “its” 
and insert the word “a”. 
 

It would read: 
 

That this committee be instructed to submit a report to 
the Assembly at such time as the Assembly resumes 
regular sitting in 1987. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the government side has 
no problem whatever with the amendment that’s put forward by 
the member, and we agree that it would probably be an interim 
report, or a report at least. 
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

383 
 
 

 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 5 — An Act 
respecting the Organization of the Executive Government of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s with 
somewhat saddened heart that I have to rise in this debate to 
speak on a Bill such as Bill No. 5, particularly after the kind of 
sentiments which were expressed by the members of the 
government opposite in the throne speech, talking about 
co-operation, in which they talked about consultation, in which 
they talked about all the good things which were going to come 
from this Legislative Assembly in this term. 
 
Unfortunately, for the second time in this session we’ve had to 
rise in order to defend some fundamental principles regarding 
the functioning of the parliamentary democracy and the 
functioning and the ordering of the business of the Legislative 
Assembly. And that, sir, does not bode well for the future, I 
believe, of the operations of this House, of co-operation 
between ourselves and the side of the government; does not 
bode well for the nature and the process and the development of 
a consultative process between the government, between those 
who govern and those who are governed. 
 
In saying that, I’d like to refer a bit to a statement made by the 
hon. member from Quill Lakes yesterday, in which he made 
reference to the fact that the Big 8 or the Big 9, as they came to 
be known in November of 1985, took it upon themselves to 
bring this government, issue by issue, into account and into an 
account of its actions. And they were able to do that. They were 
able to do that by nature of some of the fundamental principles 
of parliamentary democracy which have been established in this 
House. 
 
And we, sir, view Bill 5, Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition 
view Bill 5 as an attempt to attack some of the underpinnings of 
the edifice of democracy which has been built not only in this 
House but throughout the Commonwealth over the last several 
or hundreds of years. 
 
And that’s why I basically am rising to oppose this Bill 5. 
Because I view it, as a member, as an attack on my rights — on 
my rights as a member of this Legislative Assembly to inquire 
and to find out and to scrutinize the activities of the 
government, and as a method of them impinging on my right as 
a member, and impinging on the right of the public to know — 
the right of the public to know the conduct of the government 
business. 
 
And that is how I see that Bill — that it’s an impingement on 
some basic rights and some basic freedoms which people have 
fought for and which have died for. And to  

remind members opposite of some of those objections that 
we’re raising, I’d like to review some of the legal ramifications 
of this Bill. 
 
The one particular legal ramification which we’ve seen . . . The 
member from Regina North West is so taken away with this 
speech, I see him not able to control himself. 
 
There are some legal ramifications in this Bill, the primary 
objection to which we see outlawed and probably . . . 
(inaudible) . . . The member from Regina . . . pardon me, 
Saskatoon Fairview, excuse me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Fairview and the member from 
Regina Lakeview have outlined the primary essence of our 
objection to the legal portion of the Bill, and that objection is 
based on its ultra vires nature. 
 
Now I’m not a lawyer and I’m not going to pretend to go into 
the legal if’s, and’s and but’s and some of the legal niceties of 
the Bill, if you like. But when I see such prominent members of 
the legal profession as the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 
as the member from Saskatoon Fairview, and as the member 
from Regina Lakeview, as well as the member from Regina 
Elphinstone who, I would submit, have been involved in some 
fairly significant legal operations in this province and in this 
country and who have got some knowledge of constitutional 
law and who have some knowledge of how, in fact, the British 
parliamentary tradition operates; and myself, as a new member, 
when I see people like that coming out in such strong 
opposition to this Bill, then there is something twigging in the 
back of my mind that says there is something wrong legally 
with this Bill, and that the members opposite, particularly those 
in the back bench, had better open their ears and had better start 
beginning to take notice of precisely what is wrong with what is 
happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — When we have people of such a stature, people 
involved in the drawing up of the constitution of Canada, one of 
the fundamental legal documents which governs the nature of 
our democracy, standing up and saying, this is ultra vires the 
British parliamentary tradition, then gentlemen and ladies 
opposite, I suggest to you that you had better pay attention, that 
you had better pay attention, because there is something wrong. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Souris-Cannington 
referred to some sinister and cunning reasons in regards to this 
Bill. And playing the “ah shucks! And gee, gosh, golly” act that 
he affects so well — tries to down-play the significance of this 
Bill; tries to say that it has no political ramifications for the 
people of this province; that it has no political underpinnings 
and no political motives behind it, and there’s absolutely 
nothing political, we just want some good old-fashioned, 
down-home common sense efficiency, and that’s the only 
reason why we’re trying to put this Bill forward at this time. 
 
Well the only thing down-home in terms of that kind of 
reasoning, Mr. Speaker, is the down-home hog-wash that  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

384 
 
 

we see coming across the floor in terms of that kind of 
reasoning. 
 
But I think, unlike some of the members on this side of the 
House who have been fairly charitable in terms of trying to 
impute motives to the opposite side, I am not going to be quite 
so charitable, despite the fact that we’re so close to Christmas. 
Despite the fact that I’ve been told not to be a Scrooge, I’m not 
going to be overly charitable in trying to say that there is 
nothing political or there are no sinister or there are no cunning 
political reasons behind the introduction of this Bill . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
No, the member from Saskatoon Centre didn’t say that. The 
member from Souris-Cannington did say that — that there was 
nothing cunning and nothing sinister behind this Bill. But I 
think, Mr. Speaker, if we look at a little bit of the past history of 
the activities of this government over the past four and a half, 
five years, we will see what kind of sinister and cunning plans 
that the government has laid out for the people of Saskatchewan 
and how Bill 5 fits into their sinister and cunning plans. 
 
For examples, let’s take the whole question of privatization and 
this Bill’s ability to privatize, to take out of the realm of the 
public domain those businesses, those corporations, and those 
government departments which the public has entrusted its 
administration to, in terms of having passed Acts establishing 
them in the past. 
 
To refer to the Liquor Board store — the local Liquor Board 
store which can possibly be established in Regina and 
Saskatoon and throughout the province through the attempt to 
privatize the Liquor Board operations of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. The governing party of the government opposite 
has passed resolutions at their convention urging for this type of 
privatization, that in fact liquor sales should be a private matter, 
should be put over to the private sector, should be taken out of 
the hands of the people of the province and put into the hands of 
their entrepreneurial friends, big business and small; and that 
the Liquor Board operations should not be a functioning of the 
government and should not be responsible to this legislature. 
 
Now that’s the kind of logic, Mr. Speaker, which seems to fly in 
the very face of the activities of the government in the recent 
past in setting up operations like SADAC and establishing the 
alcoholism treatment centre, alcoholism and drug treatment 
centre in Yorkton. On the one hand, they want to turn over the 
Liquor Board operation to private business in this province to 
promote liquor sales, to spread liquor around, to make it more 
accessible. On the other hand, we, the taxpayers have to pour 
more of our tax money into trying to . . . drug abuse programs, 
liquor abuse programs, and rehab programs such as set up by 
SADAC. 
 
And Bill 5, Mr. Speaker, Bill 5 and the principle of Bill 5 
allows them to do that. And so we’re going to oppose Bill 5 for 
that reason. 
 
Now we ask the question: what does Bill 5 do for example to 
600 maintenance workers who are members of Saskatchewan 
Government Employees Union who work in the government 
offices and in the businesses, the  

legislature here, and in the government buildings in Saskatoon, 
and the government buildings in Swift Current, and Moose Jaw, 
North Battleford, Prince Albert, Yorkton, and Melfort — 
around the province. What happens to those maintenance 
workers? Are they an impediment, Mr. Speaker? Are they an 
impediment to the government’s aims of being able to privatize 
and to contract out government work? 
 
Well, Bill 5 allows them to do that, Bill 5 allows them to be 
able to reorganize the Department of Supply and Services, or 
whatever government department, that will affect these 
maintenance workers, and to throw all these people out in to the 
streets. And that’s not fantasy land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look back at the record of the government opposite when it 
came to privatizing highway workers. Highway workers in this 
province were transferred to the private sector, and some of 
those highway workers are now on welfare and still haven’t 
been able to find jobs. And part of the reason they haven’t been 
able to find jobs is because of the kind of despicable attitude the 
government has to working people in this province, and also 
because of the despicable attitude the government has in terms 
of fixing the roads, and the pot-holes, and the broken bridges of 
Saskatchewan, and in giving away one dollars in every 10 to 
their big corporate buddies at Weyerhaeuser out of the 
Highways department budget. 
 
Highway workers have felt the benevolence of the members of 
the government opposite. They have been put out in the private 
sector, and Bill 5 allows them to, in fact, make highway 
workers just the advance guard of this transferring into the 
private sector. 
 
And that’s why we are going to oppose this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
because we don’t want to see government services in this 
province fall — the level of government services fall. We don’t 
want to see working people throughout Saskatchewan 
transferred into the private sector, transferred in to the UIC 
category, and then transferred onto the welfare rolls of this 
province. 
 
And that, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is one of the sinister and 
cunning aims of Bill 5, in order to let the government of 
Saskatchewan privatize — transfer to the private sector — 
government workers, without the scrutiny of the House, and 
without allowing us, as members of the Opposition who will 
stand by those workers, who will stand up for those workers, 
who will stand up for those workers and not let the government 
begin this kind of dismantling of the public sector and the 
public service which they have on their political agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 5 is the slide— it’s like the 
child’s slide that they are putting the public workers on top of, 
and they are going to grease it up, and they are going to slide 
them out. They are going to slide them out into the warm, 
loving embraces of the private sectors, the warm, loving 
embraces of those employers who took such good care of the 
highway workers of this province. 
 
That’s what will happen to the liquor board employees. I  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

385 
 
 

suggest that that’s what this government intends for 
maintenance employees in the province. 
 
I also think, Mr. Speaker, that that’s what the government 
intends for a whole range of government services and a whole 
range of government contracts. And if one looks at the 
provisions of Bill 5 . . . And I’m not going to go into them 
because we’re speaking now on the principle of the Bill, and 
we’ll get into this, I’m quite sure, more closely when we do the 
clause by clause study. 
 
But in terms of the principle of Bill 5 and the way that it can 
establish the privatization of government services and the 
privatizing of the jobs of government sector workers, we’re not 
going to allow it. And that’s why we’re going to be here for a 
while; and that’s why, gentlemen and ladies opposite, we’re 
going to be here for a while. 
 
Because we oppose that kind of privatization. We oppose you 
people putting people out on the street only so that some of 
your big business buddies who own contracting firms or 
maintenance firms, or whatever kind of firms, can bring them 
back in, pay them at half the present rate of pay so that they can 
increase their corporate fat cat profits. We oppose that kind of 
thing. Bill 5 allows you to do that, and that’s why we’re 
opposing Bill 5. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 5, when it talks about changing the purposes 
of departments, when it talks about changing the aims and 
objects of departments, allows this government to carry out the 
kind of attack on the rights of working people in this province 
that we’ve seen in the last four years. We’ve seen it not only 
with the introduction of bill 104, and we’ve seen it not only 
with the actual de facto change in purpose of the nature of the 
Labour Relations Board under its Tory hack appointment, 
Dennis Ball; we’ve seen the kind of labour laws which are in 
place, twisted and perverted. 
 
What Bill 5 does, it will now allow the minister for everything, 
the hon. member from Melville, the fourth most powerful man 
in the Tory caucus — it not only changes what labour 
legislation in this province was established to do — it allows 
that hon. member to define and re-define the nature and the 
object and the purpose of the Department of Labour away from, 
for example, as The Trade Union Act, which is an Act to allow 
and to encourage employees to set up trade unions in this 
province. 
 
I’m quite sure that that is not the intention, that is not the intent, 
and that is not the motive of the government in regard to Bill 5. 
That will not be the purpose of the Department of Labour after 
they get through putting the Department of Labour through the 
meat grinder, and after they get through putting the Department 
of Social Services through the meat grinder, and after they get 
through putting the secretariat in charge of human rights and the 
Human Rights Commission, and the secretariat in charge of 
native and northern affairs, and the secretariat in charge of 
women put through that meat grinder. 
 
Those purposes and those objectives will be radically different, 
will be radically different than the intention of the legislation 
which was passed here in prior legislatures. And that the intent 
and purpose . . . and I see  

the member, I see the member from Melville smiling, but I 
don’t think, I don’t think that your attack on trade unions in this 
province by a minister of Labour is anything to smile about, Mr. 
Minister. I don’t think it’s funny; I can tell you right now that 
the workers on strike at Lanigan don’t think it’s very funny; I 
can tell you right now that the workers on strike at the Co-op in 
Nipawin don’t think it’s . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Who were you calling to order, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m calling you to order. I assumed that you 
knew why. You were not on the topic at all, and I would ask 
you to get back to the topic. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I would . . . It’s an oversight; I’m sorry. I’m 
trying to relate, in fact, the actions of the Minister of Labour 
and the Minister of Social Services to the history of this 
government, and the history of this government in the context 
of Bill 5. 
 
And while it may range somewhat far afield, I understand from 
your own rulings in the past that the second reading is to 
discuss the principle of the Bill in the widest possible range in 
its implications on people in this province. And if I was totally 
out of order, I will apologize. 
 
However, I believe I was in order in terms of talking to the 
minister regarding the record of his government, which is a 
pretty sorrowful record, you’ll have to agree, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pretty sorrowful record when it comes to defending working 
people. And one has to look at the statistics in this province and 
see, for example, that last year Saskatchewan was the only 
jurisdiction in Canada to see a fall in the actual industrial wage, 
the average industrial wage in Canada — it was the only 
jurisdiction. Everywhere else in Canada there was some rise in 
the average industrial wage except Saskatchewan. 
 
So when I say there’s been attack on the living standards of 
working people, there’s statistics from the government’s own 
Bureau of Statistics to back it up. And Bill 5 will enable this 
government, will enable that government across the way to 
continue its attacks on the rights of working people, working 
people who are organized in trade unions, but also working 
people who are not organized in trade unions. 
 
(1100) 
 
It will, for example, allow the Minister to rearrange the 
purposes of the Department of Labour in terms of conducting 
itself when it comes to enforcing The Labour Standards Act. 
Now for all intents and purposes, Mr. Speaker, the Labour 
Standards Act of this province is now not being enforced. It is a 
piece of legislation which is out there; it is a piece of legislation 
in which the inspectors have been jerked back by the 
government departments to whom they are responsible. That the 
kind of enforcement procedure which was in force between 
1971 and 1982, which defended people who weren’t members 
of trade unions, people who were working for the minimum 
wage or above the minimum wage, people who were part-time  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

386 
 
 

workers, people who were working for the 40 hours a week, 
people who were protected by that legislation aren’t being 
protected any more — they ‘re not being protected. 
 
In fact, some of the regulations that this government has put in, 
in terms of changing the purpose of the Labour Standards Act. 
That’s what Bill No. 5 does. It allows the government to change 
the purposes of the departments, and when you change the 
purposes of the departments, you change the way in which the 
legislation is administered, you change the purpose of the 
legislation. 
 
That is a de facto fact of life. That’s a fact of life for working 
people in Saskatchewan. And what Bill No. 5 will do will allow 
the minister of everything, minister of the oppressed, to change 
behind closed doors the purposes, for example, of those who 
carry out labour standards so that they will have some legal 
justification, if not a moral justification, for the kind of 
activities that they’ve carried out in the past four years when it 
comes to working people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that Bill No. 5, when it comes to 
people in the whole realm of trade union rights and the rights of 
working people who are not in trade unions, that we’re going to 
see Bill No. 5 used in the manner which is a clear and focused 
political purpose and which was outlined in the Speech from the 
Throne when it talks about removing impediments to 
efficiencies. And let’s cut through all the high-faluting 
bureaucratese and see what that really means. 
 
Impediments to efficiencies means things, for example, at least 
from the point of view of the government opposite, means 
things like section 37 of the Trade Union Act. And section 37, 
if you’re not familiar, Mr. Speaker, is that section which allows 
succession rights and succession duties and places an obligation 
upon new employers of firms which are unionized to bargain 
collectively with the employees. 
 
And I suspect that what we’re going to see is that it will be 
deemed an impediment to efficiencies, and it’ll be applied 
particularly in the civil service. And it’ll be applied in the civil 
service in a manner which we’ve already seen in this province. 
We’ve already seen it in the setting up, for example, of the 
water corporation, in which the government deliberately passed 
into legislation enabling legislation to set up the water 
corporation; specifically excluded members of the 
Saskatchewan Government Employees Union, members of 
SGEU from having been able to bargain collectively on behalf 
of the employees of the water corporation when its headquarters 
were established in Moose Jaw. 
 
And they had to pass specific enabling legislation in that regard. 
Well what Bill No. 5 does will provide an easy out, in my mind, 
for the government to carry on that kind of contracting out, 
because that’s all it is. 
 
And if members look at section 14 of that Bill, and members 
look at section 12 of that Bill, and 13, you will find there a very, 
very, very close symbiotic relationship  

between what they did with the water corporation and what the 
sinister and cunning plans of this government is in regards to 
contracting out, to privatizing, and to attacking trade union 
rights such as section 37 of the present Trade Union Act. 
 
And what it will do, Mr. Speaker, in my mind, when I look at it, 
it will not only affect, for example, section 37, it will also attack 
the established sections such as section 46, I believe, which 
deals with technological change and the introduction of 
technological change. 
 
Now the definition of the technological change I don’t 
necessarily have to go into, other than to say that when there is 
a major change in the work-force or the major change in the 
nature of work or when there is a major change in the nature of 
work or when there is a major change in terms of laying off 
employees or shutting down an operation or any kind of 
technological — and it’s interpreted in a very broad sense, and 
that was the interpretation given to that section when it was 
passed — that the technological change provisions of The Trade 
Union Act will become totally meaningless, that they will, in 
fact, be totally disregarded by the government of the members 
opposite. 
 
What it will do, what Bill 5 will help the government do, will be 
able to change the nature of work in the public sector and the 
public service without having to deal with that section of The 
Trade Union Act which not only deals with technological 
change, but with that section of The Trade Union Act which 
forces the government or any employer to negotiate with its 
employees on any change, and any change in their work. 
 
So we see an attack on section 37, the succession. We’ll see an 
attack on the very principle and the heart of the principle 
contained within The Trade Union Act, which is an obligation 
for employers to negotiate collectively with their employees 
when they change, when there is any change in the manner of 
work. And also we will see an attack, I suspect, on the question 
of technological change, and it will be all under the rubric of 
removing impediments — removing impediments to 
government efficiency. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the word “efficiency” cropped up in the 
throne speech debate, cropped up in the throne speech itself. 
And here once again, here once again, we see it cropping up in 
the mouths — the minister, Deputy Premier, minister for . . . 
pardon me, the member for Souris-Cannington, the member for 
sinister and cunning reasons, the introduction of Bill 5. 
 
And what I’ll do, Mr. Speaker. . . What this Bill will do — Bill 
5 — will affect, I know directly, me in my critic area as 
opposition critic for the environment. It will allow, I suspect, 
when it comes to dealing with the change in the purpose and the 
objective of government departments without scrutiny by this 
House, it will come to mean more and greater secrecy in dealing 
with environmental issues in this province. 
 
We’ve already seen the kind of secrecy from the minister in 
charge of Environment, the hon. member for Rosetown. We’ve 
seen that kind of secrecy when he ordered a gag rule, when he 
put a gag on his employees  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

387 
 
 

— put a gag on his employees, saying you’re not to talk to any 
of the MLAs — not to talk to any of the MLAs, and that 
includes the back-bench MLAs across the way; you’re not to 
talk to any MLAs without clearing it through my office first. 
That’s the kind of ministerial directive he gave. That’s the kind 
of secrecy they want when it comes to environmental issues. 
 
That’s what Bill 5 does, Mr. Speaker. Bill 5, will allow him to 
change within the Department of the Environment those 
provisions which will require openness. And I refer specifically 
to section 13 of the environmental Act, and the hiring of 
inspectors and the nature of the duties of those inspectors, and 
the environmental assessment of people. And those good people 
who are concerned about the environment, who work for the 
Department of the Environment, will have their purposes, will 
have their objectives, will have their functions changed by the 
back-room boys, by the wheeler-dealers. They’ll be told not to 
raise this environmental issue. And don’t you touch that 
environmental issue because that’s not your purpose; that’s not 
your function; and that’s not what you’re hired to do; and that’s 
not your objective. 
 
And the kind of secrecies that we’ve seen which, for example, 
have kept the recent massive spill of sulphuric acid at Key Lake 
. . . We heard the government talk about that kind of massive 
sulphuric acid — the member from Weyburn doesn’t even 
know about it; the minister’s so good at keeping secrets that the 
member from Weyburn doesn’t even know about it — when 
which a tanker load of sulphuric acid, a tanker load of sulphuric 
acid was spilled in the containment building at Key Lake, then 
somehow — and we’re not quite sure how, because it’s not 
supposed to happen — but then somehow escaped the 
containment building. And as you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, by 
its very name the word “containment building” means that 
things are supposed to be contained within its walls — then 
somehow the sulphuric acid got into the ground water, into the 
water table, and has in fact totally destroyed one of the 
reservoirs at Key Lake. 
 
Now did we hear anything about that from the government 
opposite? No, no. These are people who want to talk about open 
government and about the democratic process and how they’re 
consulting with people and how they’re co-operating with 
people. Yet at the same time, they put gag orders on their 
environmental officials, and they keep quiet about a major 
environmental hazard and accident that’s just recently occurred 
within the last three weeks at the Key Lake mine site. 
 
And not a word. And I bet you they didn’t tell their back-bench 
members, and I bet you they didn’t tell most of the members of 
their cabinet, despite the fact that one of the reservoirs and 
despite the fact that the security of the containment building at 
Key Lake has been breached. Secrecy, secrecy, the big secret, 
and that’s what’s in Bill 5. The big secret: don’t tell, don’t tell, 
don’t put our political behinds in hot water. That’s what . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Right. Well, that’s right. 
 
As the member from North West says, if they were 
Weyerhaeuser, they would tell; if they were Pioneer Trust, they 
might tell if it was here. They’ll tell Pioneer  

Management, but they’ll give it away. But they’ll tell their big 
corporate friends, but they won’t tell the people of 
Saskatchewan. And Bill 5 allows them to change the purposes 
defined by section 13 of the environmental Act so that 
environmental officers won’t be able to do their job in this 
province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s another reason in terms 
of dealing with that. And we look at the government’s project at 
Alameda, Rafferty, and Shand, and in terms of the 
environmental impact that those projects have at those three 
sites. And they’ll use that in environmental . . . They’ll be able 
to use Bill 5 to change the purposes of the department in 
dealing with the environment in order to put a muzzle on some 
of the environmental hazards and some of the political and 
environmental issues which have arisen around the Shand, 
Rafferty, and Alameda projects. 
 
I want to give you just one example on that. As we’ve been able 
to discern from people in the state of Montana, environmental 
activists and people who support the environment and support 
the notion of clean air and good drinking water and productive 
soil, one of the reasons why the government made its decision 
to put Shand power plant where it is instead of building at 
Coronach — and I’m not carrying a brief for either at this time, 
Mr. Speaker — but the reason they put it over in Shand was 
because of the nature of the sulphur emissions coming from the 
Shand plant. 
 
(1115) 
 
And right now, within the state of Montana, within the state of 
Montana the level of sulphur emissions is at such a state that 
not one more particle — and I use that figuratively, not literally 
— but not one more particle, in a figurative sense, if it crosses 
the international boundary, will be tolerated by the federal 
regulatory agencies who deal with emissions, who deal with the 
emissions problems. And what will happen is that some of the 
industries, some of the industries in the state of Montana will 
have to cease operation, cut back its . . . or I should say, cut 
back its sulphur emissions. And that will involve a ceasing of 
operation until they apply the appropriate technology to cut 
that. 
 
And that there was communication between the Government of 
Montana, the Governor, and the state of Montana and this 
government, requesting that no more coal-fired power plants be 
built at Coronach because they did not want the large corporate 
interests in Montana, particularly in the mining and smelting 
industry in Montana, to undergo any more pressure on their 
profit levels; that they didn’t want them to have to take money 
out of their corporate profits and put them into environmental 
emissions equipment. And so that was one of the factors in 
determining the whole move of the power plant over to Shand. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what Bill 5 does, what Bill 5 does in terms 
of trying to put the lid on those kind of political information, 
will allow . . . And that was obtained, I might say, that was 
obtained because legislation exists as it presently exists, and 
because the objectives and definitions and the purpose of the 
Department of the  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

388 
 
 

Environment is defined as it presently exists without the 
introduction of Bill 5, and we’re able to obtain that kind of 
information. That kind of information, while it may not stop 
altogether, the government wants to put a stranglehold on it. 
And that’s again just a question of secrecy that this government 
has when it comes to dealing with environmental issues. 
 
They don’t want to tell people . . . They don’t want to tell the 
farmers, for example, at Birsay Lake and at Luck Lake what the 
environmental results of the spray irrigation systems which 
they’re proposing to put in place through Sask Water 
Corporation, what effect that will have on the salinity levels. 
And I’ll be going into that question a little during the spring 
sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker, so I won’t bother . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . We’ve got to be open. We’re an 
open party, and we’re an open opposition. It’ s unfortunate we 
don’t have an open government opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s another section 
of the Bill that I object to, and I object to it in the political 
context. I object to it in the political context we find ourselves 
in Saskatchewan, and that’s the whole question of things that 
we’ve seen recently like the appointment of George Hill to head 
up that . . . that qualified, eminent, electrical engineer who is 
able to grasp quickly the management problems at Sask Power 
and grasp them so quickly that he puts long-time civil servants 
like Don Moroz out on the street. 
 
There’s an aspect of this Bill, Bill No. 5, that I object to, and 
that’s the section 14 which it specifically states out, and again I 
refer to the principle of patronage, which seems to be a 
watchword of this government — the principle of patronage, 
not any specific examples — but in which section 14 of the Bill 
allows them to carry on, and states openly — right? — that they 
want to hire their advisers, and they want to hire their 
consultants, and that they will want to hire their friends and 
their political hacks when it comes to setting up any new 
reorganized, disestablished, de-purposed, produced, 
manufactured, and diversified departmental structure, and so 
forth. But they want to use section 14 of the Bill and be able to 
fill the pockets of their Conservative friends. 
 
We’ve seen that again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the history for 
the last four and a half to five years of this government — it 
will be five years in April — over four and a half years of this 
government, which has nothing but one long, miserable record 
when it comes to plugging — that’s the only word. They just 
plug them with their political friends so they can all feed fat and 
happy out of the trough. 
 
You know, when they told me that Mr. Hill was making close 
to $200,000 as the head of SPC, I think of the people, Mr. 
Speaker, the people in Regina who last night attended the 
Salvation Army turkey supper, who had to attend a supper at 
the Salvation Army because they didn’t have enough money to 
be able to buy their Christmas turkeys. And I look across the 
halls and I see, yes,  

George’s friends, 200,000 bucks. Well I can tell you, he’ll be 
having some nice turkey suppers, and he’ll be having them in 
Saskatchewan, and he’ll be having them in Acapulco, and he’ll 
be having them all around the world at the taxpayers’ expense. 
Lots and lots of money for the pigs at the trough, Mr. Speaker. 
Lots of money for the George Hills in this province. Not very 
many for people on social services. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Bill 5, section 14 of Bill 5 is going to allow 
them to line up, going to allow them to line up stretching from 
here to Kuroki, and then saying: come on boys, come on in; 
stick in the snout; it’s public money; it’s trough money; come 
and get it because we’ve established a new department and 
we’ve established a new agency, and it’s got this purpose and 
it’s got that purpose. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the primary 
purpose that they are going to establish some of those agencies 
and some of those departments and some of those divisions is 
so they can line up their friends at the trough, they can stick 
their snout in, and they’ll be just supping mightily. They’ll be 
supping mightily on the sweat and labour of the people of this 
province. 
 
That’s another one of the reason for Bill 5. I don’t believe, Mr. 
Speaker, I have seen a record of patronage, of legitimized theft 
of the treasury of this province, from any government since the 
time I have moved here. Ross Thatcher, he was a piker when it 
came to piggery compared to these folks. Let me tell you he 
was a piker, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s legitimized theft, and Bill 5 helps them set up a trough 
which is legitimized theft. And my friends, let me tell you, 
these people will have no hesitation; they’ll have no hesitation 
whatsoever of getting their friends out there, leading them in, 
sticking the snout in the trough and saying: drink deep friends, 
drink deep. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, all these things put together are 
objectionable. They are objectionable politically, they’re 
objectionable morally. They are straight objectionable. They’re 
also unconstitutional, according to my learned friends. 
 
They’re wrong. They’re plain, plain wrong when it comes to the 
conduct, the manner in which the conduct of the affairs of the 
province in which we, as legislators, want to encourage people 
to act. And I think that one of the essences, the conceptual 
essence of democracy, is a very, very simple, straightforward 
proposition that when you have an informed citizenry that 
knows the issues and that have the confidence in which to act 
on the issues, that at some point in time our functions as 
legislators will wither away, because they themselves will be 
part of the Demos of the people who take part in the democratic 
process. 
 
And I can’t think of a more fitting quote to back me up on this 
than a person whom the Premier raised time and time again 
during the legislature as one of his heroes. You know, he raised 
Tommy Douglas as one of his heroes, as one of his icons, to be, 
you know, to be followed by people in this province. It’s too 
bad the Premier didn’t take to heart any of his writings. 
 
And I refer to the July 1987 page of the Tommy Douglas  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

389 
 
 

commemorative calendar, which are obtained by . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, some hon. members are 
attempting to cast aspersions or make light of the fact that this 
is a . . . of this quality product. 
 
But I want to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seeing that the Deputy 
Speaker has taken the chair, I want to quote now from the July 
page of this calendar, Mr. Speaker, “Those of us,” Tommy 
Douglas says: 
 

Those of us who believe in genuine democracy are 
convinced that it is possible to have both freedom and 
security. We believe that there must be a place in 
human society for human values and the dignity of the 
individual. We believe that it’s possible to build a 
society in which man will not have to choose between 
freedom and bread, but will be able to eat not only the 
bread which he has earned by the sweat of his brow 
but will also be able to walk the earth in dignity and in 
freedom. 
 
The greatest defence in the world today is a satisfied 
democracy. I hear people talking about defending 
democracy. You may have to defend it with bayonets 
and bombs, but in the final analysis democracy is an 
idea which cannot be defended with guns and bombs 
alone. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — “The greatest way to defend it is to make it 
work.” 
 
I want the members opposite to hear what Tommy Douglas had 
to say about that. The greatest way to defend democracy is to 
make it work. 
 
And you, ladies and gentlemen of the government opposite, are 
trying to make it not work. And that’s your aim. And you’re 
trying to make it not work for your narrow and selfish political 
aims. It’s plain and simple. It’s a power grab. “Unless,” Mr. 
Speaker, Tommy Douglas goes on to say: 
 

Unless democracy can give people full stomachs, 
clothing to wear, decent houses to live in, educational 
opportunities, security in their old age, health services 
for themselves and their families when they need it — 
unless democracy can do that, democracy will have 
failed. 
 
It’s your job and mine to make democracy work. 
 

When I look around this province and I see what they want to 
do with Bill 5, I see what they want to do with Bill 5, and there 
is nowhere in Bill 5 any idea of extending democracy out to 
people, any idea of involving them, any idea of making things 
work better for people, but only making things work better for 
their fat-cat corporate friends. When I see that, then I know the 
hypocrisy of the members opposite when they bring up Tommy 
Douglas’s name. Then I know they’re hypocrites because they 
have no conception, they have no understanding, of the kind of 
things he said about something so plain, so elemental to our 
historical traditions as the nature of democracy. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s another reason that I intend to 
oppose Bill 5. You know, I earlier said, Mr. Speaker, that when 
I began this short address that the . . . and these are my opening 
notes gentlemen, these are my opening notes. I earlier on said 
that the government regaled us, absolutely enthused and 
overwhelmed us with words like co-operation, with words like 
consultation, with all those nice, warm buzz-words that the 
Conservatives opposite like to use, what they’d like to put in 
place instead of any kind of substantive action. 
 
And I want to talk about consultation in terms of Bill 5. Well 
first of all, they didn’t consult us as members of the opposition 
on Bill 5 as to what kind of efficiencies we can effect in 
government, of what kind of methods there are — and there’s a 
fair bit of experience, you will come to understand, Mr. 
Speaker, on the front benches of this opposition, when it comes 
to administrating, when it comes to administrating government 
in an effective and efficient manner — an effective and efficient 
manner. You’ll find that kind of knowledge rests not just on 
that side of the House, but on this side of the House. 
 
But there wasn’t any consultation when it came to the 
introduction of Bill 5 in dealing with the whole question, in 
dealing with the whole question of government effectiveness 
and efficiency, despite the fact that it’s there. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, and there wasn’t . . . and they talked a great deal 
in the throne speech debate, they talked a great deal about 
consulting with those groups outside this House who will be 
affected by their legislation, who will be part of their economic 
plan, who will be partners for progress as we march down that 
glorious, glorious Tory road into the ever-rising sunset of hope 
and prosperity which the members would like to paint as a 
picture which faces us all, and which we all know is not true. 
 
They talked about consulting groups. You know, they introduce 
a Bill which deals with the reorganization of government. And 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an organism by which 
people work together to do certain things. And the first, the very 
first people, the very first people they forgot to consult were the 
people who work for them. They’re so concerned with 
developing their rhetoric about consultation, and so concerned 
about painting that picture of co-operation out there, that they 
just forget a little bit to actually do any consulting. 
 
And I want to read into the record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a letter 
that I received yesterday from Barbara Byers. Barbara Byers, as 
you well know, is the president of the Saskatchewan 
Government Employees Union. The letter is dated 18th of 
December, 1986, and it’s addressed to the Hon. Grant Devine, 
Premier of Saskatchewan, Legislative Buildings, Regina, 
Saskatchewan, and it says: 
 

Dear Mr. Premier: I am writing to you to express 
concerns about the recent introduction in the 
legislature of proposed Bill 5 of 1986-87, an Act 
Respecting the Organization of the Executive 
Government of Saskatchewan. 

  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

390 
 
 

The proposed government organization act would, if 
passed, have the effect of overriding many pieces of 
existing legislation which guarantees the maintenance 
of government services to the public. It would allow 
the cabinet to eliminate or reorganize government 
departments and agencies without the knowledge or 
permission of the province’s elected representatives in 
the legislature. 
 

I want to repeat that. 
 

It would allow cabinet to eliminate or reorganize 
government departments and agencies without the 
knowledge or permission of the province’s elected 
representatives in the legislature. 
 

We can underline that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here is an opinion 
from people, the representative of people, who work day in and 
day out in the government services, and they’re saying that your 
Bill 5 will do the following: 
 

It would allow the cabinet to eliminate or reorganize 
government departments and agencies without he 
knowledge or permission — (without the knowledge 
or permission) — of the province’s elected 
representatives in the legislature. 
 

There they go again, grabbing power — grabbing power. They 
take their power from the Conservative Party and put it in the 
hands of the caucus, from the caucus they put it in the hands of 
the cabinet, and from the cabinet they do it in their own version 
of the Politburo — their little inner cabinet — and it ultimately 
devolves it down into the little tin-pot dictator, the would-be, 
tin-pot dictator on the other side. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is not my opinion. That is the opinion of 
the Saskatchewan Government Employees Union. 
 

That it would allow the cabinet to eliminate or 
reorganize government departments and agencies 
without the knowledge or permission of the province’s 
elected representatives in the legislature. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it says that’s what it would do. And it says, 
here’s what the effect is. 
 

If adopted, this Bill would constitute a radical 
departure from Saskatchewan tradition. 
 

“ . . . a radical departure from the Saskatchewan tradition.” And 
I believe I’ve mentioned the word “radical” earlier on, Mr. 
Speaker, in dealing with that question. That’s not my word. 
That’s the Saskatchewan Government Employees Union who 
say: 
 

(that they want to introduce) a radical departure from 
Saskatchewan tradition in the organization of 
government services, and the public’s right to 
scrutinize government decisions. As such . . . 
 

And here’s the recommendation. It says this is what they did; 
this is what the Bill will do; now, here’s what they  

want done. 
 

As such, it warrants thorough study of it’s 
implications, and meaningful consultation with 
affected groups, before consideration of its passage 
into law. 
 

The Saskatchewan Government Employees Union, the 
organization in this province most to be affected by the 
introduction of Bill 5, wants, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wants 
consultation. 
 
And my question now to the government is: are you prepared to 
provide that consultation? Will you meet with the 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Government Employees 
Union to discuss Bill 5 and how and what it will affect? And 
will you negotiate, will they instruct their negotiators in fact to 
deal with the Saskatchewan Government Employees Union on 
the questions they raise insofar as it affects the reorganization 
of the government. 
 
What they want, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what they ask for 
outlined in this letter is: 
 

We strongly urge that the proposed Bill 5 be 
withdrawn from the current session of the legislature 
. . . 
 

They want Bill 5 withdrawn. Those people most affected by 
Bill 5, those people who will feel the full brunt of Bill 5 want it 
withdrawn. They want Bill 5 to go. and that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the reason why I’m going to oppose it, because if 
those people want it withdrawn, those people with the most 
knowledge and the most to lose by this Bill, when those people 
want it withdrawn, I’m standing by them. And that’s why we 
here on this side of the House will stand by them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — They want it withdrawn from the current session 
of this legislature pending full consultation with employee 
organization and consumers of government services. 
 
That seems to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that seems to me not a 
very radical request to have. They want the legislation 
withdrawn until the government consults with the groups most 
strongly affected by this legislation. Are they going to withdraw 
it? Well, I don’t think they will. My own bet would be that they 
won’t. Because between the rhetoric of consultation and the 
reality of their secrecy live the shadow people, out therein the 
grey areas, trying to hide from the people; trying to cover 
themselves in lots of nice rhetoric, lots of nice rhetoric, about 
consultation, about co-operation. But you know, they will be 
found out. They will be found out because the shadow people 
will be brought to account in the full light of public scrutiny 
either inside this legislature or outside in the legislature of the 
streets. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in Saskatchewan will not 
allow the continued attack on the democratic rights and 
traditions which people in this country have fought  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

391 
 
 

for for so long. We will not allow the power grab. We will not 
allow them to introduce the kind of sinister and cunning 
measures, sinister and cunning measures which these people 
intend to. 
 
Their agenda — and Bill 5 is the mechanism by which they 
intend to do it — their agenda is an agenda of oppression and 
misery for working people in this province. It’s an agenda for 
patronage for their corporate fat cats. It’s an agenda for disaster, 
economically, in terms of . . . And we only have to look at 
Weyerhaeuser when they give away $248 million worth of 
assets and we have to pay $7 million for it. We can see the kind 
of agenda for disaster that Bill 5 is going to allow for this 
province. 
 
But, gentlemen, step out of the shadows and come into the real 
world. Step out of the shadows and come into what’s really 
happening out in Saskatchewan. I want to, just in enforcing that 
comment, I want to remind you of what’s happening in other 
places in the world and what’s happening to governments who 
try to force through legislation. And I’ll refer, for example, to 
the Government of Quebec — a nice Liberal government who 
wanted to put forward some reforms who, under the rhetoric of 
consulting and co-operating with people, tried to put through 
reforms somewhat the same as is happening here in this 
province in terms of affecting contracting out and cut-backs in 
the civil service and a cut in the quality of government services. 
 
They were met not only with a hostile legislature in terms of the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Quebec, the Chamber 
of Deputies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were met with the real 
parliament. They were met with the real parliament, the 
parliament of the street, the parliament which overthrew 
“Boo-boo” Bourassa in 1976, and which will be Boo-boo’s 
downfall in 1986 because in 10 years that good Liberal hasn’t 
seemed to have learned anything at all. 
 
And we look at another Conservative government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in which they tried to introduce reforms under the 
aegis of efficiencies and consultation and co-operation, the 
government of Jacques Chirac in France. And you know it was 
very interesting, despite all the hard-line and hard-nosed 
statements that they would never knuckle under, they would 
never give in, that these reforms are so important — and they 
were dealing with the educational institutions — and they were 
so important to the educational future of France, it took the 
parliament of the streets, it took the parliament of the streets to 
immobilize that government. 
 
And when you see what’s happening in France, if you look at 
your television sets and see what’s happening in France, I say to 
the members opposite, what you’re doing is you’re looking into 
the mirror of your own future. Spring is not far away. Spring is 
not far away, and that is why we’re opposing it. That is why, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re opposing at this time in this Bill, in this 
place, is because that government wants to ram it through just 
before Christmas. They want to sneak it by the people. They 
want to slide it under the mat of the political agenda. They don’t 
want it out in the open. They don’t want consultation. They 
don’t want co-operation in putting this Bill through. 

What they want to do, Mr. Speaker, is hide it behind the backs 
of the people of Saskatchewan, but we’re not going to let them. 
We’re not going to let them do it. And if we can’t beat them 
here in the parliament, in the Assembly, the people will get 
them in the broad light of day out there in the parliament of the 
streets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry that I’m not able to go on much longer, 
other than to say that I’d like to finish my remarks and talk 
about some other examples of the Conservative commitment to 
democracy and why we have Bill 5 before us. 
 
I refer the members opposite to yesterday’s paper, yesterday’s 
edition of the Leader-Post, December 18, 1986, to a front-page 
story that says, “Four Tory MPs linked to Contras.” The Tory 
MPs, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Don Blenkarn of Mississauga and 
Andrew Witer of Toronto. And they said that they met several 
times with retired U.S. Army General John Singlaub, the chief 
American fund raiser for the Contra rebels. 
 
Now what we have here, Mr. Speaker, what we have here . . . 
I’m going to read it. What we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a party 
which claims to be committed to democracy, committed to 
territorial sovereignty and integrity, committed to all those good 
things, committed to all those good things. Right? What do we 
have? And yet what do we have? We have two Tory MPs — 
two Tory MPs — meeting with the chief fund raiser for the 
Contras in the United States. 
 
There they are, in the back rooms, meeting with the Contras, 
trying to subvert a legally elected government — a government 
that was elected legally and free in democratic elections. That’s 
what they’re trying to do — subvert. Bill 5 is the same nature, is 
of the same nature. They have no interest in democracy. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the story goes on and on and talks 
about the relationships between Patrick Boyer, a Toronto Tory 
MP, and Alex Kindy of Calgary, Alberta MP, and that they 
attended a meeting last month organized by the anti-bolshevik 
league — you know, that mass organization we see all around 
us, and it’s a member of the World Anti-Communist League. 
 
Now for the point of information, Mr. Speaker, the head of the 
North American World Anti-Communist League is none other 
than leadership aspirant for the Tory federal leadership, than a 
former Tory member from Toronto named John Gamble. 
 
Now John Gamble ran for the Tory leadership. Right? Ran for 
the Tory leadership, ran for the Tory leadership, headed this 
North American Anti-Communist League or anti-bolshevik 
league or whatever it’s called, who are involved in shipping 
arms, who are involved in shipping arms and, as the story says, 
blowing up kids — blowing up kids in Nicaragua. 
 
You know, that’s the kind of attitude that we’re finding more 
and more as the strong status, as these people who try to grab 
power and put it closer, closer into their little clutches, as they 
try to bring it closer and closer to the seat  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

392 
 
 

of executive government and ultimately to the seat of the 
member opposite. 
 
This is the kind of commitment to democracy that we find from 
Conservatives. If you don’t like it, kill it. If you don’t like it, 
squash it out. You know, all in the name of the good old 
Conservative ideology, all in the name of that good old 
Conservative ideology. 
 
And I can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the reaction of the 
members opposite, that they’ve wakened up, that they’re taking 
attention and that, in fact, some of their skin colours are turning 
a little redder because, in fact, they themselves have met with 
people like Don Blenkarn, they themselves have met with 
people like John Gamble, and that ultimately, ultimately, that 
they will support the kind of work that these gentlemen are 
doing to support the Contras. 
 
(1145) 
 
Because if you asked them, if you asked them, each and every 
one of them here, ask them about their commitment to 
democracy, ask them whether or not they favour Ronald 
Reagan’s policy. Ask them whether or not they favour the 
Contra policy in Latin American, in Nicaragua, in terms of 
trying to overthrow a legally constituted government. And you 
ask them about it, and you’ll get one answer, and they won’t 
say it here. And they won’t say it openly, but they’ll say it in 
private. They’ll say it behind closed doors. Yeah, yeah, they 
agree with that. They agree with that kind of subversion of 
democracy. 
 
So despite all the rhetoric, despite all the fancy words of 
co-operation and consultation, despite all of their undying 
commitment to democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 5 is the 
same kind of subversion of democracy that we see their Tory 
MP friends doing in terms of trying to overthrow the 
government of Nicaragua. 
 
And I see the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden chortling rather 
heartily at this fact. I see the member there saying — kind of 
denigrating those kind of statements. Well let me tell you, -Mr. 
Speaker, about this member’s . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would just like to ask the hon. member if his remarks have 
anything to do whatsoever with the Bill before the Assembly. I 
don’t know what Nicaragua has to do with the Bill before the 
Assembly. The hon. member hasn’t been anywhere near the Bill 
since he put it down. And I suggest that the rules are such that 
the matter before the House is the particular Bill. And I think 
that the hon. member should follow the rules and speak about 
the matter before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The point of order is well taken. I’ve 
been listening to the debate quite closely. I have allowed it to go 
quite far-ranging, but I would ask the member to return to the 
Bill and discuss the Bill that is before the House. And I think 
we’ll have to tighten up on the comments. 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will offer my profuse 
apologies for ranging far afield and outside of the bounds of the 
debate. I would like, however, to defend myself very shortly by 
saying that the nature of the subversion of democracy that we 
find here in the Legislative Assembly, and the kind of power 
grab that we see undergoing that we’re witnessing here before 
our very eyes, is the same kind of subversion of democracy that 
we see in . . . (inaudible) . . . to the Contras. But I won’t raise 
that any more. I’ll put that aside. 
 
In doing so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say that it’s a 
very simple solution to the problems if in fact our charges that 
we make to the members opposite in terms of the principle of 
the Bill; if in fact our charges are incorrect; if in fact they’re not 
a subversion of democracy; if in fact they’re not ultra vires; if 
in fact they’re not and have not and will not have any sinister 
and cunning reasons, to quote the member from 
Souris-Cannington; if in fact that is not true, then why don’t the 
members hold the Bill? Why don’t they just withdraw it for 
now so that it can be studied by a committee of the House — 
that they consult their legal people; that they can go and consult 
the people from the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union, who it most directly affects, so that those people can get 
their questions answered and they can get their concerns 
addressed. If, in fact, what we’re saying isn’t correct, why don’t 
you do it? Why don’t you live up to your rhetoric for once in 
your life? For once in your life why don’t you live up with the 
kind of ideals that you profess to have? For once in your life 
why don’t you do what’s right for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join in this 
debate and make a couple of points primarily as they relate to 
some of the legal arguments being advanced by the members 
opposite over the last day or so. 
 
I will leave the question of the streamlining of a government, 
which is the prime purpose of this Bill and I think everybody 
understands that we have to streamline government. I’ll leave 
that to the Deputy Premier when he closes the debate, hopefully 
late today. 
 
I would particularly like to address some of my comments to 
the member from The Battlefords. The member from The 
Battlefords, who I have watched as some of the new members 
in the Assembly, some of the new members in the Assembly, 
and I isolated him out as one that I would see as more of a street 
politician and perhaps less of the Bryant oratory contest type 
members from opposite. 
 
Look at the situation as to what is happening. And I say to the 
members opposite, take some time to look exactly at what is 
happening because what you’re doing here is following the 
direction of your new leader, the member from Riversdale, who 
is taking you guys down on a constitutional track once again. 
And that’s exactly where you’re going. 
 
He would have us believe, Mr. Speaker, he would have us 
believe that somehow this bill is the most dastardly thing  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

393 
 
 

ever done to the democratic process in the history of the 
province and in the history of parliament itself. That’s what he 
would have us to believe — coming from a guy, a person, the 
leader, the member from Riversdale — coming from a person 
who says that they are destroying, and this will destroy the 
parliamentary system. 
 
Now I want to take you back, and I want to take the member 
from The Battlefords back five or six years ago. Five or six 
years ago, and let’s remember five and six years ago when the 
country decided it would take off onto the debate on the 
constitution. Okay. That was the decision we took at that point 
in time. Some of us disagreed with that. Some of us said: no, 
the bigger issue is the fact that interest rates are at 22 per cent in 
our country at that time. Others said: no, it’s the issue that 
inflation was at 15 per cent at that period of time. And others 
argued: no, the big issue of the day is the fact that Ottawa was 
trying to rape the resources of the provinces like Saskatchewan 
and Alberta. 
 
But no, in their wisdom, and in the wisdom of Trudeau, and in 
the wisdom of the member from Riversdale, the constitution 
was far more important than those issues. And to the member 
opposite I would say this: go back to that period of time and 
remember, because there were some were saying you are taking 
us off, I’m sure some within your caucus would say: hey, the 
member from Riversdale is taking us off our agenda. Because 
the people out there were not concerned about the constitution; 
they were concerned about those other issues. 
 
But let me go back and deal with the constitution — a person 
who was very instrumental, to his credit, who did a lot of work, 
gained national profile of bringing us a constitution, a charter of 
rights. Now let’s go back and remember, and we debated that in 
this House in the first session, the first legislature I was here, 
the 19th Legislature; we debated that question often. And you, 
member from Battlefords, was a member of parliament, and you 
obviously experienced debate even more than we did. 
 
Now with that constitution came the charter of rights and the 
debate was, and I suppose still is, the debate is finished; we 
have a charter of rights in this country. But I think its’ fair to 
say, and most would agree, that there has been nothing in the 
past 50 years in this country that has taken more away from the 
power of parliament and from the power of the legislature than 
did the charter of rights, because it took away far more than this 
Bill here is even trying to deal with. It took away permanently, 
for ever, the rights of parliaments and the rights of legislatures 
to deal with fundamental questions. 
 
Yesterday, for example, we saw a decision by the Supreme 
Court. What the Supreme Court ruled with regard to the Sunday 
hours question was not as important as the fact that because of 
the member from Riversdale and because of Trudeau, we in this 
legislature, us as elected officials, no longer have the right to 
decide whether or not stores should be open on Sunday or not, 
if the court so decides it’s not in our bailiwick to do it. 
 
Now you can go through hundreds and hundreds of examples. 
Will this legislature have the power to say that  

a member can belong or does not have to belong to the trade 
union movement? That is in the power now of the courts, not in 
the power of this legislature. That process, my friends and 
Deputy Speaker, was what the charter of rights did, and nothing 
has eroded power more from the legislatures or the parliaments 
than the charter of rights. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It seems to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
seems to me a rather hollow and hypocritical argument for the 
member from Riversdale to make. The very person who 
championed the charter of rights that took the power away from 
parliament, that took the power away from this institution, to 
say some small Bill is now destroying parliament and 
destroying democracy; how hypocritical can he be, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And the member from The Battlefords, 
to his credit — the member from The Battlefords, to his credit, 
when he sat in the House of parliament back in those days five 
and six years ago, said, I don’t agree with it either. And that’s to 
his credit. And that’s a tough decision for anybody to take. And 
you pay the price for making those tough decisions, which I’m 
sure you can advise us better than I can advise you. But you pay 
the price for that. You stood there for that principle. Now if you 
were making that argument rather than the member from 
Riversdale, you have some credibility. The member from 
Riversdale does not have credibility— talking about what 
powers legislature should have; what powers parliament should 
have. 
 
Let me then go finally, Mr. Speaker, to the points raised by the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview. A member that is not caught 
up, as the member from The Battlefords is not caught up in this 
concept of Bryant oratory wing of the party. 
 
Now he raises some points that he takes in all seriousness, and I 
took them to be made in all seriousness, his argument being that 
this violated the constitution — violated the charter of rights. 
That was the argument he advanced. He advanced it. I think in 
fairness to the member, saying that I don’t profess to be an 
expert on the constitution or charter things. And that’s to his 
credit, and he said that in the House. 
 
I had some of the law officers go over the comments being 
advanced by the member from Saskatoon Fairview, as he had 
requested that I do. And I have from them a brief two-page 
comment with regard to the allegations raised by the member 
from Fairview. He pointed out the initiatives and referendum 
argument case that was in Manitoba in 1916. 
 
I think it’s important for the Assembly to understand what that 
particular issue was at that particular time — what the issue as 
at that particular time, which was not uncommon to legislatures 
and to politicians of that time and into the ’30s, where you had 
some of the revolt movements within the politics. What that 
legislation sought to do in Manitoba back in 1916 was to 
delegate power to referendum. What the parliament or the  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

394 
 
 

legislature of Manitoba was basically saying in that particular 
case is that we will delegate power to referendum. And when 
you took a referendum on a particular issue, you bound the 
legislature of Manitoba to the decision of whatever the 
referendum was taken. 
 
Now that was the case that the hon. member referred to, and 
that was the case that was challenged. The Privy Council 
ultimately decided that the Act was unconstitutional because it 
altered the position of the Lieutenant Governor in a fashion not 
contemplated by section 98(1) of the BNA Act, the province’s 
authority to amend the constitution. 
 
(1200) 
 
This line of reasoning, according to the officials, is not 
applicable to Bill No. 5. The Bill does not deal with initiatives 
and referendums; it does not amend the constitution of the 
province; and it does not affect the office of the Lieutenant 
Governor; it does not concern primary law-making authority. 
And that’s the important point — it does not affect the primary 
law-making authority. 
 
It is clear and has been established beyond any reasonable 
doubt that the legislature can competently delegate authority to 
subordinate bodies or to other bodies. The legislature does that 
every day and it delegates substantial and broad authority every 
day. Even a sweeping delegation of power is valid under our 
system. That principle was established in England in 1700 and 
it was established over 100 years ago by the Privy Council with 
respect to the Canadian provinces and their legislatures. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Fairview errs when he attempts to 
inflate the rather peculiar legal circumstances of the initiatives 
and referendum case into a general principle. Indeed the very 
passage from Professor Hogg’s text at page 292, 293, that the 
hon. member relies on actually points out the error of his 
argument. Professor Hogg notes that a delegated power is 
substantially different from a primary lawmaking power. Bill 
No. 5 involves delegation of authority. It does not involve the 
creation of a primary lawmaking authority as in the Manitoba 
case. 
 
The hon. member also refers and tries to rely on section 3, 4, 
and 5 of the charter of rights. Those provisions deal with the 
right to vote, the maximum duration of the Legislative 
Assembly, and the requirement of an annual sitting of the 
legislature. His argument is completely wrong on this point. 
There is no possible basis for the provision that the charter can 
be engaged by section 5. The Bill self-evidently does not touch 
either upon the right to vote, the duration of the Assembly, or 
the sittings of the Assembly. 
 
Now that in my view, Mr. Deputy Speaker — Mr. Speaker, as 
you’re there now — clearly are of the position that the 
legislation, in the fine, small point made by the member from 
Fairview, is that the legislation was unconstitutional, was ultra 
vires and could not be passed by this legislature, we find to be 
not correct. Of course we in this Assembly can’t decide that. I 
suppose ultimately  

anybody can challenge anything they want in the courts. 
 
The point I make in closing, Mr. Speaker, is this Saskatchewan 
And it’s to the member from Riversdale, the person who 
spirited, and to his credit, some would say, brought in a charter 
of rights that took for ever powers from legislatures and powers 
from parliaments; who championed that across this country; 
who must, I think, agree that that charter takes away power 
from legislatures and parliaments like no other Act has, because 
it take away for ever and a day and a day and a day. He was the 
person that championed that. You broke lines and went against 
him on that. Now he is trying to lead you boys — he is trying to 
lead you boys back on to the constitutional trail. He wants to 
talk about he constitution, I suspect, because that’s one of the 
things that he understands. He doesn’t want to lead you into the 
job creation or economics; he wants to go back to the 
constitution. 
 
We cautioned you prior to ’82, you’re on the wrong agenda, 
boys. You wouldn’t listen. You’re on the wrong agenda, and 
that wrong agenda took power away from the NDP in 1982. 
Keep it up and we’ll be here for a long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to start off 
my remarks today by wishing a Merry Christmas to the 
members of the Assembly, and to you, Mr. Speaker, since this 
is likely the last opportunity that I’ll have before the Christmas 
to do that. And I’d like to wish my constituents as well, and 
others that . . . I wish them a very Merry Christmas, and peace 
and happiness throughout 1987. 
 
And I want to make some remarks in this second reading on the 
principle of the Bill entitled the government organization Act. 
And I appreciated some of the comments that were made by the 
hon. member from Kindersley. However, I would want to point 
out that the charter of rights and the constitution do not have a 
whole lot to do with this Bill in particular that we have before 
us today, however accurate he may have been in his analysis of 
some of the things that happened earlier in the 1980s 
concerning the constitutional Act that came before parliament, 
and there was much debate within this legislature. 
 
And I would agree with the hon. member that some rights of 
legislators and parliamentarians within the country have been 
lost in that things that could be done in parliaments and 
legislatures prior to the constitutional Act, which included a 
charter of rights, cannot be done now, because the decision are 
made by the judicial system within Canada to make sure that 
things fall within the charter of rights within this country. 
 
The member is also right in his analysis that I spoke and voted 
against that in parliament — one of a few members from my 
party — and may or may not have done me some harm. I am 
sure that by this point in time I’ve recovered from any harm 
which may have been inflicted upon my person, and I hope to 
continue some career in this legislature. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, about the charter of rights in  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

395 
 
 

Canada, is that those that wanted a charter of rights wanted 
some consistency as to how politicians dealt with people they 
represent fairly and equally across the country, and I can 
appreciate that from those that would argue that viewpoint. 
 
But we also have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that politicians and 
the forums in which they operate, like this legislature, this 
House, or the Parliament of Canada, have responsibilities. And 
they have to act in concert with a charter of rights, because 
there are many countries throughout the world that have 
noble-sounding constitutions, but if the political will of the 
politicians and the legislatures and the parliaments are not there 
to carry out the intent of that charter of rights, then it’s not 
worth the paper it’s written on. Because if you look at the 
Soviet Union, if you look at some of the Central American 
countries where human rights are violated every single day of 
the week, the paper means nothing. So it in fact has to operate 
with some degree of regularity and fairness with politicians, 
their forms, and with the charter. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what myself and my colleagues and our 
House Leader are asking for is not to have this issue taken into 
the constitutional argument of the charter of rights. What we’re 
looking for is that this Bill, Bill 5, the organizational Act, does 
not take away from the scrutiny of this House What we want to 
do, or at least what I would like to see happen, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the government draw this Bill from the House and change it 
so that it is in fact then in line with the federal statute. 
 
We’ve heard from some of the members on the government 
side that this is similar to the federal Act; it’s similar to the 
province of Manitoba. But there are some very distinct 
differences in this piece of legislation. And so maybe because 
I’m not a lawyer, as some members are in this House, maybe I 
don’t understand all the technicalities of the Bill. And maybe, 
Mr. Speaker, there are some things implied in that Bill that this 
government opposite would honour throughout their entire 
term. But I would prefer that if the Bill would be withdrawn, 
make it very explicit so we can understand it and future 
governments can understand it as well. 
 
I don’t wish to question the integrity of the government 
opposite. I hope that they do have integrity to honour their 
word. But if a government comes along 50 years from now or 
60 years from now or 10 years from now, the Bill should be 
explicit enough that the new government can understand and 
carry out the intent of the proposed legislation that’s before us 
here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so that’s what I think would satisfy this side of the House. 
It would certainly satisfy me that you would at least bring it into 
line with the federal statute that would be the counterpart at our 
federal level of government. I would personally find that very 
acceptable and would try and convince some of my colleagues 
that this is something that we could dispose of rather quickly 
and carry on home for Christmas instead of trying to preserve 
the rights of people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Because the Bill causes some very serious problems and I want 
to turn to addressing those . . . 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Even though, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, the 
government organization Act, the proposed legislation may 
imply some of the things that the members opposite are saying, 
it certainly is not explicit in those areas. 
 
The section 5(1) of the Bill talks about: 
 

Assign to any minister any power, duty or function 
conferred or imposed by law on a minister. 
 

Well it seems to me that that gives an awful lot of power to the 
Executive Council or to cabinet. So many things that have 
formerly come before this House can be done in the confines of 
the Executive Council, by the cabinet, with very little, if any, 
scrutiny from this legislature. 
 
Section 12(1) states out that the purpose may be: 
 

(a) establish, continue or vary any department and 
determine the objectives and purposes of the 
department; 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very onerous responsibility that the 
cabinet takes upon themselves, and that means that entire 
departments could be wiped out, could be privatized for the 
services that were provided there before by the scrutiny of this 
legislature, which will no longer exist. It’s fairly awesome the 
power that the Executive Council will receive if this legislation 
comes into being. 
 

(b) (it can) disestablish any department; 
 
c) determine or change the name of any department. 
 

And we have a good example of that already, Mr. Speaker. 
There are many employees within departments that come under 
the authority of the hon. member from Melville that are already 
referring to themselves as being the department of human 
resources. Now, have in fact the government opposite actually 
brought into reality the functions of this proposed legislation? 
Are they already making those decisions in the Executive 
Council? It seems to me that they feel that they are. Otherwise, 
why would they be referring to themselves as working for the 
department of human resources? In fact, during earlier debate in 
this House the member from Melville referred to himself as the 
minister of human resources in the province. 
 
Well, we would like to be able to debate the pros and the cons, 
the pluses and the minuses of major alterations to departments 
where they are disestablished. Some of them may be put under 
another department. I don’t know, as one individual member, 
Mr. Speaker, what part of his far-ranging portfolio actually 
comes under human resources. Is some of it under human 
resources? Is some of it gone to other departments? Has some 
of it gone to the private sector? We don’t know that, and I think 
that points out, Mr. Speaker, the importance of having to come 
back before this legislature when there are major 
reorganizations within the Government of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

396 
 
 

(1215) 
 
Granted, there’s a section in the Bill, Bill No. 5, that requires an 
annual report which I would assume would be tabled in this 
legislature, but it’s already a fait accompli. We would have to 
be referring to things that have already been done with little 
chance of having some impact on it. And if there’s one thing I 
think we should be able to do, Mr. Speaker, in a Legislative 
Assembly that is relatively as small as it is, we should be able to 
have some influence with each other. 
 
Just because an idea comes from the opposition side of this 
legislature should not necessarily mean that it’s a bad idea. We 
hope that members from time to time on the government side 
will take our advice under advisement, at least, and look very 
carefully at what we are advising, because we are politicians, 
Mr. Speaker, but we also have a legislative role to perform. We 
have to ensure that legislation that’s passed through this 
Assembly serves the interests of all people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And as politicians we get very partisan. But 
as legislators, I think that we have to look very carefully at our 
role, Mr. Speaker. And what we’re doing as legislators from 
this side is trying to convince the Government of Saskatchewan 
to please withdraw this Bill and bring it in line, make it more 
explicit, make it fall in line with the federal statutes, where they 
have to come back before the legislature when they’re doing 
major reorganizations as is being proposed through this piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even if it was for a limited amount of time, I believe, the 
federal House — the hon. member from Lakeview, I think, has 
refreshed my mind — it at least has to come back for, I believe 
it’s seven hours of debate before the House of Commons before 
it can actually be passed into law and become a statute. 
 
And what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that democracy is at stake, 
and I don’t want to be accused of using a lot of rhetoric. 
Democracy is important. I took the opportunity the other day to 
look in the dictionary for the dictionary definition of 
democracy. It said, and I quote: “A government that is run by 
the people who live under it.” 
 
Well it seems to me that people are being run over by pieces of 
legislation that are proposed such as this, because they have less 
and less of an ability to intervene and to make their feelings 
known, because feelings that are contrary to the government 
opinion need to be expressed by opposition members of the 
legislature. And if we can’t express our opinions on 
reorganizations and major activities that are undertaken by the 
government, then people lose their voice. They don’t have the 
ability then to run the government as they who live under it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we’re experiencing something that is 
dangerous to democracy, and that is that we have a government 
that’s being democratically elected and now are trying to 
overstep their authority. If you’re not willing to withdraw this 
Bill and make the changes to it, that’s what you’re trying to do. 
And I’d ask the back-bench  

members of the government side to think about this very 
carefully as to what kind of authority do you want your 
Executive Council, the Premier, and the cabinet ministers, what 
kind of power do you want them to have over everything? It 
seems to me that what’s happening is that the voices are getting 
fewer and fewer and fewer as to who has influence on how 
government is organized. It’s likely better to have many voices 
involved in that, not a few. 
 
Now Bill 5 that we have before us moves a long, long way 
towards a dictatorial system, and I don’t want to dramatize, but 
it does in fact do that. Because any time, Mr. Speaker, that you 
have one person or two people or at least a very few people 
making all the major decisions without this Assembly having 
any input into it, that is a movement away from democracy 
towards a more dictatorial system. And we don’t want that in 
this country. We don’t want that in this province. And I think 
that if this Bill 5 passes, we are in fact confining power to a 
very small and very select group of people. 
 
The philosopher Voltaire once said on the principles of 
democracy that . . . He said, “I may disagree with what you 
have to say, but I’ll defend to the death your right to say it”. 
And I think that is a basic principle of democracy. 
 
Like you have a basic principle, Mr. Speaker, a basic role to 
fulfil that democracy is preserved in this House, whether it be 
question period so that there is fairness and equity, or whether 
it’s in the debates of this House, to assure that we’re debating 
the issues at hand. 
 
And this Assembly has a similar responsibility to people within 
the province of Saskatchewan so that they can be assured that 
our voices are being heard on their behalf. And certainly some 
of the voices have been longer heard than some of the members 
opposite would like. But we have to make a point. We feel we 
need to make a point on this proposed legislation that’s before 
us. 
 
Now regarding the organization of government, they’re 
completely taking away any voice from this forum that we’re in 
here today. And one of the major tasks of a legislature is to 
form a government that’s fair, that has some equity, that serves 
the needs of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now no longer does the government want that authority to 
come before the legislature. They want that authority to be kept 
by the Premier and by the cabinet ministers that he has some 
confidence in. And does that mean that in the future, maybe 
he’ll be developing a committee of himself and maybe the 
political tactician, the Minister of Justice, to make that decision 
on their own. Does it get fewer from there? Mr. Speaker, I 
submit to you that it’s better to have those things come back 
before this legislature, at least for ratification and some 
scrutiny, and to listen to the input that we would like to make in 
terms of reorganizing government. 
 
And we’re not saying that government never needs to be 
reorganized. All of us, I’m sure, have our opinions on how 
government could better serve the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Members on this side of the House, I  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

397 
 
 

know, have some ideas, and I know that there must be people in 
the back-benches of the government that have some firm ideas 
on how government can be reorganized. I’m sure your 
constituents come to you on a regular basis with some bouquet 
or some experience they’ve had with government that has been 
not very meaningful to them, and you sort of summarize all 
those and you develop ideas on how government could better 
serve people and how it should be organized. 
 
Now I’m not saying that something like the department of 
human resources is good or whether it’s bad, but the point that 
we want to make is that we’d like to have some input into the 
organization of the department of human resources. We want to 
have this forum have some input into the formation of that and 
other departments and, in fact, in some cases, Mr. Speaker, 
agencies that carry out the role of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And I think that we need to keep that role here 
in this legislature. 
 
The introduction of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to me means one of 
two things. It’s either a blatant power grab, which I would hope 
that it’s not. We don’t need people grabbing more and more 
power. When you have more people making decisions, or at 
least giving input to decisions, you likely have a better 
opportunity of making good decisions, even though, when it 
comes down to the final decision, you can’t have everybody in 
the province or everybody in the country in on the final 
decision. That doesn’t make sense. But at least you should be 
listening to what other people have on as broad a base as 
possible. 
 
When you talk about co-operation and consultation in the 
throne speech, throughout your last term of government in the 
20th Legislature, throughout the election campaign, I hope you 
mean that. I hope there is not a double standard by what you say 
and what you actually do. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, which I had hoped was the reality 
of what’s happening, was that it was an extremely poor job of 
drafting the Bill — Bill 5, the Bill to organize . . . the 
organization Act, the proposed legislation. And if it was a poor 
job of drafting, or if your new legal language is taking on new 
definitions that maybe members opposite — on the opposition 
side — don’t understand, then again I say, make it explicit to us 
so we can understand it, future legislators can understand it 
within the province of Saskatchewan, whether it be new 
members in your government or, more preferable to us, our 
government, or, heaven forbid, a Liberal government some time 
in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it is that extremely poor job of drafting the Bill 
that is the issue here, that could rectify the situation that we 
have, and the members on the government side are not willing 
to withdraw the Bill and make the changes to it, I think the 
Peter principle must apply. And the Peter principle is that they 
have reached their maximum level of incompetence. 
 
If that’s the case here, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what’s 
happening, the only way that the Peter principle could be 
extended by the maximum level of incompetence is doing 
something at the federal level — like is being suggested here — 
and that is to, by order in council,  

appoint these people opposite to be the Privy Councillors, to be 
the cabinet of Brian Mulroney in Ottawa. Then they would have 
reached an even higher maximum level of incompetence, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But as I say, I hope that that’s not what’s happening here. And I 
hope that the government will withdraw the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because the principle of the Bill — the 
government reorganization . . . I want to turn for a while to the 
actual government departments that we speculate at least may 
be affected by this legislation. And some of the implications 
could be quite alarming and could have a detrimental effect on 
many, many people who have worked and paid long and 
dedicated service to the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, it 
could be interpreted as a lead-up to an attack on the public 
service and the public employees of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now for example, the Department of Social Services. I 
mentioned earlier that I would like to know more about this 
department of human resources. Is the Department of Social 
Services going to fall under that department, Mr. Speaker? Or 
even more detrimental, what we have heard — by rumour, mind 
you; I cannot substantiate it — but we would like to know from 
the minister of many portfolios whether or not this government 
intends by their reorganization to transfer the administration for 
income support programs that are currently under the 
Department of Social Services to municipal levels of 
government. Is each rural municipal government, is each town 
council, each village hamlet, each city council, going to have to 
prepare to administer income support programs within this 
province? 
 
It was mentioned in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, that there 
will be a look at the delivery of income support programs. Is 
that what’s going to happen? Is that what the minister has in 
mind as the minister of human resources? Because if it is, the 
municipal levels of government which are a delegation of 
authority from this level of government, Mr. Speaker, had better 
start getting prepared for a horrendous nightmare. There will be 
inconsistencies; there’ll be people moving around in the 
province. It just, to me, doesn’t make any sense. 
 
If that’s the avenue the government wants to go down in terms 
of reorganizing that particular department, it doesn’t make any 
sense to change that and put it in the hands of municipal 
governments. And I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that municipal 
governments want that on their platter of the many things they 
already have to do. I think that it would be an abdication of 
responsibility by this government if the government has that on 
their agenda. Incidentally, a hidden agenda, because if this Bill 
passes we’ll never find out about it; wont’ have any input until 
after it actually happens. 
 
I’d like to turn for a minute to the importance of the Department 
of Social Services as something that is general over the whole 
province of Saskatchewan. The entire province has a consistent 
way. And I’m happy to see the member from Rosetown-Elrose 
in the Assembly here because some of my remarks would 
concern him. 
 
(1230) 
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

398 
 
 

I can remember on the evening of December 10, Mr. Speaker, I 
was attending a Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
dinner, and the hon. member at that time happened to be giving 
an address as the former president of the Saskatchewan chapter 
of that organization. And during the presentation, Mr. Speaker, 
he spoke of how he had gone on a trip to India on a delegation. 
And I would say that our organization, the Commonwealth 
parliamentary Association, does some very good work; and it’s 
a prestigious organization that has given tremendous help to 
many countries throughout the Commonwealth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when the hon. member from 
Rosetown-Elrose happened to be at that dinner explaining his 
trip he mentioned in passing that he had a wonderful time there. 
The Indian government had treated him royally and that he had 
been provided with a chauffeur-driven limousine and two 
bodyguards. The Indian government would allow him to go 
anywhere he wanted to see anything he wanted to see and to 
stay for as long as he wanted at the hospitality of the 
government — whether it be one week or two weeks or three 
weeks or for however long that he wanted to stay and see the 
country of India — have some idea of how the country 
operated. 
 
And one of the major points that the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose made was that there’s no welfare system in 
India — no welfare system in India. If everyone wanted 
something they had to work for it, and everybody worked in 
India. Well, I’d point out, Mr. Speaker, that if that’s an example 
of what we’ll get in government reorganization, I don’t want it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — There’s thousands of people that die in India 
every day from starvation because they have no income support 
program in that country. Ask Mother Teresa how good the 
welfare system is and how good the system is for taking care of 
people who starve in Indian countries like that. We don’t want 
that in the province of Saskatchewan under reorganization, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have no input into. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Saltcoats also made some comments that evening, 
and I won’t even address those. 
 
Another department, Mr. Speaker, that I am very concerned 
about is the Department of Supply and Services. Already, 
without any debate in this House, without any debate in this 
Assembly, we now have the property management corporation 
in the province of Saskatchewan. The property management 
corporation is a new Crown corporation by an outfit who is 
against families of Crown corporations, that believe in 
privatization . . . They create another Crown corporation. And I 
would have to go on record today, Mr. Speaker, that if I ever 
got into the position in the province of Saskatchewan where I 
could abolish a Crown corporation, it would be abolition of the 
property management corporation, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 
dangerous. It has a couple of aspects to it, because of 
reorganization. 
 
One of the aspects of it, Mr. Speaker, is that the assets that  

belong to the people of Saskatchewan can now be mortgaged. 
The government departments can’t take on mortgages. Crown 
corporations can. So the plan as we understand it from the 
sketchy comments that have been made and from information 
we pick put through the media, is that all the physical assets of 
the government will be put under the property management 
corporation, therefore they can be mortgaged. 
 
For example the Saskatchewan Hospital, the only long-term 
mental health care facility in the province of Saskatchewan in 
the constituency I represent, Mr. Speaker, can now be 
mortgaged. If the economic and finance record of this 
government continues at the rate it’s going — downhill — and 
there’s a mortgage placed against that building, some financial 
institution can ultimately end up with that building because they 
could seize it. Because that's the collateral that we’ve put 
against a loan. They’re now mortgaging — wanting to 
mortgage all of our assets in the province so they can raise 
money to keep the Government of Saskatchewan operating 
because we’re in a terrible debt situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other aspect about the property management corporation 
and how it ties into the Department of Supply and Service 
through reorganization — an example we’re already seeing — 
is the fact that employees who work in that department also 
now go to the property management corporation at least 
temporarily, Mr. Speaker. At least temporarily they go there. 
 
Because what happens if the government carries through on 
their wish to bid things out, tender things out to the private 
sector? Does that mean that those people who work as janitorial 
service personnel for the Department of Supply and Service will 
be having to compete, all of a sudden putting in bids, on jobs 
that they’ve held in some cases for many many years, when 
they know about some of the patronage that’s happened from 
this government, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Somebody that’s worked at a rate . . . Say they’re getting 
$1,000 a month as a janitor with the Department of Supply and 
Services and one of the Tory members opposite knows 
somebody that’s a friend of theirs in the private sector can bid 
that job for $990. They’ll guarantee them the job because they 
outbid the person that’s been in that job for some cases 10, 15, 
20 years. It’s open to all kinds of manipulation, Mr. Speaker, 
and I think that we have to be careful of that because . . . And it 
all ties in to the reorganization of government. 
 
What we want to do is point out some of the negative aspects of 
that that I think if you go ahead, the members on the opposite 
side will come back to haunt them in a very short period of 
time. 
 
Under the property management corporation, Mr. Speaker, I go 
back to the Saskatchewan hospital as an example. In the 
Saskatchewan hospital there’s janitorial personnel there; there’s 
people that are tradespeople, electrical, mechanical; there’s 
people who do maintenance work. And every single one of their 
jobs is now in danger because of what the government is doing. 
Over from Supply and Service to the property  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

399 
 
 

management corporation and then tendering out things that 
have been traditionally done by public employees to the private 
sector. And I think we’ve got to be very careful of doing that. 
 
For savings of what would be, in some cases, a minuscule 
amount, we’re affecting the lives of families, Mr. Speaker; 
we’re affecting the livelihood of people who have planned, in 
some cases, for many, many years on working, doing a good 
job for the province of Saskatchewan in whatever department 
they’ve been in, planning on the retirement income that they’ve 
been able to budget and contribute towards through the pension 
plan of the provincial government. And those things are in 
danger, Mr. Speaker, and we should be very careful about how 
we tread on that. We don’t want to take responsibility for those 
things happening, and that’s why we’re keeping you here to get 
you to at least change your mind on the method of how you do 
government reorganization,. Mr. Speaker, that’s the point of 
what we’re taking these people on the government side through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another department that I’m seriously concerned 
about, because it falls within my critic area . . . The Leader of 
the Opposition appointed me as Highways critic. And in the 
Department of Highways the former member from Wilkie had 
very heavy lay-offs in the Department of Highways; affected a 
good many families and the incomes for some of those people. 
And his line, if I recall correctly, at that time, Mr. Speaker, was 
that he was giving those people the opportunity to work in the 
private sector. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s now in the private sector himself. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, one of the members said he’s now in 
the private sector himself. 
 
But the Department of Highways currently continues on and the 
hon. member from Melfort is the new Minister of Highways. 
And we want to know from him: is his department going to 
disappear so that then all of the Department of Highways 
employees have the same opportunity to work in the private 
sector? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the private sector is all right in some cases 
but we don’t want to see, at least on this side of the House, the 
entire government put into the private sector. It seems to me 
that that’s what we’re moving towards, Mr. Speaker. And if 
we’re moving towards that, it just exemplifies to me that a 
government that doesn’t believe in government cannot run 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, look at some of the departments 
like . . . What are the counterparts? Does it mean Finance is 
going to be The Royal Bank of Canada, after we reorganize and 
then privatize? Is Justice going to be Tony Merchant’s law 
firm? Is Agriculture going to be the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I give you the assurance right now, it is 
not. 

Mr. Anguish: — I didn’t quite catch what happened there, Mr. 
Speaker, but I was wondering if Tony Merchant is the 
Department of Justice. 
 
In Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is it going to be the 10 largest 
landholders? Will Hudson’s Bay Company and CPR, or 
Marathon Realty that holds the land for the CPR, going to be 
controlling the Department of Agriculture as the private sector 
counterpart? 
 
What about Rural Development, Mr. Speaker? Rural 
Development maybe should go to the new venture capital 
corporation called Agri-business Incorporated. That would 
likely make a good trust for the Department of Rural 
Development — a new avenue to take in the private sector. 
 
Or the Department of Health, Mr. Speaker. If that goes through 
reorganization and then to privatization, maybe the American 
Pharmaceutical Association could run the Department of Health 
at a great efficiency and economy and savings to the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan. I think not. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s Blue Cross. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Oh, is that Blue Cross? Blue Cross could be 
the one., Mr. Speaker, to take over the Department of Health. 
They seem to really be running MCIC down. 
 
Parks and Renewable Resources. I had to think for a while on 
that one. But ever since the documents were tabled, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that that would be best privatized under this 
government’s plan by the Weyerhaeuser corporation. It’s sort of 
almost getting like a last will and testament, Mr. Speaker, of 
where the government wishes these current government 
departments to go to. 
 
The Department of Science and Technology. I thought that after 
yesterday’s question period that Fleet Aerospace would be a 
good one for the Science and Technology. Fleet Aerospace 
seem to be very well equipped to handle that, in the impression 
of the government. 
 
Energy and Mines. No problem there, Mr. Speaker. When that 
goes privatized, we will give it to Exxon. Exxon’s the one that 
seems to be appropriate there. Because they have such a large 
bureaucracy themselves, they should be able to take over 
actually the entire government with no problem. 
 
And Environment — Environment was a tough one, but we 
thought that likely where you have to watch that going is to 
Inco, because Inco has such a good record on creating acid rain 
and killing thousands of lakes in Ontario. 
 
Tourism and Small Business. Well, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t 
difficult at all. That’s to the Federation of Independent Business 
in Canada here. It’s going to be kept locally owned because 
Tourism and Small Business are the backbone of our society, 
and we thought that the government would likely be wanting 
that to remain Canadian. 
 
Education. I don’t know where they would put education,  
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

400 
 
 

but they might have schools that have special new curriculum 
development. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Compucollege. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Compucollege. Compucollege, but I hope that 
the minister honours his commitment to the reading, writing, 
and arithmetic to the very basic principles of education. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my last few minutes I would think the 
members on the opposite side would agree it’s a bit absurd. I 
would hope that that would never happen. But we have to be 
very careful on reorganization. We can’t just reorganize with no 
input from this side of the House. And when the reorganization 
takes place, that’s when privatization kicks in. And I have 
nothing against the private sector, Mr. Speaker, but some things 
do not operate well under the private sector. 
 
Under the private sector there’s always got to be the profit 
motive there, because who would want to be involved in the 
private sector and not make any money, even though there are 
several businesses today in Saskatchewan that aren’t making 
any money. But it certainly wasn’t their intention when they 
first went into business, Mr. Speaker, or chose to be an 
entrepreneur in the private sector. 
 
(1245) 
 
And in the private sector they have to make a profit or else they 
don’t exist. But the idea of government is not always to make 
profit. Hopefully some of our Crown corporations don’t cause a 
drain on the public purse. But private sector cannot run all of 
government. And if that’s what you’re looking at on the 
opposite side of the House, you’re sadly mistaken if we think 
that we’re going to let you disorganize, change, obliterate, 
disestablish, and privatize all of government. It’s taken many, 
many years to build, Mr. Speaker, but at the same time I do 
acknowledge some reorganization is not all bad. But we want to 
have some say into that reorganization. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, things are deceiving where the thrust 
of government goes sometimes. I know that I was talking to a 
shopper the other day, Mr. Speaker, and she said she was down 
at the store and bought some PC pork and paper. And I said, 
well you must be wrong; you must have been down and bought 
pork and beans. And she said, no, no, I bought pork and paper. 
She said, it’s very good for your diet; it’s very, very expensive, 
and when you open it up there’s very few calories, it’s just hot 
air comes out. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are not liking what 
they see going on, and when it gets removed more and more 
into the back rooms, they’re going to like it less and less. At 
least in this, many people do agree with what the government 
opposite’s doing or else they wouldn’t have got re-elected. But 
many people, in fact a few more — because the popular vote 
was heavier in our direction — agree with what we’re saying 
too, Mr. Speaker. And so if you take all of that criticism and 
take it out of this forum, keep it all in the back rooms and run 
with an iron hand, people of Saskatchewan will give you even 
fewer votes next time when you come before the public at the 
general  

election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to look back at the throne speech for just a 
minute because it does tie into this. And that is the commitment 
through the throne speech to the people of Saskatchewan that 
there’ll be a rules committee to look at the rules by which this 
legislature operates. And I believe that the motion has been 
introduced and that committee has, in fact, been agreed to in 
this House. The day after the throne speech, on the Thursday, 
the government comes in and arbitrarily tries to change the 
rules by which the legislature’s members operate — that iron 
hand there again, that power grab, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now Bill 5 even takes more away. It doesn’t give us the voice 
that we require to operate in this legislature. And I remember, 
Mr. Speaker, in the earlier days of this legislature, in this 21st 
Legislature, that the member of Kinistino was up and speaking 
in his seat, and he told us how proud he was of Saskatchewan, 
how proud he was of Canada, that we have such a great 
province — and we do — because he was comparing it to his 
time when he grew up, in his words, under Hitler in Germany. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what happens is that when fewer and fewer 
people grab all the power, the same thing can happen. It’s only 
because of the good kindness of the hearts of the people who 
are here now that it doesn’t come to the same thing that it had 
come to in Germany leading up to, and during, the Second 
World War. There’s a very thin line between democracy and a 
dictatorship. And as we allow the erosion of this, the greater 
and greater grab for power, it does come closer to that. And I 
would ask the member from Kinistino to reflect a little, to think 
about what actually is happening in terms of rules, what’s 
happening in terms of the centralization and the consolidation 
of power by this government. And you back-benchers should be 
concerned about that. 
 
And the member of Rosthern who I mentioned in my throne 
speech, Mr. Speaker, when his family left the area of what is 
now the Soviet Union; when the Bolsheviks and the 
Mensheviks were fighting with each other, driving people out 
of that country — those countries all had great-sounding 
constitutions. Some of them even had charters of rights but 
people were driven out. People were killed because the ruling 
party of the day didn’t like the rules that were there. They killed 
people because of that. 
 
Here we’re at the stage, Mr. Speaker, where we don’t kill 
people, and I don’t ever imagine that would happen. Even the 
members opposite wouldn’t go to that extreme, but when they 
don’t like the rules here they just arbitrarily want to change 
them. They don’t want any dissension, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you have a role in making sure that doesn’t happen, 
because of the virtue of your position and the high prestige that 
that position holds. And I would hope that all members on all 
sides of the House respect the role that you have to play in this 
legislature by providing the fairness and equity on both sides of 
the House. Because for you, I’m sure, it’s not a matter of both 
sides of the House, it’s the matter that we are here as 
representatives from a very diverse and large province and have 
very many interests. 
  



 
December 19, 1986 

 

401 
 
 

That same principle has to apply in terms of how the 
government acts. They don’t just represent Progressive 
Conservative votes. They represent all people in the province. 
And it’s not a long distance; it’s not much different from 
changing rules and stifling dissent to what happened many, 
many years ago in countries that many of our ancestors came 
from, to come to a new land where there would be more 
freedom and a land of hope. 
 
The other thing that I don’t understand is that many of the 
back-benchers on that side of the House tell us that they’re born 
again Christians. And to me, any born again Christian I’ve ever 
known, such as my brother-in-law or some of you on that side 
of the House, the supremacy, the main driving force in their 
life, Mr. Speaker, is the supremacy of God. Just like in our 
constitution, the start of the charter of rights speaks of the 
supremacy of God. I can’t for the life of me understand that 
anybody that has that as the major driving force in their life 
could sit back in silence and not saying anything about what’s 
going on. Even if you want to criticize us, do it, but say 
something. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I prefer that you say something that would 
convince your cabinet members, the Executive Council of this 
government, to withdraw this piece of legislation and make the 
changes that need to be made to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to have a few more brief comments. As 
politicians, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a great grabby issue for us. 
When we talked amongst some of our members, and as I’m sure 
the government side talks about, is that when you want to deal 
with something, you always wonder what implications it’s 
going to have through the media. And I know that in terms of 
this Bill many people must wonder why we’re staying here to 
debate this piece of legislation. 
 
I notice the members of the press gallery are listening very 
intently to what I have to say, and they now have the advantage, 
Mr. Speaker, of going and watching it on tape so they can get 
second and third and fourth runs so they don’t miss a word that 
any of us have said here in this legislature. But to my surprise 
the press did, in fact, pick up some of this debate and I’ll just 
quote from the Leader-Post article that came out this morning. 
The first paragraph says: 
 

A bill giving the provincial cabinet the right to 
terminate or create departments is legally, 
constitutional, and morally wrong, the NDP 
Opposition charged Thursday. 

 
And I’m no lawyer, Mr. Speaker, but I have great confidence in 
the member from Regina Lakeview and the member from 
Saskatoon Mayfair. I don’t want to list all the lawyers in our 
caucus, but I have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, okay. And the member from Regina 
Centre and the member from Quill Lakes and the member from 
Riversdale and the member from Regina Elphinstone. I think 
I’ve listed all the great legal minds in  

our caucus. I have confidence in them when they say to me that 
this is, if not unconstitutional, it is on the verge of being 
unconstitutional, at least. And there are legal opinions that this 
Bill is unconstitutional. 
 
We’re trying to save the government of a great deal of 
embarrassment, of putting through . . . the members opposite 
just make me laugh, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s hard to take them serious when you look at the weight and 
importance of this Bill 5 that they are trying to put through the 
legislature, very close to the Christmas break when they thought 
we’d give up, and we don’t want to let it go like that. We’re 
trying to save the government the embarrassment of pushing 
this legislation through. Because at the end of the day you have 
the weight of government to push through this piece of 
legislation, but we want to save you the embarrassment of being 
challenged in the constitutional validity of this, that it’s not 
ultra vires — because we think it may be — and someone will 
be taking the Government of Saskatchewan to court if this Bill 
goes through. As the member from Kindersley has already 
acknowledged, the charter of rights will allow this to be 
challenged in the Supreme Court of Canada, and we don’t want 
to embarrass you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see it’s moving very close to the time of getting 
out of this place. I would ask that you recognize that it’s 1 
o’clock. And if the members want me to continue, I’d like to be 
able to continue my comments on Monday. I don’t have any 
great need, but I’d ask that you . . . do you want me to adjourn 
debate? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. I wish you a 
very Merry Christmas and a prosperous 1987. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:57 p.m. 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS

