


















































June 23, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 23, 1986 
 
 

2207 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Domotor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, a 
group of 23 students in grade 6, 7, and 8, located in the west 
gallery. They’re from the Plunkett Elementary School, and they’ve 
come here to observe the proceedings of the afternoon. I met with 
them this morning to briefly explain to them some of the 
proceedings and some of the things they might anticipate being in 
the House. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. C. Hrynkiw, and 
chaperons, Debbie Clavelle, Inger Olaw, Helen Miller, and Joan 
Farago. I ask members to welcome them here today. I wish them a 
safe journey back. They have some other things that they’re going 
to look at this afternoon and enjoy, and I hope they find these 
proceedings informative and educational. I ask all members to 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my special privilege 
today to introduce a special group of students from the 
constituency of Regina South. They are students from the Regina 
Christian Academy, and there’s six of them. They represent grades 
6, 7, and 8. They’re situated in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re here 
with their teacher, Mrs. Kathy Nieuwenhuis, and also Mrs. Diane 
Wesley is with them. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them after question period, and 
we’ll visit a little bit. We’ll take some pictures, and we’ll see how 
you enjoyed your visit in the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
I ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to welcome them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
this afternoon to introduce to the House six students who are here 
through the Rotary youth exchange. They’re sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery. Two students are from Finland, and I hope that 
they are going to enjoy their stay here this afternoon. I’ll be 
meeting with them at 2:30 this afternoon. 
 
I would like all members of the House to give them a welcome 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Currie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure at this 
time to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a group of 20 grade 4 and 5 students from 
Massey Elementary School. They are seated in the west gallery. 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Notemboom, and by 
chaperons, Mrs. Gibson, Mrs. Malley, Mrs. Jensen, and Ms. 
Keenan. 
 

I’m sure that you will find your visit interesting and educational. I 
plan to meet with you immediately after question period. I would 
ask the members to join with me in extending a welcome to these 
young people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Terms of Agreement for Sale of PAPCO 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the Premier, and it’s a straightforward question about 
the terms of a proposed sale of public assets — a major sale. My 
purpose is to get information so that the public may have 
information on which they can assess the wisdom, or otherwise, of 
the proposed sale. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you confirm that the Weyerhaeuser corporation 
is purchasing the Prince Albert pulp-mill and all related assets? 
Can you confirm that the down payment is zero? Can you confirm 
that, during the 30-year pay-back period, the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation may or may not have to pay back the purchase price of 
$249 million? And can you confirm that until Weyerhaeuser 
makes good on a promise to build a new paper-mill, it is able to 
deduct any losses suffered from the purchase price — so-called — 
of $248 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the minister gets 
into the Bill again, he will go through the numbers in much more 
detail. I have the number before me, but he will get into numbers. 
 
I would just run by, in a general sense, the numbers for the Leader 
of the Opposition so that we can put it in perspective. It’ll only 
take him a couple of minutes, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that the 
members opposite are interested in this. And I believe it’s 
important, because of the issues that have been raised by the 
opposition, that we provide as much of the information as possible 
just for a couple of minutes. Mr. Speaker. 
 
Okay. In 1979, 30 per cent of the pulp-mill was purchased by CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) for 
approximately $23 million. In 1980, 70 per cent was purchased for 
$162 million. That’s a total of $185 million. The interest on that, 
Mr. Speaker, the interest on that was $126 million since 1979. 
Now they collected a few dividends, which has been $28 million, 
so the interest written off to date on the total package is $98 
million. Mr. Speaker, the loss to date in the last five years is $44 
million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying is that if you take $186 million, 
and the interest that we’ve written off is $98 million, plus $44 
million loss, Mr. Speaker, we have $328 million worth of liability 
that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are now sitting there watching 
bleed — that we’re losing. At 12 per cent money, at any interest 
rate, it could lose in the neighbourhood of $40 million a year, just 
interest on the money we’ve already got into it — just interest on 
the money we’ve already got into it — plus it can continue to lose 
money as it did the last year and the year before. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2208 
 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at putting together a new 
pulp- and paper-mill, and a brand-new operation, the estimate for a 
pulp-mill of this magnitude right now is anywhere from zero to 
$60 million — that may be what it’s worth — 0 to $60 million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if we’re looking at the kind of losses that you 
could be of interest on the debt plus ordinary losses in running the 
pulp-mill, which has been going on, and you look at what the 
market value of that pulp-mill may be, it’s anywhere from zero to 
$60 million. And, Mr. Speaker, we can put together a brand-new 
paper-mill, and the pulp-mill, and not get $60 million for it, not get 
70 million, not get 100 million, but $248 million integrated into 
our whole new unit, Mr. Speaker. Then it says to me that we are 
going to save the taxpayers not only the bleeding that’s going on 
to date — the year after year of losses — but in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
we are going to get: one, a brand-new paper-mill with 165 new 
jobs, and we are going to be cutting the losses that goes on day 
after day in a pulp-mill that we’ve got something like $328 million 
into now that the taxpayers . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to caution the Premier 
to keep his answers short and to the point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, you gave a great number of 
figures, none of them relevant to the question. I’m going to ask a 
question so narrow that it’s going to be very difficult for you to 
make a speech and still be in order. I ask you, Mr. Premier — you 
talk about losses: will you admit that in the year 1980 PAPCO 
made a profit of $27.4 million? We’ll start with that nice, narrow 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, if 
PAPCO made some money in 1980 — I don’t have ’80 before 
me; I have 1981 to 1985 — if it made some money and you think 
that it can make some money and we integrate it with a new 
paper-mill, then I’m not so sure that you could have it both ways. 
Either it’s losing money, and it’s lost a great deal — which is the 
fact — or you think that it can make money and you can pay it off. 
Now you can’t have it both ways. You’re arguing, one, you don’t 
want to do it, you don’t want to have a new paper-mill because it 
will lose money. Then you say, well by gosh it’s going to make 
some money. Well if it’s going to make money, then we should be 
integrating it and it will pay $248 million to the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And, Mr. Premier, I wasn’t arguing at all. 
I’m in question period; I’m asking questions. This is not a time for 
argument. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier: do you deny that in 1981 the mill made 
$24.1 million and that it started making losses only in 1982 and 
thereafter, when your management took place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the losses from 1985 
to 1981 were as follows: 1985 it lost $33.585 million; 1984 it 
made 5.203 million; 1983 it lost $29.117 million; 1982 it lost 
9.409 million; 1981 it made $24.132 million. So in the last five 
years it’s lost $42.776 million — 42.776 million, and on top of 
that we got $186 million into it and $98 million in interest that’s 
already been  

written off — net — 126 million minus the 28 in dividends for 
$98 million net. So the public has got $328 million, at any kind of 
interest rate, that is bleeding there now today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re saying: couldn’t the opposition agree that you take a 
pulp-mill that has lost in the last five years $40-some million, 
integrate it with a new $250 million paper-mill, with the 
opportunity to get $248 million for the pulp-mill, plus 165 new 
jobs, for a brand-new $500 million project in the province of 
Saskatchewan with somebody else’s money; why would you want 
to perpetuate the loss? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
obviously not going to get anything but a barrage of figures from 
the Premier. 
 
Would you do this: would you file the financial statements of 
PAPCO since 1982, and would you file the documents with 
Weyerhaeuser? Then we will make our own analysis, and we will 
not be subject to his blizzard of figures. Would you do that? Will 
you give us the financial statements of PAPCO and your deal with 
Weyerhaeuser, and we and the public will make our own 
judgements? Will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — As I just said, Mr. Speaker, we will provide 
the information, as much of the information that I have got in 
documentation, when the minister comes up with respect to third 
reading of the Bill. All the Bill does is guarantee a note for 
$80-some million with respect to the purchase. So what I am 
laying here, and what I will be prepared to document — and I say 
this, Mr. Speaker, that we have got in the neighbourhood of 
$300-and-some million of taxpayers’ money into this outfit and 
it’s losing money, and any kind of interest on it at all is 30 to $40 
million every year. I will document that, and I will table that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who bought it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I didn’t buy it, Mr. Speaker; it was bought 
by the members opposite. They paid too much for it. They had a 
chance to have somebody else pick up 70 per cent of it and they 
didn’t exercise that. And we’ve been paying interest on it since 
1979. 
 
Now we have a opportunity to get a company in here with $250 
million of new money, put it together, we’ll cut off our losses, 
integrate it into a brand-new system and get $248 million. And 
they want to hang onto this thing that they bought n 1979 and 
1980 that is still costing us a fortune. 
 
Well, we’ll be tabling the document so that you can see that the 
public has got over $300 million in losses and it’s bleeding to date, 
and no sign of any optimism. And you say, well, by gosh, in ’81 it 
made a little money. Well it didn’t make money in the last five 
years, and certainly $42 million plus interest on any kind of 
investment shows it was a poor investment. When you had a 
chance to market it, you didn’t, and the taxpayers have been 
paying for it ever since. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2209 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Since the 
Premier refuses to answer questions and gives long harangues, 
may I ask the minister in charge of PAPCO whether he will do 
two things today so that we will have them for tomorrow when we 
discuss this Bill. 
 
Will you file the financial statements of PAPCO, which you say 
will show all of these losses, and will you file the documents of 
your deal with Weyerhaeuser, so that all of the public can make 
their own judgement? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? Will you do 
it today so that we and the public would have an opportunity to 
have the figures and analyse them before the Bill is being 
discussed? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll file the financial 
statements of PAPCO, and we’ll file as many documents as we 
can file as it relates to the Weyerhaeuser deal — the deal with 
Weyerhaeuser, between Weyerhaeuser Canada and the 
Government of Saskatchewan — as many as can be filed before 
final closing of the deal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will you let us 
have those today so that we’ll have them in order to analyse them 
for tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll attempt to have the PAPCO financial 
statements available today. I say I’ll make that attempt, but if it 
won’t be today, it will be tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will you also 
attempt to let us have the arrangements with Weyerhaeuser. You 
have given us Schedule B; will you give us Schedule A, Schedule 
C and the agreement? Is there any reason why we couldn’t have 
that today? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’m sure we’ll get into that debate 
when the Bill comes up, Mr. Speaker. I have said in debate in the 
committee stage of the Bill before, we will table what we can table 
as it relates to the negotiations that are still ongoing — and they 
are. They are still ongoing. No final documentation has been 
signed, and it should be made clear, Mr. Speaker, as well: I have 
given the undertaking to the Leader of the Opposition and to the 
members opposite that at the date of closing, when the final deal is 
signed, the total documentation for that deal which will number 
pages in the thousands, including all the schedules, they will have 
the copy of the final deal. Mr. Speaker, how more forthcoming 
could I be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You have 
given us, Mr. Minister, Schedule B, which is initialled. Will you 
give us other documents which were similarly initialled? There 
was no harm in giving us Schedule B, and you gave it to us. 
Would you please give us the similar documents which were 
initialled and dated March 24? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, two points that should be 
made here . . . I don’t say that I won’t give other documents, but I 
do say this: those members over there, that man who just asked the 
question, the former premier, when they purchased for, I believe 
the number was $162 million, the 70 per cent of this pulp-mill, 
when they  

purchased 70 per cent, no documentation was filed. The question 
was asked in this House by my colleague at that time in 
opposition, Mr. Rousseau, to the minister at that time, Mr. 
Cowley: will you provide the documentation? He said, no, this is 
not a negotiating forum . . . I’m just paraphrasing now, but I’ll be 
glad to give you the total answers. This is not a negotiating forum, 
he says; we’ll table it at some future time. 
 
It was never tabled, Mr. Speaker. That point needs to be made. 
That government, that premier over there, when he was the 
premier, did not table it. And now he stands in the House and says, 
will you table it; why won’t you table it? I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
what he says in opposition and what he did when he was in 
government are two far different things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask the 
minister, who is also putting through the transaction to the House 
in respect to the Weyerhaeuser deal, a question. As you know, Mr. 
Minister, the public are shocked with the apparent terms of the 
agreement that you have that were revealed here in the House last 
week. I ask you, Mr. Minister, and I dare you to put the full 
proposed terms of the agreement; table them today; put them 
before the legislature; allow the public to make an assessment of 
them. I dare you to table them. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, I dare you to file all the documents and 
then in return, having reviewed them, call an election. I dare your 
Premier to follow up an election on this issue. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, are you prepared to go further? Instead 
of vacillating as you did last week, will you file the remainder of 
the documents as has been requested? Are you prepared to do that 
so the public will be entitled to look at what the nature of the 
agreement is? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same question, 
exactly the same question that was asked by his leader. I will say 
to him as I did say to his leader, we provide more information on 
this deal than they ever provided as it related to the pulp-mill 
purchase that they purchased. They went out and purchased a 
pulp-mill, $162 million, asked the people nothing about it, did not 
come before the House, gave no documents to the House. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, have come before the House. We’ve brought the 
Bill here, and what the Bill is, that they’re talking about, is the 
enabling legislation to provide a guarantee for one-third of the cost 
of a paper-mill — a paper-mill which they say they are against, a 
paper-mill which they do not want, a paper-mill which they say 
they do not want, Mr. Speaker. They say they do not want it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my 
question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, it deals with the 
Weyerhaeuser deal and the Prince Albert Pulp Company. And I 
would like to say first of all, Mr. Premier, that the magnitude of 
this deal, I’m sure that you would be aware of all the deals that go 
on and every item involved in such a deal of this magnitude, and 
you continually indicate in  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2210 
 
 

the House that the integration of that pulp-mill with a new 
paper-mill is the only way that it can survive. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier: if that is the case, why did you sell off 
the Big River sawmill and all the forest rights related to Big River; 
and why did you also include the chemical plant in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, obviously we’re looking at an 
integrated project completely, and it makes sense. We’ve got a 
new forest management agreement; we’re looking at higher 
royalties; we’re looking at a whole combination of new forestry 
management in northern Saskatchewan and a brand-new $250 
million paper-mill that doesn’t cost us a dime. It’s other people 
who are bringing their money to invest in here and integrate it with 
a pulp-mill that has lost $44 million and is hemorrhaging money. 
And it’s costing us up to $60,000 a job just to keep the people 
working there, and you’re saying, well, I wonder if we should get 
into this and have a brand-new project and integrate the whole 
system and a new forestry management agreement and higher 
royalties. 
 
I suppose, as the member from Quill Lakes raised, you want to 
raise some argument. You haven’t been doing that well in the 
House on pension legislation or on agriculture or on jobs or 
anything else, so you’ve got to raise an issue. Well, you can raise 
it if you like. Every time they get into trouble, they say, well, I’m 
going to call an election. All right, that’s all you can do, is call an 
election. 
 
I know you’re against the paper project; you’re against brand-new 
modern reforestation; you’re against new royalties in the forestry 
business; and you want to hand on to a bleeding corporation 
because you bought it and paid too much and wouldn’t sell it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Most certainly 
I’m not against progress, but when the Saskatchewan taxpayers 
. . . New Question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you indicate that 
we’re against progress. I say . . . And where you say we’re against 
private enterprise, I say when you can give $248 million to an 
American firm to take our assets, that’s the kind of private 
enterprise that I’m opposed to. 
 
There was not . . . And by way of information on your documents, 
Mr. Premier, Weyerhaeuser Canada never put up one red cent to 
purchase our assets — not one red cent — and there is no 
paper-mill that’s being planned right now, because you haven’t 
given us the documents. 
 
My question to you is also, Mr. Premier, and I’m sure you’re 
aware . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — My question is . . . And I’m sure you’re aware 
of all the details. Under the present agreement with PAPCO, they 
operate and maintain 1,000 miles of roads in the 8 million — not 8 
million; they didn’t have 8 million — but Weyerhaeuser now has 
8 million acres of our forest that they control. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, of the 1,000 miles of road  

that are maintained by PAPCO, which Weyerhaeuser’s going to 
take over, is it true that the Department of Highways are going to 
now take over that agreement and maintain the 1,000 miles of road 
in our forests? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — On the details with respect to how many 
thousands of roads, I’m going to turn it over to the minister 
responsible. But the hon. member mentioned the taxpayer; he says 
he’s worried about the taxpayer. I mean, that’s your major 
concern. 
 
Well I go back, Mr. Speaker. I have to respond. I have to respond. 
You raised it with respect to the taxpayer. The taxpayer’s already 
got $328 million into this, and it’s already bleeding money and 
hemorrhaging money, and any market value said it’s worth 60 
million. And he’s saying, well, my heaven sakes, I wondered if we 
should do something about it. 
 
And he’s off on how many roads is going to be involved in a new 
forestry management agreement. I mean, he’s missing it 
altogether, Mr. Speaker. I mean, I can turn it over to the minister 
responsible for forestry, and he can talk about the royalties, and he 
can talk about the size and the roads and the rest of it. But we’ve 
got 320-some million dollars invested n its . . . Even interest on 
that is losing, let alone the losses we got to date. And the market 
value for the whole works is probably no more than 50 or 60 
million, and he wants to hang on to it. And he says, you’re only 
going to sell it for 248 million. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will turn it over to the minister, and he can 
talk about the roads. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I asked a question specifically 
of the Premier, and he went on that long harangue and never 
answered one of my questions. Now he’s going to turn it over to 
the other minister. I think, Mr. Speaker, that that’s not fair. And he 
gets up and he makes a speech that a private corporation is losing 
all this money, and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that he is paying 
Weyerhaeuser Canada $248 million of our taxpayers’ money . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Does the member have a 
question? Order, please. The member is making a speech. Do you 
have a question? If you do, get directly to it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the question of the 
Premier, and if he wants to slough it off to another minister, fine, 
let him answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we are very satisfied with 
the terms of the new forest management licensing agreement. Just 
for the information of the members opposite who think that 
somehow there’s a much bigger area being given to the 
Weyerhaeuser company than was previously under the auspices of 
PAPCO, that simply is not so. As a matter of fact, in this 
agreement Weyerhaeuser will be harvesting a smaller piece of 
forest area than PAPCO was previously harvesting, plus, there’s 
built into that exceptions of 96,000 cubic metres for small 
operators which was never there before in the core area, and 
another 300,000 cubic metres excepted for small operators in the 
parameters which was never there before. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2211 
 
 

Mr. Thompson: — The question that I asked was: on the 1,000 
miles of road, are the Department of Highways of Saskatchewan 
going to take over and maintain those 1,000 miles of road that 
PAPCO now maintains? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking a look at the 
road situation in the forest area. We have been discussing with all 
the minister involved, the minister who is piloting the Bill through 
the House, myself as minister in charge of forestry, the Minister of 
Highways; we’ve been taking a look at these roads as it relates to 
the Weyerhaeuser agreement, and as it relates to the current 
situation, and as it also pertains to current maintenance, and we 
think we’ve come up with something that’s satisfactory to all of 
the players in the game. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, you have just indicated to the 
House that there is no agreement for the Department of Highways 
to take over, nor is there any agreement for Weyerhaeuser to 
continue to maintain those roads. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or build a paper-mill. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes. That’s right. And I suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, that there is absolutely no agreement of any detail . . . 
(inaudible) . . . to the pulp-mill. 
 
I want to also ask you, Mr. Minister, with the 1,000 miles of road 
that are now . . . they encompass the PAPCO agreement, plus the 
roads that are maintained and are in the Big River agreement, will 
there be any agreement in there or any details that will indicate 
that there will be no privatization of those roads so that the hunters 
and the trappers and the commercial fishermen in our province, 
both commercial and tourist fishermen, and the hunting, will have 
access to our forest, that there will be no signs put up that this is a 
private road? Is that going to be written into the agreement, or is it 
now incorporated into the agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve done in the 
agreement is taken a look at integrated resource management. I 
enjoy the luxury of not only being the minister in charge of 
forestry, but also wildlife and fisheries, and I can give every 
assurance to all members of this House, and to anybody else 
who’s interested in hearing it, that we have taken into 
consideration the interests of all users of the forested areas of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

Apology for Comments Reported in Media 
 
Mr. Hampton: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 
day, I would like to just rise to say that on the weekend . . . in the 
weekend media there were some comments attributed to myself 
that were less than complimentary to you and to your office. And 
for that I wish to extend an apology to you, Mr. Speaker, and say 
that I’m very sorry that it was . . . that it came out that way. And I 
hope that you will accept my apology. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Advanced Education and Manpower 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Mr. Minister, would you like to introduce 
your officials, please, for Advanced Education and Manpower. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just 
to my right, the deputy minister of Advanced Education and 
Manpower, Mr. Lawrie McFarlane; to Lawrie’s right over here is 
Don Wright, the assistant deputy minister of university affairs; 
directly behind the deputy minister is Judy Moore, executive 
director of finance and administration; and directly behind myself 
is Elizabeth Crosthwaite, assistant deputy minister of Advanced 
Education and Manpower. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A few preliminary 
questions, Mr. Minister, in respect to the normal questions that 
we’ve been asking. I was wondering whether you could send over 
the names, salaries, and positions of your executive assistants, and 
indicate whether or not there was any increase in their salaries 
during the course of the year, if you would. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’ll send that over just 
now. And as it relates to the increases, the salaries are based 
strictly on the grid scale that’s there, so if there is any increase at 
all, it’s that they moved one step on the salary grid but that’s all. 
There’s no other increases. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. The present salary classification level and 
the name of the individuals are all here. I thank you for that. They 
are referred to as ministerial assistant I, ministerial assistant IV, 
ministerial assistant D, assistant D, and ministerial assistant C. I 
guess what I want to ask, just for clarification: in respect tot he 
ones that you have listed here as your own personal staff, Mr. 
Minister . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Point of clarification. Just in glancing at 
this, the fourth name down, Patrick Jarrett, and I believe it says — 
I’m not sure if your sheet has this. Does it have ministerial 
assistant D? That should be III, I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And the question I was going to ask in respect . . . 
their classifications are as ministerial assistants; are any of them in 
the position of doing secretarial work? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, the way to read that is: the ministerial 
assistants with number I to IV are the assistants to the minister, 
and the ones with letters are secretarial staff. That’s in all cases, 
and I think you will notice that in a pattern through other 
departments as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And in respect to your ministerial  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2212 
 
 

assistants then — thank you for that clarification—are any of them 
located outside of Regina, for example, in the minister’s 
constituency, as is the case for the Minister of Revenue and 
Supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, they’re all located in Regina, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I was wondering whether you could also 
give me the list of your senior executive people and their 
positions, classification, and their salaries also, if you could. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’ll send that over just 
now. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now in respect to the salaries that are indicated 
here, you have the present, actual salaries. In respect to the 
members of the executive committee, are there any other perks 
provided, for instance, to the deputy minister and/or the assistant 
or associate; do they get any other additional perks like 
automobiles? Can you outline the extra perks that members of the 
executive committee get? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe it’s the same as it is throughout 
the public service. I believe there’s a car for the deputy minister, 
and I think a car allowance for the two assistant deputy ministers. I 
believe that’s it as per the guide-lines throughout the government. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now I didn’t quite get what you indicated in 
respect to any increases during the course of the year. That’s not 
indicated here. All we have is, in respect to the executive 
assistants, the present salary, and in respect to the members of the 
executive committee, we have the actual salaries. And I don’t 
think there was a basic pattern, as I recall, from one estimate to the 
other. 
 
And so what I’m really particularly asking you: can you indicate 
whether, during the course of the year, the ministerial assistants, 
whether or not they in fact received any increase, and the amount 
of increase? If necessary, I can go through name by name, and you 
can provide that for me, or otherwise you can give me the general 
information. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated as it relates 
to the ministerial assistants, any increases would have been 
moving one more step on the salary grid, but I have here a copy of 
the same information for the ’85-86 year, which I’ll give you for 
comparison purposes, and you’ll have both sheets, last year’s and 
this year’s. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now you have a new assistant deputy minister, I 
believe, Ms. Crosthwaite. I would just wonder whether you can 
give me a brief resume of her past experience with government 
here in Saskatchewan and the basic background of experience in 
the field of education, vis-a-vis her qualifications, in other words. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Ms. Crosthwaite is appointed as assistant 
deputy of this department. Her education was at Carleton 
University, Master of Arts. She had a college year in Greece; a 
University of Toronto high-school teacher’s certificate, a B. Ed.; a 
University of Toronto  

Bachelor of Arts. Her experience here goes back . . . just 
immediately prior to being assistant deputy minister to this 
department, she was clerk of Executive Council and assistant 
cabinet secretary in the Department of Executive Council. In 
’82-83 she was executive assistant and special adviser to the 
ministers of government services, Revenue, Supply and Services. 
In ’81-82 she was at the Embassy of Canada in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. In ’79 and ’81 she worked here for the opposition in 
this Legislative Building. I guess we don’t have to go back any 
further than that for the purposes of the question that you asked. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The educational background, I think I heard you 
correctly, was a Bachelor of Education and a Bachelor of Arts. Is 
that correct? Or is there other formal education beyond? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And the . . . Where am I here now? And I 
have a Master of Arts in history, Carleton University. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wonder if the minister could provide the 
information in respect to the minister’s travel during the course of 
the year. You were not minister for the entire . . . Well I want them 
for ’85-86. And you were not the minister during the whole year, 
so what I would like is the total cost of ministerial expenses, both 
in province and out of province, if you would. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, the ’85-86. I’ll send it over for the 
out-of-province travel. There were four trips by my predecessor 
and none by myself in this department. I’ll give you one as well, 
just in the current year here as well, one trip that I took to Toronto 
not long ago. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I wonder if the minister also, for the year 
1985-86 — that is up to the current budget — could you provide 
the total amount that was spent in the department throughout the 
year on advertising, if you would, and indicate with whom it was 
placed and the various firms. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll give a partial list here, just the amount 
that’s spent on promotional activity and so on. 
 
Just a point of clarification for the member because, just in 
anticipating your question about who was it placed with and so on, 
I’ll just come through with that. I think there’s quite a list here, 
and I’ll try to provide that in a few minutes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I’ve got the issue here: what did the 
Department of Advance Education and Manpower spend on 
promotional activities during 1985-86, spent . . . and this is the 
total amount that was expended; is that what you’re saying? In the 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What year? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — For ’85-86, $505 . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
doesn’t say that . . . (inaudible interjection). . . Oh, I see, that’s the 
quote, 500 and . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll just clarify the K — 
505.8 K means $505,800. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2213 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — I see. And with whom was this half a million 
dollars placed with? What advertising firm was the beneficiaries 
of this lucrative contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I think the placement, as it’s done in 
most of the departments, is with the agency of record, Dome 
Advertising. Most of the promotional sort of thing that’s done in 
this department is through the newspaper advertisements, 
billboards, to some extent, on the program as it relates to the 
Northern Institute of Technology, for example, one of those . . . 
some small brochures and so on, but that’s the sort of thing that’s 
done. But for the most part, I would say newspaper ads probably 
makes up the biggest portion. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I was wondering whether the minister could 
advise whether he had any consulting firms do any work for the 
department during the course of the year. If you did, give me a list 
of the consultants and the amount that may have been charged? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There’s quite a list of various consulting 
agencies, and so on, that have dealt with the department and I’ll 
just send the list over to the member. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What’s the policy of selecting the consultants? 
You say you have a fairly substantial list. Are these put out and 
various firms allowed to tender? Is there a tender placed in respect 
o . . . Are these just selected? Are these proposals, or do you just 
go and pick out whoever . . . (inaudible) . . . topic. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, just to clarify that, the 
member now will have a copy of that sheet before him. He’ll see 
that there’s quite a range of activities that go on within a 
department as diverse as this one, but for the most part, they’re 
small contracts, and they are, I believe for the most part, given to 
contracts. And then there’s a wide range of firms that have done 
work for the department, and many of them are awarded to 
companies that have done good work for us in the past, and so on. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to turn now to what I think is sort of the 
crux of the estimates here, Mr. Minister, and it seems to me that it 
relates to the general attitude, perhaps, of this government and the 
grips that they seem to have, or the lack thereof, in respect to 
Advanced Education. I think there’s a concern out there with the 
public, and partly it’s in respect to the, I guess for a better term, is 
the lack of general commitment and direction, but also sort of the 
trouble that this government has had in really getting, first of all, a 
minister who can last more than a few months. And *I think it’s 
very difficult for the educational institutions and the universities to 
keep having a change of the minister in which they’re dealing 
with. And here we had the member from Regina Wascana, and 
then we had the member from Turtleford, and you will recall the 
tremendous amount of success and the warmth in which the 
member from Turtleford was received throughout the educational 
world in Saskatchewan. And after he was unceremoniously 
removed from that office with, I suppose, come concurrence by 
the educators of Saskatchewan, then we were back to the member 
for Wascana, and now more recently we’re back to the  

member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Much has been the same in so far as the lack of continuity in 
respect to deputy ministers. We have gone through a number of 
deputy ministers and a number of associate and assistant deputy 
ministers. And here, I think, in one of the most vital areas — the 
most vital areas — and it’s rather I think symptomatic of the 
government in that it really is evidence of its lack of priority or 
coming to grips with the education. 
 
I want to ask the minister whether he can indicate whether or not, 
in respect to the general funding, there’s a major concern. I want 
to go into it in some detail in respect to the cut-back in funding by 
the federal government. 
 
Now we’ve been through this with a series of ministers. With the 
minister of Health we spent a good length of time establishing that 
there is going to be a major cut-back in what otherwise would be 
the amount for health care, and finally indicated that there was $13 
million, 9 of which would be cut back for health, leaving about 4 
million for post-secondary. 
 
And so I want to ask you: can you indicate what representations 
you, as Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower, have 
made to the federal government in opposing their step for a major 
cut-back? All of the indications are is that it will be fairly massive, 
and the consequences are going to be felt across Canada, and 
certainly we can’t afford more cut-backs in education and 
university funding. 
 
So I ask you then: can you indicate briefly what have you analysed 
will be the significance of the Wilson Budgetary cut-backs as it 
relates to post-secondary education? And what positions have you, 
as a minister, taken to oppose the steps that they are proposing to 
take? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member will 
recall the discussion with the Minister of Finance the other night 
here, just in the estimates of the Department of Finance. As it 
relates to that, I think the member will be aware, as well, that the 
Minister of Finance has been carrying the lead agency, that 
Finance has been the lead agency, as it relates to dealing with the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it should be very well clarified here that our EPF 
(established program of financing) revenues will be higher, not 
lower, as the result of the measures introduced by the federal 
government now. They’ll be higher. And let me explain to you 
why. 
 
The gross national product growth is still the key element in the 
EPF formula. It’s still the key element . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . and I say it still is. The formula that the predictions 
were being made on was based on a zero growth scenario at that 
time — was based on a zero growth scenario. Those growth 
predictions have changed and have been moved upward to a 3.5 to 
4 per cent growth prediction — those are federal government 
numbers — and because of that we believe that in 1986-87, for 
example, the new formula, along with current gross national 
product forecasts, will be 671 . . .  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2214 
 
 

where are we here? Just a minute; I need to clarify one number 
here. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the prediction that we thought we would get under 
the old formula that I just referred to was about $660 million. 
What we now with the new formula, we believe that 
Saskatchewan will have $671 million accrue to us as it relates to 
that transfer, which is a plus $11 million, the difference between 
the two forecasts. 
 
It’s extremely important to note that the forecasts are important; 
gross national product is important in all of this. In ’87-88 we 
believe that under the new formula that it will be $711 million 
accruing to Saskatchewan from the old formula prediction of 689 
million, plus $22 million difference, and we have some of those 
numbers for some of the other years. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, you see the problem that we have is that 
somebody has to be misrepresenting the facts. How can we have 
one Minister of Health come in here, after we have documented 
the amount that the Canadian Health Association indicated that 
there would be a loss of about $154 million to Saskatchewan, 
changing from the old formula to the new formula, the Minister of 
Health indicating that there’s $13 million going to be lost — 9 
million to health. So the other obviously goes to . . . This $4 
million is for education, in the first year. 
 
(1500) 
 
All indications indicate that the federal government is cutting 
back, that the amount of funding that they were paying was over 
50 per cent, and it has decreased substantially in the last few years 
to where it’s at about 43 per cent; and by 1990, 1991, it is 
estimated that it’s going to be reduced to 36 per cent of the 
funding for education and health. 
 
And you stand up in this House and you say you’re better off. 
Well I don’t know, I really don’t know why you’re sitting back 
and watching because the . . . We’ve gone through these before 
with the Minister of Health, but here is the . . . 
 

“Payment cuts inevitable,” says MacDougall. “The province 
will have to live with legislation trimming federal 
contributions to higher education and health programs by 6 
billion over the next five years,” junior Finance Minister 
Barbara MacDougall said Monday. 

 
It now returns to the House for further debate and final 
readying. They also insist the change will save the federal 
treasury 2 billion a year from now until 1991, and it puts the 
poorer provinces in the position of having to cut the quality 
of service. 

 
Now I don’t know if the federal minister misses something. I don’t 
know if what he said in his federal budget is not being carried 
through, but that’s what I started off asking you, whether or not 
you have made representations; have you been at any of the 
meetings? 
 
I have here, and I want to read a part of this, just a portion of it, 
which deals with it and that’s the political analysis  

news-letter, a monitor of fundamental relationships in Canada. 
And it says here: 
 

In 1981 a parliamentary task force on federal-provincial 
fiscal arrangements, echoing a familiar theme in Canadian 
history, defined our nation as a compromise, even a paradox. 
It said our history had demonstrated that the nature of our 
federal-provincial relations could make or break Canada as a 
unified nation. Now, five years later, the federal-provincial 
arrangements are once again in the news. Finance Minister 
Wilson’s decision to reduce the rate of growth (and that’s 
what he’s doing, Mr. Minister; he’s reducing the rate of 
growth) of federal funding for health and post-secondary 
education has re-opened the issue. 

 
And I could go on. But to put it in perspective, it deals with the 
Established Program Financing Act which first came into effect in 
April of 1977 when parliament passed the federal-provincial fiscal 
arrangements and established program financing. I want to say 
that it says here: 
 

Since 1977 payments have been made in the form of block 
grants which give the provinces more flexibility in the 
allocation of dollars within and between programs. The 
block grant scheme signalled the end of the conditional 
transfer whereby the federal government shared the cost of 
health and post-secondary educations and the provinces were 
prepared to meet certain national standards of delivering 
quality. These are the payments slated for reduction. 

 
This is the evidence, and I can give you more evidence of what is 
in fact happening. 
 
And I say to you that our higher education cannot in my view 
support a major reduction by the federal government for its 
funding towards higher education. I don’t know where you’re 
coming from or why you’re defending the federal government. I 
guess I do know. But it’s a disappointment that minister after 
minister is standing up and, in spite of the fact that everybody has 
been fighting to get the federal government not to cut back, you 
stand up in this House, and you try to deceive the public into 
believing that they aren’t jiggering the formula, that they aren’t in 
fact reducing the increases, and while other provinces have made 
representation, you won’t even get into the discussion of what 
steps you have taken or realization that there is. 
 
I have a pamphlet done by another province here indicating that 
the basic cut in the amount of funding which is at about 43 per 
cent now, I believe, will be decreased down to something like 36 
per cent. This, I say to you, is very serious. It says: 
 

Two things are clear from the data. The federal share 
remained close to 50 per cent from ’77 to ’80. The federal 
share declined sharply since 1980 to the current level of 43 
per cent, in part reflecting cut-backs by the former federal 
government, and in part reflecting the failure of the 
GNP-related formula to keep pace with the programs. 

 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2215 
 
 

So I ask you again, Mr. Minister; we have the admissions here of 
the Minister of Health, and we have the admission, after much 
drilling, from the Minister of Finance, indicating that yes, there 
was $13 million; indicating that there’s going to be less money. 
 
And I want to ask you again, how do you come to the conclusion 
that you’re going to get more money under the formula which cuts 
back the rate of increase than you would under the previous 
formula? Other provinces — in Manitoba they have estimated that 
they’re looking at a cut-back of something like $313 million from 
the present until 1990-1991. The estimation here in Saskatchewan 
is about $213 million. 
 
And so I ask you again: have you attended any of the ministers’ of 
Advanced Education and Manpower meetings; and what 
presentations did you make to the federal government? Or did you 
in fact send a telegram saying, everything is fine; keep up the good 
work, Brian? 
 
I mean, you can smile, Mr. Minister, but this is a major concern. I 
mean, this province is running a $2 billion debt. And you say, well 
look at what we’ve done for health. You haven’t paid for it. Look 
at what we’ve done for education and advanced education. But 
you haven’t paid for it. You’ve got a massive debt. And you want 
to stand by and allow the transfer of responsibilities from the 
federal to the provincial government. That seems to be the 
apparent approach that you’re taking. 
 
So I ask you again: can you indicate whether you attended any 
provincial-federal meetings in respect to the cut-back. And I want 
to ask you again . . . Don’t tell me that you’re going to get more. 
You may be getting more in total sum, but you’re not getting more 
than the old formula. You are getting less than what you would 
have under the old formula; you know it, and everybody else in 
every other province knows it. So that’s the question here; so don’t 
try to deflect it. 
 
I ask you, why aren’t you standing up with other provinces? Other 
provinces have made representations to the . . . It says here: 
 

“The Conservative majority on a committee studying 
legislation to reduce the growth of federal payments to the 
provinces for education and health care has voted not to 
travel across the country hearing views on the Bill,” an NDP 
committee member says. The move, which angered the 
opposition members of the committee, follows a request for 
a cross-Canada hearing from Manitoba Finance minister. 

 
So I ask you, have you met with federal counterparts and other 
provincial counterparts in respect to this very serious concern of 
the decrease commitment to post-secondary education? I think it’s 
clear, Mr. Minister, that should this happen and be allowed to go 
forward — and it is going forward as the junior Finance minister 
indicates; it’s going forward. So I ask you: have you met, and 
could you indicate the dates which you met with the other 
provincial counterparts and/or the federal Minister of Finance? 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well a couple of observations, Mr. 
Chairman. As far as my involvement in this since coming to this 
portfolio, I’ve been to one meeting of the council of ministers of 
Education at which one federal minister was there, Mr. Bouchard, 
the secretary of state. This was on the agenda. As I indicated 
before, the Minister of Finance from Saskatchewan, as is the case 
in almost every province, the ministers of Finance in Canada are 
the ministers that are leading the provincial position as it relates to 
established program financing. 
 
And I want to make this observation. The member clearly says 
when he talked to the Minister of Health . . . and we can all 
remember; it was back is some earlier days of the session before 
the formula was changed — not that the formula was changed so 
much, but before the growth estimate was changed. And the 
growth estimate was changed, and when you talked to the Minister 
of Health and he indicated something in the order of $13 million, 
that was based on a zero growth. And what I would say to the 
member, that’s been upgraded by the federal government not by 
the provinces. But I’ve said it before to you; the Minister of 
Finance went through this with you in some detail the other night, 
and the numbers that I have given you are the following: in 
1986-87, because of the new growth forecast and the way the 
economy is performing on a national basis, we can expect $11 
million on the plus side of the ledger — $11 million more than 
what we would have got had that estimate not been changed; in 
‘87-88 we can expect $22 million more; ’88-89, $28 million more. 
 
And I would ask the member this: the numbers that he quotes from 
the province of Manitoba are the similar numbers to those that he 
quoted when he was talking to the Minister of Health, so he has 
not updated his numbers as it relates to the new formula, the new 
estimates of growth. He has not updated his numbers, and he 
stands in the House and reads those same numbers, based on that 
zero per cent growth, and wants the public to believe that that’s 
where it’s going. Well it is not. And so the numbers that he gave 
as the bottom line in terms of what Manitoba will “expect to lose”, 
and I put that in quotes, will not be accurate. And he should check 
with his cousins over there to find out if they’re accurate or not, 
because it is not accurate. 
 
What more can I say, Mr. Chairman, except to reiterate once again 
this negotiation is led by the Minister of Finance. I should point 
out once again as well that the Manitoba government, because of a 
political posture and so on, is the reason that they got into all of 
this. I can say that they didn’t get one more cent, and they will not 
get one more cent in their established program of financing with 
all of their “fed-bashing” or whatever it is that they believe makes 
this federation go. 
 
And as it relates to the commitment of this government, this 
Progressive Conservative government in the province of 
Saskatchewan to post-secondary education, we need take a back 
seat to no one in Canada — no one in Canada — and the numbers 
will show in any category that the member would like to raise that 
we lead in that area. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I’ll tell you, the people in higher  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2216 
 
 

education and the universities and the students that are watching 
must be very proud of the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Manpower for his tremendous fight to keep the federal funding up. 
And let’s come clear. I mean, you’re not being fair either with the 
people of Saskatchewan or with the legislature. It’s the same as 
dealing with other aspects with you, Mr. Minister. You either 
don’t know what you’re talking about, or you’re deceiving the 
House. And you know very well what the . . . there was the 
previous formula. And so I ask you: what was the previous 
formula? You obviously know. So I ask you: what was the 
previous formula in respect to federal funding, and how it was 
based? Let’s get down; let’s go through it; give me the previous 
formula? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I know this much 
about the two formulas, and I know that you’ve been through this 
with the Minister of Finance just a matter of a few days ago. The 
former formula was based on a three-year rolling average of the 
GNP. The present formula is a more simplified one, based on 
performance of the economy in a given year. And that’s the 
change in the estimate of growth that I referred to earlier, and 
that’s how it affects the present formula. 
 
The estimate of growth, as I said before, was for a zero per cent 
increase in growth, zero growth, and in 1985, for example, Canada 
recorded real GNP growth of 4.5 per cent, which was 4.7 points 
better than what was forecast. And for ’86, forecasters are now 
calling for growth in the 3.5 per cent range, which is three full 
points above what was forecast before. 
 
So I would say to the member, rather than get into these formulas 
— and I quite readily admit to him, that the Minister of Finance 
has been carrying this for us, as it should be, and as is the case all 
across the country. There’s no question, as it relates to 
post-secondary education, we in this department are watching with 
a very, very interested eye in what’s happening. We are pleased 
that the new growth statistics will indicate that we can expect an 
$11 million increase in what’s accruing to Saskatchewan in the 
‘86-87 year. 
 
And as I said once before, Mr. Chairman, we in Saskatchewan as 
well have an excellent record as it relates to the commitment to 
post-secondary education over the last several years. And I can go 
through a series of accomplishments if the member would like. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well obviously you don’t want to get into the 
formulas, because if we start making application of the previous 
formula and the new formula, you come out on the short end. I 
mean, let’s not play games, Mr. Minister. Basically what it is is the 
gross national product minus 2 per cent proposition is what the 
federal government is putting forward. And there is a very, very 
substantial amount of money that’s . . . the amount is going to be 
decreased in so far as the federal contribution. 
 
Are you saying that . . . Is what you’re trying to say here in this 
House is that as a result of the steps taken by Mr. Wilson, the 
Finance, and the statement that he made, that he was going to in 
fact cut back on the amount of funding;  

in spite of all of the junior minister of Finance indicating that 
you’re going to have to live with it, you’re saying that 
Saskatchewan is somehow different than all the other provinces? 
You’re saying they’re going to save, cut back what they otherwise 
would have, some $6 billion by 1990-1991 under the previous 
formula. And here he stands up and he starts defending the federal 
Tories as the erosion and the major cut-backs in the funding to 
post-secondary education. 
 
It’s so bad, what is happening . . . the results are so bad that 
speaking to a group of graduating students at the University of 
British Columbia, the Chief Justice of Canada — and very rarely 
do chief justices get involved in what is essentially a political 
matter — but the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court in fact 
indicated his major concern. But he worried that the current 
funding policies were undermining the institutions, being the 
universities. 
 

“There is a serious, bordering on tragic, lack of funding for 
universities in Canada today,” he said in his prepared text. 
“Let me speak first to the governments, provincial and 
federal. Please do not choke off the funding of universities. 
Canada must have good universities with outstanding 
teachers and world-class research facilities. Education is too 
important to be left to the ministers of Finance.” 

 
That’s what the Chief Justice said. Too important to be left to the 
ministers of Finance. 
 
And here we have the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Manpower, when the rest of Canada is very concerned with what 
is happening, saying everything is fine. I ask you: have you done 
an analysis of the effect of the proposals of the federal budget, 
Wilson’s budget; and did you make a presentation as to the 
consequences that it’s going to have from the present until 
1990-1991 vis-a-vis using the previous formula and the new 
formula which cuts back the amount of the federal contribution? I 
was wondering whether you have . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Take the smile off your face. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Take the smile off your face. If you’d come a 
little closer and get involved. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Member for Quill Lakes, would you please 
keep your debate with the minister and refrain from everything 
else, as well as the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — This is a great institution. This is a great group of 
people that you have on the other side. We’re talking about one of 
the most major topics that we should be discussing in this 
legislature, and they send over the member who can’t even run in 
his seat, the member from Moosomin to try to interject, just like 
they were doing in the Agriculture estimates. Well I’ll tell you, 
I’m going to go on as long as I want on a very important subject. 
And the member from the southern sits and laughs as the federal 
government cuts back. 
 
I wonder whether you’re aware that . . . In fact I ask you: have you 
made an analysis, a total analysis, of the overall  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2217 
 
 

effect that it’s going to have in the decrease in funding to the 
university during the period from the present to 1990, 1991? 
Because we want you on the record as to what you’re saying here, 
because what you’re telling the people is different than what the 
Minister of Health is saying, and it’s different than what the 
Minister of Finance is saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, first of all, it should be clarified. 
What I’m saying is not an iota different than what the Minister of 
Finance told you the other night. What I’m saying is different 
from what the Minister of Health told you only on this basis, and I 
explained that to you once before. It’s different only on the basis 
that prior to the change in the forecast for what the economy 
would do, the Minister of Health talked in terms of $13 million 
decrease accruing to Saskatchewan. What I’m saying to you is that 
what will happen as a result of the change in the forecast and as a 
result of the performance of the economy . . . And just let’s go into 
that for a minute. 
 
What the federal government has done here is set the formula on 
the basis of how the economy performs in a given year. And it’s 
no different really than what we would do or what you probably 
did, or at least I would expect that’s what you would do when you 
were on the treasury benches of the former government — that 
you look at how the economy’s performing and you say, here’s 
where are priorities are here, and you set your priorities regardless 
of how the economy’s performing, and then you say, there’s 
where the money will be spent, and you hope for increased 
revenues or for growth in the economy. What we have in the 
nation today is growth in the economy greater than what was 
forecast earlier. That’s been changed since the time that the 
Minister of Health had his estimates before this House. 
 
So what I’m giving you is exactly the same information that was 
given to you by the Minister of Finance. And as it relates to 
Saskatchewan’s position . . . Universities, for example, university 
grants, Saskatchewan. And I can go right down the list of all of the 
provinces of this country and the difference between 1982-83 and 
1986-87. Let’s just go through some numbers, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Saskatchewan’s difference, 37.8 per cent increase. This is 
operating and capital grants to the universities — 37.8 per cent 
increase from ’82-83 to ’86-87 under this government here in 
Saskatchewan. British Columbia, 3.8 per cent increase; Alberta, 
7.6 per cent increase; Manitoba, 18.2 per cent increase; and we go 
down through the line. And I just say to you, Mr. Chairman, in any 
category that the member might like to raise, as it relates to a 
commitment to post-secondary education, this province versus his 
cousins in Manitoba or any other province in the country, I would 
stand, this government would stand, and this province stands in 
very good stead in that area. 
 
And what he says, he says because the government of Manitoba 
has raised their fed-bashing and so on, and they say . . . They 
haven’t received 1 cent more, nor do they stand to receive 1 cent 
more from established program financing — not 1 cent, Mr. 
Chairman. And yet he’ll stand here and come with their political 
line as it relates to this. He won’t . . . He doesn’t agree. 
 

What the member is saying over there is that he does not agree 
that financing should be based on the growth in the economy, on 
the performance of the economy. I believe that it should be, and it 
is. And I’m just pleased to see that the economy is growing to the 
stage where there will be a plus-11 million dollars accruing to 
Saskatchewan in ’86-87. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I don’t suppose that anything will 
change. What you have decided as a government is to have a 
love-in with the Prime Minister and the federal Tories until you 
get by the next election. But let there be no doubt that there is an 
erosion going on, and I have yet another in the Options magazine, 
May edition of volume VII, number 4, and this is done by L. 
Johnson, who did his task force report in respect of funding, and 
he says, “Stop neglecting research.” But in part of what he is 
saying is that from 1977-78 to 1984-85: 
 

. . . government grants to universities and colleges: the 
principle source of their funding, rose by only 2.5 per cent in 
real terms, while enrolment increased by 27 per cent in 
universities, and by 36 per cent in community colleges. 

 
That is the basic position that he discovered across the country in 
respect to funding. So not only in the core funding are they cutting 
back, as I said, from 43 per cent of the total cost by 1990-1991; 
that will be reduced down to about 36 per cent of the total funding 
of health and post-secondary education. And let there be no doubt 
that the provinces will have increasingly difficult times to be able 
to adequately finance both health and post-secondary education. 
 
Similarly, I don’t know why you would be sticking up for the 
federal government when you look also, not only in the core 
financing that it’s very, very . . . it’s being decreased substantially, 
but he goes on in analysis in saying that in respect to research, that 
the performance of the . . . in Canada, for research and 
development at our universities, is in a crisis state. 
 
And he makes some comparisons: they amount to 1.22 per cent of 
the nation’s GDP (gross domestic product) in 1981, compared to 
2.52 per cent for the U.S.A.; 2.49 per cent for West Germany; 2.38 
per cent in Japan; 2.23 per cent for Sweden; 1.9 per cent for 
France; I repeat — 1.22 per cent for Canada — that’s for research 
and development. 
 
And you stand by here and you say there’s no crisis in allowing 
the federal government — without even attempting to bring home 
the problem that it will create — allow the federal government to 
cut back on funding. All projections indicate that it’s going to be 
cut back from 43 per cent to 36 per cent. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, we’ll get into the particular 
funding here in estimates, but I think it’s absolutely crucial that the 
federal government continue to make a major contribution; rather 
than cut back, it should be increasing. It was at a 50 per cent — 
50-50, shared with the provinces; that has been substantially 
reduced, and there’s no doubt that there is a further  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2218 
 
 

reduction. 
 
So I ask the minister: is he not concerned, in taking a look at the 
magnitude of the deficit that we have here, the concern that other 
provinces have, the relative state of education and the need, are 
you not concerned that the direction of the federal government in 
cutting back the EPF is going to be a major drawback to the 
further development of post-secondary education? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, we have here the member 
from Quill Lakes, the member of the New Democratic Party, 
formerly in government in Saskatchewan — the most agricultural 
province that we have in this country, this province — no 
commitment to agricultural research from that government over a 
period of 11 years, a dire need for an agricultural college in 
research for many years, and that member will stand here and talk 
about the need for research. Now that’s a new-found concern of 
members on that side of the House, I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, a 
very new-found concern. 
 
But the facts are these, as it relates to research in agriculture: new 
agricultural college building has been announced for the 
University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, not by the former 
government who said, and I paraphrase, but very near a quote 
from their leader at the time, that it wasn’t a priority; agricultural 
college was not the priority at the campus during the time of their 
government. 
 
It is the priority of this government because agriculture is a 
priority of this province, and we are building a new agricultural 
college at the University of Saskatchewan, a cost of more than $90 
million. And that member will stand and say that there’s no 
commitment to research. And he has some new-found 
commitment to research now that he sits in the opposition 
benches. It just doesn’t hold any water, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I think the basic position of the minister is 
clear. One, he is not going to fight the federal government for 
further funds and fight them in their planned attack to reduce the 
amount of funding. That’s perfectly clear, that he’s not going to. 
 
And secondly, he has indicated that . . . tried to leave the 
impression that under the new formula, despite the fact that all of 
the headlines and all of the other provinces are desperately 
working towards preventing the federal government, that he’s 
satisfied; he’s going to allow the federal government to cut back. 
They’re doing wonderful here. 
 
How he’s going to try to defend it, just like the Minister of Health 
saying, well just take a look at our health budget. And that’s what 
you’re saying, take a look at our education budges. And what I’m 
saying to you, Mr. Minister, you aren’t paying for it; you’re 
charging it up and our universities are going backwards. That’s the 
facts. 
 
If your funding was so great, I wonder why — and we’ll be 
getting into this — why in fact there’s $3 million or more deficit at 
the Regina campus. I wonder why students are phoning in and 
saying, you know, it’s raining and they  

haven’t repaired the buildings on the Regina campus. That’s what 
they have said. They’ve got pails all around catching the rain. So I 
mean, it’s a tremendous financing that you have done for the 
Regina campus. 
 
How many times have the tuition fees gone up at the Regina 
campus under your substantial funding? And we can get into what 
you’re doing . . . What is necessary now, apparently, by the board 
of governors, is putting it to all of the visa students, anyone from 
outside of Saskatchewan. They’re going to double their tuition 
fees the first year, and double it again the subsequent year. And 
Tories say, are you against that? I’ll tell you, we’ll get into it and 
decide the policy. 
 
You’re saying a tremendous funding. And here we have the 
Regina campus. I’d like to ask the minister: are you aware of the 
total amount of the deficit that is facing the Regina campus? Our 
information has indicated that there’s some $3 million deficit, and 
the major source of income is from the provincial grants. So if 
your grants have been sufficient, I don’t understand why there’s a 
major deficit, and that the buildings are out of . . . a lack of repair. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, maybe you could indicate why you think that the 
3.2 per cent increase here this year for the operating grants at the 
university is going to be sufficient, because the universities have 
been having difficult times under your financing. The problem is, 
as has been indicated in the University of Saskatchewan annual 
report, going back to ’84-85, and on page 2 it indicates: 
 

The past year was a difficult one financially. The 1984-85 
operations forecast indicated that to maintain programs at the 
’83-84 level the operating grant would have to rise 6.8 per 
cent. The grant that was provided, however, fell 2 percentage 
points below the required amount. 

 
And we can go into the general capital programs of the university 
and, similarly, they haven’t been met. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, do you feel that the 3.2 per 
cent of the operating grants that you are offering here to the 
universities are adequate to meet the needs during the year, or is it 
likely that later you will be in fact providing further grants as you 
have in the previous years? Is this the budget that we’re dealing 
with, or are you waiting for further indications in respect to 
enrolments, and what have you, and may in fact decide to increase 
the budget? 
 
So two questions: one, do you feel that the 3.2 per cent operating 
grants is sufficient for the universities during the course of the 
year, or is there likely to be some increases? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the question as it 
relates the 3.2 per cent — sure. I mean when we talked about, you 
know, where revenues are and where you sit in the whole 
budgetary picture and so on . . . And what I would say to the 
member, as Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower, sure, 
I’d like to see increasing numbers. I’d like to see greater numbers 
for operating. The fact is, we felt that it was a fair number, 3.2 per 
cent. I talked to the administrations of both universities about it  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2219 
 
 

prior to, and they’re no different than I am because that’s the 
community within which they work, the university community, 
and they say that they would like to have seen it somewhat more. 
But we have been turning our emphasis to capital, and they also 
appreciate that as well. They want that to happen because there’s 
been a dire need for a good number of years for the capital grants 
to increase at the two universities, and they are doing that by 
substantial numbers. 
 
As it relates to tuition fees, which the member talked about a few 
moments ago, just to give you an idea of where they sit. I’ll just 
give you a couple of colleges that are quite a ways apart on the 
spectrum, so to speak, some comparisons. In engineering: the 
tuition in the College of Engineering at the University of 
Saskatchewan is $1,170; University of Regina, $1,192; and at the 
University of Manitoba, to give an interprovincial sort of 
perspective, it’s ranging from 1,232 to $1,284 — College of 
Engineering. College of Fine Arts: at the University of 
Saskatchewan, $1,075; at the University of Regina, $1,192; and a 
range at the University of Manitoba from 1,221 to 1,251. So in this 
year, in terms of tuition fee increases, the board of governors 
decisions, as I know the member knows, the University of Regina 
has decided to raise tuition fees by 5.7 per cent, the University of 
Saskatchewan has recently decided to raise their fees by 6 per 
cent, and just for that interprovincial perspective once again, the 
University of Manitoba by 8 per cent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to indicate and get into some of the details 
in respect to the problems that they’re having at Regina. It 
indicates that there is some $3 million deficit at the campus in 
Regina, and I don’t know how you can indicate that there’s 
sufficient funding with a deficit of that magnitude. I ask you: are 
there any plans by your government to orderly assist the university 
in order to bring under control the $3 million deficit? 
 
I take it that the board of governors were hoping to increase some 
of their revenue through tuition fees, but if one looks at the tuition 
fees here in Regina and makes a comparison, certainly they’re 
relatively high. So I want to ask you then: is the government 
making any plans whatsoever in respect to helping the university 
here at Regina to get rid of their rather large deficit, because 
essentially the only revenue they have is the tuition fees? They can 
increase them some, but to wipe out a deficit of $3 million . . . I 
wonder if you have any plans in mind to help them? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s no question 
that we are, in the department, as are the board of governors and 
the administration at the University of Regina, concerned about 
that deficit. We’ve tried to arrest that, and I believe we have 
arrested it at a certain level there now, but our department is 
working with the administration at the University of Regina, as 
well as . . . well I guess it’s the administration. The board of 
governors, I know, is aware of what some of the discussions are. 
We have another aspect here, the university renewal and 
development fund, which for a good part of it deals with capital 
but also with some other things, and they are into discussions 
regarding the costs of equipment. 
 

Some of the things which the University of Regina face and on 
which they have made their case very strongly is in terms of 
equipment renewal, and there is a problem there that’s been 
long-standing. We have been recognizing that, and we are into 
discussions about that now in terms of how we might be able to 
solve some of those problems. 
 
I think, as the member will recognize as well, the two universities 
are very different in terms of their history and in terms of their size 
and so on, and we have to be able to look at the two of them and 
realize that the problems that may be faced by the University of 
Regina aren’t problems that would be so inherent in Saskatoon. It 
has a more established base and is more of an established 
institution. 
 
So, yes, we are aware of the problems, and, yes, we are working 
with the administration at the University of Regina to try to 
address this. Hopefully we will see that deficit rolling in the 
opposite direction very soon. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well was any discussion carried on with the 
board of governors or the administration at the University of 
Regina whereby the government indeed indicated that they had to 
take certain steps in order to eliminate their deficit? Because it 
seems to me that in Regina we are getting to the stage that the 
tuition at the University of Regina is, relative to others, very high. 
 
I have here a comparison at the Brandon University. Students at 
Regina already pay one of the highest tuition fees for the prairie 
provinces, according to Statistics Canada. They have a table here 
of Brandon University, $893; University of Manitoba, 912; 
University of Winnipeg, 822; University of Regina, 1,128; 
University of Saskatchewan, 1,015; University of Alberta, 852; 
University of Calgary, 832; University of Lethbridge, 892. And 
this is what the students have done in their basic analysis of tuition 
fees. 
 
(1545) 
 
So what I’m saying is that it seems to me that forcing the 
university to put on further tuition fees is going to have a 
detrimental effect on the right of students to be able to attend if 
you start jacking up the tuition fees too high. So I ask you: one, 
have you had any discussions with the U of R whereby you have 
indicated that it’s their responsibility to take some action to 
proceed to reduce the amount of the $3 million deficit, because 
certainly the board of governors took some pretty significant steps 
in increasing again the tuition fees and doubling the fees for 
foreign students? Is there any direction by the provincial 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. As it relates to the decisions taken by 
the board of governors, there have been no directions by the 
provincial government. In our discussions, as I said, relating to the 
deficit and trying to address the deficit, we’ll discuss various 
things that might be done in terms of, as I said before, equipment 
costs and faculty renewal and some of the things that go on at 
universities — and resource costs in the libraries and the need for 
renewal there, and some of those things which they have identified 
as major problems. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2220 
 
 

The numbers that you read, and I think it’s important . . . And I’m 
not sure if this is the case at Brandon, but I know at the University 
of Manitoba — and I think Brandon may well be under a similar 
circumstance. You read out a number which is their tuition fee. 
What they have at the University of Manitoba over and above 
their tuition fee is what they call a faculty fee which they pay to 
the college they enter. A student will pay to the college they enter, 
for example, engineering, or the College of Education or the 
College of Fine Arts or whatever it might be. So if you add that 
fee on to it you’ll find that the tuition fees at the universities here 
in Saskatchewan will compare very, very favourably, and as I’ve 
indicated before, will in fact be lower than they are in our 
neighbouring province to the East. 
 
There’s no question that the tuition fees at Saskatoon, University 
of Saskatchewan, for most of the colleges, are slightly lower. And 
I went into that a little bit, because it is a much more established 
institution. But they’re slightly lower than they are here in Regina. 
 
And the other point that should be made, Mr. Chairman, is this. 
The tuition fee cost of education at the University of Regina — 
we’ll take that one for the example because the member 
mentioned that — is 15 to 16 per cent of the total cost of educating 
a student. So the tuition paid by student A is 15 to 16 per cent of 
the cost of his education for that year — his or her education. So 
that point needs to be made. 
 
As it relates to the decision made by the board of governors as it 
relates to foreign students, they made that decision, and it’s one 
that they made by looking at what’s happening on many campuses 
across the country. And they’ve just gone with the trend of what is 
happening at many of the universities in Canada. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to go to the capital budget for the 
respective universities. Two years ago you established what was 
known as the university renewal and development fund — $125 
million over five years. 
 
Now what I want to first of all get is in the first year, 1985-86, 
could you give me a breakdown of the expenditures out of the 
university renewal and development fund for ’85-86 for the 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan. Could 
you provide me those figures — how it was spent, the project, or 
the way in which it was spent — for each of the universities, and 
the total amount that was spent ’85-86. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The total in ’85-86 from the university 
renewal and development fund was $14,994,462, of which 
10,500,000 was to the University of Saskatchewan, 3,900,000, 
University of Regina, 594,462 to the federated affiliated colleges. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can you indicate what it was expended on in each 
instance, that is, 10.5 at the University of Saskatchewan? What 
were the expenditures for under the renewal and development 
fund, and similarly for the other expenditures? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’ve got a sheet with the various 
breakdowns that I’ll just send over to the member,  

Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And in accordance with the budget speech this 
year, Mr. Minister, there’s an indication that the total amount of 
expenditure from the development fund would be $18 million. 
That’s the commitment that was made in the budget. I wonder if 
you could also send over the proposed expenditure there, item by 
item, for the federated affiliated colleges, the University of 
Regina, and the University of Saskatchewan, and indicate the 
particular totals. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, just to clarify, what I will 
send to the hon. member from Quill Lakes is . . . and I’ll just write 
it out here now. As you will know, and I think has been explained 
before by my predecessor in this department, the university 
renewal and development fund, there will be an negotiation 
process between the two universities and the government, those 
three parties. What we have allocated up until now, of that $18 
million that’s committed is about 14-and-some million. There’s 
about $4 million which the two universities are coming to some 
agreement upon. We will send over to you that portion which has 
been committed to this stage which is something in the range of 
$14 million. I’ll have it right written out and send over, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That would be appreciated, Mr. Minister. In 
respect to dealing with the universities and their capital needs, 
what you have done is set up the university renewal and 
development fund of 125 million, as you have indicated, 14.9 
about the first year, and you’re indicating 18 this year. Have you 
asked the universities, since you have the five-year university 
renewal and development fund, have you asked the universities to 
submit sort of their five-year proposal, and are you attempting to 
meet those priorities which they set out for each of the years? In 
other words, are they able to plan ahead commensurate with the 
renewal and development fund which is over a five-year period? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — My understanding is that, yes, the 
universities are able to plan over a period of time and the URDF 
expenditures, as it comes out in last year’s and then this year’s, 
expenditures are in accordance with how well they feel that they 
can keep up with the cash flow and with the expenditures in this 
fund. 
 
And yes, they have some long-term plans. And one of the criteria, 
Mr. Chairman, in setting up the university renewal and 
development fund in the very first place was to encourage the kind 
of planning that the member talked about. And that has been 
encouraged, and the three parties to the negotiations around that 
fund are in agreement as it relates to the levels of spending in any 
given year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well have you received for this year the requests 
by the respective universities, the University of Regina and the 
University of Saskatchewan, for their capital expenditures? Have 
they made their submission to you? And can you indicate whether 
or not . . . Well let me ask you whether they have made their 
submission to you. And if you would indicate also, if they have 
indeed, and I would be surprised if they haven’t as to the amount 
of the expenditure that they are requesting at their respective  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2221 
 
 

campuses. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, in the initial stages of setting out the 
URDF . . . and when we sat down initially with the two 
administrations of the two campuses, they submitted the five-year 
plans and ten-year plans into the future, in terms of the kinds of 
things that they could see down into the future. So it’s on the basis 
of those rather . . . 
 
As you get out further into it, into 10 years, and if you get out into 
15 years . . . And I submit to the House and to anybody that that 
may well be the kind of things that need to be done, when you’re 
dealing with major institutions like the universities and the 
institutions that they are and that they have become, that you need 
to look down the road. 
 
This URDF that we set up was to go a good long way in terms of 
getting that type of thinking established, and we think it has gone a 
good way in that direction. In fact, I believe the university 
administrations would in both cases agree with, and in fact they’ve 
been heralding this program to their counterparts in other 
universities across the country. 
 
But in terms of saying this is what the list is, and this is what the 
priorities are, I won’t be able to give that to the member, for 
example, because the two universities, in this negotiating process 
that goes on between the three parties that I mentioned earlier, that 
continues. And it continues on so that, for example, when the 
college of agriculture building was the priority in Saskatoon, the 
discussion included three parties, one of them including the 
University of Regina, who also recognized, which is a great 
breakthrough in a lot of ways if they recognize that agriculture and 
the agricultural college, even though it’s at another campus, is a 
major priority; and they said fine, go ahead, that’s right. 
 
And by the same token, some of the things that have happened 
here at the University of Regina have been with the agreement of 
the University of Saskatchewan because they also realize the 
importance, for example, to the student union building to the 
University of Regina, to campus life, and the things that they have 
had for a good number of years in Saskatoon at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You’re going to be sending over the proposed list 
of projects in respect to the development fund of 125 million, you 
say, about 14 out of the 18 are designated now, and you’ll send 
that over. That’s fine. 
 
What I want to know is, in respect to the University of 
Saskatchewan, is the college of Agriculture . . . does their funding 
come out of the university renewal and development fund, or are 
the major capital expenditures separate and apart from the 
development fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. The cash flow, as it relates to the 
College of Agriculture building, some of it will come beyond . . . 
by the nature of the size of the project, some of it will come 
beyond the parameters of this five-year program, which is fair ball, 
an the next . . . whatever will replace that and will be another one 
of these. 
 

(1600) 
 
So just for the funding though, it comes from two of the 
development funds which were set up in last year’s budget: $19 
million will come from the agricultural development fund; $17 
million from the university renewal and development fund in this 
early stages. And as the project goes on there will be . . . and 
certainly there’s $12 million committed from the university in a 
public fund raising from the private sector and so on, who are 
willing to, and the university says that they feel they have no 
problem with that number. But after the five-year time, of course, 
there’ll be cash flow on a project which is committed, and that will 
come into URDF number two, or whatever it is that replaces it at 
the end of the five years. 
 
I might say, if the member, you know, suggests that the URDF is 
. . . I don’t say that you are suggesting this, but we believe that the 
URDF has been operating extremely well. It has brought the two 
universities to the table with a good deal of understanding that we 
didn’t think was there before, and both universities are looking 
now forward to longer-term planning and are setting out plans and 
schedules and so on to take them beyond this URDF and into 
another one to replace it, or something similar to replace it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well It’s increasingly difficult to be able to follow 
the capital expenditures because if you go to the expenditures on 
Advanced Education and Manpower, you can’t find anything 
under capital expenditures. And so you’re going to give me the 
details in respect to the expenditures of the development fund, and 
what I want is a list then of the capital projects that you’re 
proposing to proceed with, or are proceeding with at the present 
time for each campus and the source of the funding because, as I 
say, you have to wander around the estimates to be able to track it 
down. So can you provide that information in respect to all the 
capital projects and the source of the funding for each of the 
campuses? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ve just had . . . The sheet that I referred 
to earlier, that I could send over, as it relates to ’86-87 allocations, 
those which have been agreed upon thus far, which leaves 
$3,750,000 to still be allocated, so that leaves that void there. I’ll 
just send the sheet over as it’s written out, and if you have any 
questions relating to it, please ask them. But the numbers are: 
University of Saskatchewan 11,910,000; the University of Regina 
2,340,000, already allocated by agreement. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes. This is the allocation then out of the URDF 
(university renewal and development fund), the U of S and the U 
of R, and still to be allocated. This covers off then . . . 
 
There is no other expenditures say for the University of Regina 
outside of what is going to come out of the university renewal and 
development fund? In other words, I’m asking whether any 
additional capital expenditure beyond what you have listed here 
allocated. . . I know that you’re saying that there’s more to be 
negotiated to use up the $18 million. What I’m asking you 
specifically, outside of the university renewal and development 
fund, are there any other allocation of funds for capital 
expenditures? 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2222 
 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes. There is more capital which goes to 
the . . . I think I know where the member is coming from. You’re 
suggesting that there isn’t more capital money than what comes 
out of the URDF. Is that what you’re asking? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. At the University of Regina there 
will be $2,005,000 out of ordinary capital, in addition to what I 
sent you from URDF; and at the University of Saskatchewan, 
$6,795,000 ordinary capital, which is in addition to the university 
renewal and development fund numbers that I sent you. 
 
And the other thing that’s separate at the University of 
Saskatchewan is the geological science building which is $1.6 
million in this year for geological sciences, which is over and 
above the numbers that I sent you related to the university renewal 
and development fund. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Where do you find those capital expenditures? I 
can follow that you have 18 million out of the development fund, 
but in respect to the additional capital expenditures, where is that 
coming from? Is it from the Special Projects Fund budgetary 
expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s in the Property Management 
Corporation, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. The Property Management Corporation, if 
you look under education there’s $50.4 million. I presume that’s 
the description that you’re referring to on page 134 of the 
Estimates. Is that the only breakdown that we get in reference to 
expenditures under education on page 134, or is there another 
breakdown for the university? I haven’t found it, at least. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That’s . . . I believe I’m getting the proper 
number here now, so I’ll just . . . The $50 million that you see on 
page 134, as you referred to under education, is both education 
and advanced education. The advanced education portion is $27.6 
million — at least I believe that to be the case. I’m having that 
clarified now just to make sure that I’m giving you the exact 
breakdown here. But we believe it to be 27.6 million, and we’ll 
have it in a few moments, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well let us assume then — I’ll give you some 
time to check that out with your officials — but just assuming that 
the capital expenditure is 27.6 million, then can you give me the 
breakdown of that capital expenditure? Because you see, it’s so 
increasingly difficult to be able to know what is being expended, 
the way in which you’re doing your estimates, your budgets, 
because you have lumped it all together. And anyone reading 
under education, how would anyone know that you have lumped 
together both advanced education, universities, community 
colleges, and so on, as well as education proper? So with the 27.6 
million, can you indicate the breakdown of that? 
 
Because you see, the problem that I run into again is if you go to 
special project funds, you have also budgetary expenditures. And I 
look at the expansion of the northern  

institute, you have an item; and renovations to Advanced 
Education and Manpower equipment repair depot, under special 
projects. So trying to put together really what you are spending 
takes a magician, I guess, because it’s scattered all over, and, I 
suppose, in order to make it more difficult, but can you give us the 
breakdown then of this 27.6 billion in capital expenditures for the 
Advanced Education and Manpower? Can you give us the 
breakdown of the expenditures there? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, I’ll give those in a moment. As I say, 
they’re just putting them together. 
 
And just a comment as it relates to your previous comments, as it 
relates to being a magician to go through this. I look at page 134, 
and in terms of the $50.4 million — and I will go on record as 
saying that I would agree with you — and I would like to see it in 
property management corporation, the way it’s done, in another 
year. I would like to see it done in . . . I don’t know what the 
reasons are. I’m just going off the top of my head, but I’ll do that 
with you here. I’d like to see it broken down between Education 
and Advanced Education because they are different departments 
and different type of expenditure. So that may be something that 
can be done. 
 
And in fairness, Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the property 
management corporation is a new operation, not new in Canada 
necessarily, but new to this province. And while it may have some 
growing pains, we think it’s going to have some successes. I’ll just 
make this note to you, that yes, I believe it probably should be 
broken out into Advanced Ed and Education, and unless there’s 
some reason that I can’t think of just at the spur of the moment, I’d 
like to see it done. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d appreciate it if you’d sent that over. I may well 
have some questions in respect to the capital expenditures of 27.6. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, just to clarify it 
for the member. What I said was 27.6; it’s $27,740,000. This is the 
numbers now that pertain to Advanced Education and Manpower 
in the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation; 18 
million in the university renewal and development fund, which we 
referred to earlier; $8.140 million out of the ordinary capital; and 
$1.6 million for the geological sciences building, which I noted 
earlier as well; for a total of $27,740,000 in the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation relating to Advanced 
Education and Manpower. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. Thank you for that. In dealing with the 
capital expenditures and so on, I notice that in the University of 
Regina, deferred maintenance and equipment and so on are going 
to be expended out of the development fund. There is indeed a 
great concern in respect to the present condition of the University 
of Regina, and indeed I’ve had students contact me asking me to 
determine when you intend to do the major repairs on the roof 
there. The last rain they had, water was coming out of the 
fluorescent lights and fixtures, and garbage cans, as I indicated 
before, had to be set out and pails all over the building in order to 
catch the water. And then they were using wet vacuums to try to 
draw up the  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2223 
 
 

water. So their students are concerned with the general 
deterioration, and I wonder if the . . . I have the list here, and it 
does say, defer the maintenance and the equipment, and I’m 
wondering whether they meant major repairs are going to be done 
to the university campus this summer. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s no question, 
anybody related to the university community here in Regina has 
those concerns, and I would just say to you, as I’ve said to you 
before, that we are trying to address some of the problems as it 
relates to the maintenance, and the capital, and so on. 
 
Last year, we provided 3.1 million to the University of Regina, 
Mr. Chairman. Now I know the member will say, well numbers 
are numbers and still the roof leaks, and I agree that there’s a 
problem there. It’s certainly not a problem that has been caused 
during a term of office of this government. Like I say, we provided 
3.1 million last year to the U of R. That’s more in one year than 
the member’s former government provided in the last four years of 
its administration, per capita, Mr. Chairman. The last four years of 
their administration, they didn’t give $3.1 million to the University 
of Regina in capital, and 3.1 was in last year alone from here. So 
for him to say or to suggest that we’re not addressing it, is not true. 
We are trying to address the problem. 
 
(1615) 
 
There was not one, significant, capital project approved for the 
University of Regina during the entire 11-year term of office of 
those folks over there — not one to the University of Regina. This 
government has initiated on the other hand, Mr. Chairman, $1.7 
million capital expenditure for a new computer system — major, 
new computer system, very, very up to date. It puts the University 
of Regina at the level where it should be in the new technology 
area. One point seven million dollar renovation of Darke Hall, 
which I know the members there over 11 years did not touch for a 
long time, and it’s a long-standing problem here in the city of 
Regina and as it relates to the University of Regina. Was not 
touched by them, and in this first term of office, $1.7 million 
committed by us to the renovation of Darke Hall. Six million 
dollar student union centre project, and as we’ve indicated in some 
of the numbers that we’ve been passing back and forth here, more 
to come from the university renewal and development fund. And 
in 1986-87 we expect in the neighbourhood of 6.5 to $7 million in 
capital spending at the University of Regina. 
 
So while I don’t deny that there are some problems which, I would 
hasten to point out, we inherited, we don’t run away from them 
just on that basis. We know we inherited them. We’re trying to 
address them, and the University of Regina is dealing with a 
government that has more sensitivity to their problems now than 
they were when they were dealing with the member opposite and 
his colleagues. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think we’ll let the students make that decision. 
Obviously there’s some concern on the opposite side because they 
clearly indicate that they have done such a great job — just 
tremendous — every area.  

But I’ll tell you, when it comes to calling the election, there must 
be some reason. That’s all I can say to you. And it’s certainly 
young people that are not in fact supporting you. 
 
In respect to student financial services, I just want to run through a 
few questions in respect to the programs To follow in respect to 
your annual report of 1984-85, we have the Canada student loans 
program for full-time students, and the Saskatchewan student loan, 
and the Saskatchewan student bursary and special incentive 
bursary, as the major programs. 
 
The Canada student loans program, the criteria, I take it, is 
established by the federal government since it’s . . . Canada 
student loan is financed by the federal government. Is that 
accurate, or has the province input in so far as the basic criteria? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — For the most part that’s true; it’s 
established by the federal government. There are some areas of 
provincial discretion. For instance, in terms of the assets of parents 
and so on, those things can be under provincial discretion. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And the asset test that was required before, I 
know that that has been eliminated, which I agree with. Have the 
federal government approved that modification by the provincial 
government? I would take it that you would have to get a 
confirmation because, obviously if he’s changed the criteria, you 
can increase the amount of eligibility to more and more students, 
and that’s what I agree should happen, but is it necessary to get the 
permission of the federal government? And secondly, did they 
make that change, as far as you’re concerned, across Canada, 
applicable to other provinces as well as Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. As I indicated in my earlier answer, 
for the most part the criteria are set by the federal government but 
there are some areas of provincial discretion. One of those areas is 
the areas of assets of parents, and so on, which is an area of 
provincial discretion, and this province chose to eliminate that 
problem which you referred to that was there for so many of our 
young people before, and it was not necessary to ask the federal 
government’s permission regarding that aspect. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s really quite different. Now in the change 
that you have indicated, the interest rate the province is going to 
reduce down to 6 per cent and will in fact reimburse the students, I 
take it, in respect to the interest that they have to pay relative to 
reducing it down to 6 per cent — you’d pay the difference to the 
students. What is the mechanism for the students qualifying, and is 
it retroactive to the loans that are in existence, or is it loans starting 
at a given period of time? 
 
I guess what I’m asking is: is there any retroactivity if a student in 
fact is still going to university, has completed one year and has 
taken out loans, and say the federal government, under the Canada 
student loan program — the interest rate is 12 or 13 per cent — 
can they in fact get the reduction in interest for all of the loans that 
they take in completing their particular university? 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2224 
 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. It was determined that it would not be 
retroactive, and it is not retroactive. It applies to any loans which 
are applied for and approved after May 1st of 1986, so just after 
the announcement date of the program. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now you indicate that the new program will be of 
particular . . . Well I guess there’s one new program, and that is 
the new Saskatchewan supplementary loan program. I take it 
that’s the new program that you put into effect. I notice on the 
pamphlet that you have provided to us that it’s a needs-based 
program designed to supplement existing student assistance 
programs; criteria are similar to the Canada student loan program. 
 
Is this the particular program that you allude to that will be of 
assistance to a number of single parents, disadvantaged groups, 
etc.? You say a similar criteria to the federal program, but I notice 
the essential difference is that the assistance is available for 
programs lasting four weeks or more. So it applies to a different 
group of students, because if they’re under the Canada student, it 
has to be 12 weeks of course length. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The program that you refer to will be of 
some help to single parents, but the one that really zeros in and 
helps and the one that we’ve been lobbied by a number of young 
women, and so on, who are at university and who have children, 
the special incentives bursary program will be one that will be of 
most help to them because it includes single parents into the 
special incentives bursary program where they were not included 
before. 
 
And as it relates to the change to four weeks from 12 weeks, we 
felt that the federal restrictions of 12 weeks, which is in the federal 
criteria, were too restrictive as it related to programs such as 
intercession summer school, those kinds of things which go on for 
less than 12 weeks in some cases. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, okay, it’s the Saskatchewan special 
incentive bursary. Is that the one that you’re saying will be most 
effective there? What are the specific changes that you made in 
respect to that program which was in effect before, which will 
broaden it to include more people? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the special incentives bursary prior 
to this time was there for special needs groups such as the 
handicapped, and for isolated northern people and some of those 
things, non-status Indian and Metis people. And what we’ve really 
done is broaden the criteria to include another group which many 
statistics showed were having difficulty because of being single 
parents, and difficulty obtaining the training that they needed in 
order to enter the work-force and get in there. 
 
So what we’ve done is broaden the criteria to include this group, 
and I must say that that was an area that was asked for for a good 
long time by the students’ organizations and by various people 
who lobby. And we found that it’s been very well received by the 
public at large. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So what you’ve done under the Saskatchewan 
special incentive bursary is really broaden  

the criteria, or who can qualify to obtain it, and that’s where a lot 
of the single parents that you have indicated in your press release 
are likely to qualify. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Right. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I guess the one area that is perhaps of some 
concern to the students is two-fold. One is that the assistance that 
they get is for a five-year terms. In other words, for post-graduates 
have problems. And I was wondering whether you have been able, 
Mr. Minister, to address that basic problem, because I have . . . 
Some of the students have discussed it with me and indicated a 
concern, that if they go into post-graduate work and they don’t get 
sufficient, may get in fact cut off from the benefits that they 
previously could. Is there any discussion — any benefits there? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, I’ll attempt to outline this. For 
students who require loans for up to five years, which would be 
the normal course of studies, as you’ve indicated, the first step is a 
loan, a Canada student loan; and then a Saskatchewan bursary, 
which for whatever eligibility . . . And once their eligible for that, 
and then after five years for those into graduate work as you 
indicate, the step is a Saskatchewan student loan, and that’s been 
there for a period of time. The only change for those people who 
are into graduate work, and after the five-year plan, is that their 
interest rate is now reduced to 6 per cent, as they are for all 
Saskatchewan student loans. So that’s the outline there. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well certainly there has been no improvement for 
postgraduate students. You’re saying basically nothing has 
changed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just the interest rate has. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s right. And that the problem that they have 
still continues because they weren’t concerned so much about the 
interest rate as they were concerned . . . Obviously a reduced 
interest rate helps, but availability of funds — they just were not 
getting sufficient funds for postgraduate work, and they raised that 
with me. And I’d ask you to take a look at that. I’m sure you’re 
familiar with it. 
 
The second one is in respect to the Saskatchewan student bursary 
program. There’s some concern there that what you did is really 
reduced down the amount of the bursary relative to student loan as 
a percentage. It was decreased from when a few years ago . . . The 
former minister admitted doing this. And there is some concern 
there that they should reinstate the bursary to where it was before. 
It’s tied to the amount of student loan that you have to obtain 
before you can qualify for a given amount of bursary. 
 
(1630) 
 
And the students are aware that the availability of bursaries was 
seriously cut back by the former minister, and perhaps that’s why 
his political career has suddenly come to an abrupt end. But that’s 
one of the legacies that he leaves behind, having cut the bursary 
which was, I thought, one of the outstanding programs we had in  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2225 
 
 

helping certainly needy students. 
 
Rather than laying on their backs a very substantial amount of 
loans . . . I can tell you that students going to university that are 
dependent on loans can ring up a very substantial amount of 
indebtedness to when they graduate, and while they welcome that, 
certainly those needy students, the additional bursary was useful. 
So I might ask the minister to perhaps take a look at it and 
consider the students’ request there for a further reinstatement of 
the level of bursary that we had previously. Have you any 
comments on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, only to say that I know what you’re 
saying there, but the $70 per week level of bursary is exactly what 
it was last year. In ’85-86 it was $70. This year, in ’86-87, it will 
be $70 per week. In ’84-85 it was $65.50; and ’83-84 it was 62.50; 
and ’82-83 it was 56.25 and so on. So what we’re saying is that it 
was 70 last year and $70 a week this year. I understand what 
you’re saying in terms of the percentages and you may be able to 
make a case if there’s a percentage change there. And I’ve heard 
this argument from some representatives of student associations. 
 
Quite frankly, the changes that we have made to the student-aid 
package have been very well received by the student 
organizations. And individual students that I’ve talked to and that 
have written letters to us have just mentioned things to all of my 
colleagues from whatever part of the province that they’re from. 
We think that it’s an excellent program, and even any excellent 
program always can be better. But we will continue to monitor 
this, because just by the changes that we have made have shown, I 
believe to you and to everyone else, that we are committed to 
post-secondary education. I just say that that commitment will 
continue and we’ll continue to monitor the program as it carries 
on. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I was wondering whether . . . After having 
announced the program, you put together a fairly elaborate 
advertising campaign, if I may call it that. In respect to it — the 
pamphlets which I think outlines some details of changes — you 
have the guide, of course, and the application forms. The students 
should be aware that they have to do their applying for the rebate 
— the 6 per cent. 
 
But in addition to this package you have some elaborate 
advertising here — 6 per cent interest rate; invest in your working 
future; the new Saskatchewan student assistance program. I was 
wondering . . . And it’s my understanding that the Premier himself 
sent a package to every young person in the province — directly 
mailed individually to the young people across the province — 
university and high school. And I was wondering whether you 
could indicate: did the department, your department, pay for this 
advertising information in respect to the student loans program? 
And I’d like you to give me the basic cost of the program as I have 
alluded to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, as you have indicated, we sent a 
package to graduating high school students who will be coming 
into the post-secondary world next year, or a good number of them 
will. We sent information to people who are now in the schools, in 
the universities. We sent  

posters and information to each of the high schools and to the 
universities and the institutes and the community colleges and 
wherever else, and it was very well received in the sense that we 
had a tremendous number of applications and inquiries to the 
department following that. 
 
I think I can safely say here that the young people of 
Saskatchewan who will have benefits accruing to them from this 
change in the program and from the program itself, are pleased. I 
think I can safely say that they know about the program and 
what’s there. 
 
The cost of that was: application kits, that includes the application 
kits, $65,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Application kits. Let’s get the rest of the 
breakdown. You mailed it out individually to every individual. 
Give me a breakdown of the postage, the production of the 
posters, the production of the pamphlets, the breakdown of the 
whole thing. Let’s not run it by here and say that that’s the full 
cost. Let’s face it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will . . . As you’ve said, I said that 
includes application kits, because that was one of the things that I 
did not include in my preamble before. But it includes application 
kits and the loan remission kits and brochures and the various 
things that you referred to as well. I will undertake to give you a 
breakdown of that, but the total cost is $65,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well just a minute now. Don’t leave it here as . . . 
Give me the breakdown. You’re saying that all of the postage, all 
of the mail-outs, all of the envelopes, all of the — the whole 
package, the final total cost is, and the posters and the production 
— is 65,000. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Now the 65,000, as I’ve said, is for the 
information which was sent out to the universities and to the 
students themselves and to the high schools and to the high school 
students and whoever else received those individualized packages. 
That was $65,000. And I’ve said I will give you a breakdown of 
other costs as it relates to advertising of this student aid program. 
I’ll certainly give that to the member. I’ll undertake to break it 
down and send it to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. I want to turn to another program, and 
that’s the Saskatchewan skills extension program. And I have the 
. . . looking at your report. And this is the decentralization of 
programs. In ’84-85 you indicate 125 programs were delivered 
throughout the province, and only 11 of these were delivered in 
the centres in which the institutes were situated. And as I say, it 
was established to facilitate the expansion and decentralization of 
institute-based credit training. 
 
I’d like it if you could give me the statistics for ’85-86, how many 
programs were provided. If you can, also indicate the number of 
persons using that program, that is the Saskatchewan skills 
extension program. And if you could, indicate to me the number 
of native persons that were able to be facilitated under that 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll give you this breakdown, Mr.  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2226 
 
 

Chairman, to the member. Total programs in ’85-86 . . . When I 
say north and south here — in the North I’m talking about three 
northern community colleges being West Side, North East, and La 
Ronge region — those three. And as it relates to the breakdown of 
native people, I would say that the . . . We don’t have that in terms 
of the whole province, but in the northern ones, it’s about 75 per 
cent of those numbers which I give as it relates to the northern 
three community colleges. 
 
So it’s 20 programs in the North; 120 programs in the South, for a 
total of 140. This is in 1985-86, estimated. Total training days in 
the North, 29,334; in the South, 99,102, for a total of 128,436. 
Total participants in the North, 231; total participants in the South, 
1,755. Total communities in the North, 6 different communities; 
and in the South, 26 different communities, for a total of 32 
communities at which these programs were delivered. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder what you can tell us 
with respect to the renovations of the old campus, and particularly 
Darke Hall. I see the renovations in progress. When are they 
expected to be completed? I’ll ask you that first, I guess. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m informed that the Darke Hall 
renovation will be completed this year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Are renovations planned for any other portion 
of the old Regina campus, or is that it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The remainder of the . . . I say the 
remainder, but other buildings which are part of the old campus or 
the College Avenue campus of the University of Saskatchewan are 
part of the discussions which go on with the University of Regina 
as it relates to their future . . . or the University of Regina’s future, 
and where their colleges go, and so on. 
 
I can’t say that on the drawing board today are plans for the 
college building or the teachers’ college building. I’m not sure of 
the exact names there, but I think you’ll know which ones I’m 
talking about. So there’s nothing on the drawing board, I don’t 
think — I may be corrected on that — but in terms of what will 
happen this year, next year, and the year after, in terms of the cash 
flow and that sort of thing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What priority has the university given that 
series of buildings with respect to renovations? I had understood 
that they had asked the government for assistance in those 
renovations and that had not been forthcoming. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I think it would be fair to say, I don’t 
know where this would be divided, but it would be fair to say that 
within the University of Regina community, administration 
included, I would say that there’s some divergence of opinion 
whether there should be a major priority to the buildings on the 
College Avenue campus. I think really here we’re dealing with 
fine arts, because that’s mainly what’s accommodated there, or if 
there should be fine arts at the new campus and so on. 
 
So in terms of saying what is the priority, I would say it would be 
very difficult to put a finger on it. It would  

depend on who you’re talking to at the university on a given day. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Those buildings, Mr. Minister, comprised the 
old Methodist college, which was deeded to, as I understand it, in 
the 1930s was deeded to the University of Regina by the then 
United Church. Those buildings, Mr. Minister, are of historical 
value, and I wonder if serious consideration is actually being given 
to seeking assistance from the member from Turtleford to raise 
those buildings. The Minister of Parks and Recreation has gained 
some valuable experience in knocking buildings down, and I 
would hope that his assistance isn’t sought with respect to the old 
Regina campus. 
 
I would hope, Mr. Minister, that nothing would happen to those 
buildings. Those buildings are of considerable historical 
significance. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I hear what you’re saying. Quite 
frankly, being somewhat new to this city . . . but I also understand 
that there is . . . and I’ve heard the opinion. And as I said to you I 
believe . . . I guess the question as it relates to the University of 
Regina is: where are the fine arts facilities to be located; new 
campus or renovations at the old; and what will renovations cost at 
the old; and some of those kinds of things. But I also understand as 
it relates to significant older buildings, as those are on College 
Avenue, that they are certainly worthy of a look in terms of what 
the costs might be and so on, and I don’t deny that. I am sure that 
there will be that sensitivity in the university administration to 
look at that when the time comes to do that. I’m sure that that’s the 
case. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the Saskatoon 
Community College, I gather due to overly tight budgets, they 
have eliminated the community development program. I wonder, 
Mr. Minister, if you can tell us what steps your government has 
taken to make resources available to the Saskatoon Community 
College so that they can reinstate that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Could you ask it again because I didn’t get 
what you . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The community development program at the 
Saskatoon Community College has been eliminated. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if you could tell us what steps are being taken to provide 
sufficient resources to the college such that they could reinstate 
this program. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If I could ask the member — do you have 
another question. I’m just waiting for an official who has been 
dealing and is more familiar with that, and he will be down in a 
minute. So if you would carry on with your next question, I’ll get 
you that answer as best I can in a minute. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if your department, or 
the university . . . well, perhaps that would not be a fair way to 
phrase it. I wonder if your department has any research or statistics 
with respect to student  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2227 
 
 

enrolment figures in future years, and if so, what you anticipate 
those figures to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, just a couple of points here. The 
projections which are given to us by the universities and which are 
suggested is that the enrolments will be flat to declining over the 
next four or five years, but we also have to remember as well that, 
I believe, in the late ’70s those projections were that they would be 
falling enrolments and that in fact did not take place. I think it’s 
fraught with some danger for governments to plan resources to 
universities over a long period on the basis of those only. While 
we hope that the projections are on the mark, and what can you do 
except to believe them when they’re done in a scientific manner, 
but I think if you look at the demographics and everything that’s 
been given to us, they would suggest flat to declining enrolments 
over the next five years. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The difficulty with the projections in the late 
’70s were that they assumed a continuation in office of a 
government committed to prosperity. This government took 
office. Young people could not find unemployment and they all 
went back to school, and that’s what happened to your projections. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, those who projected that enrolment figures 
are going to decline realize as much of Saskatchewan realizes that 
these are the dying days of this government, that a better day is 
going to dawn, and that those who go to university will do so by 
choice and not because there’s no other employment available. So 
I think your projections are probably accurate, probably based on 
some sound assumptions, including the likelihood of this 
government ever getting re-elected within the foreseeable future. 
 
Mr. Minister, I assumed that the official who was going to assist 
you with community colleges had come down. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just a quick response to the comments of 
the member. When I talked to you about ’70s projections, I was 
talking about projections in ’76 and ’77 for the years ’78, ’79, ’80 
and ’81 which is when your government continued in office. So I 
mean, for us to talk in political rhetoric back and forth in terms of 
those projections, I think the projections are done in a sound and 
scientific basis by university people, and it’s just as I said. I 
wanted to make that point earlier, and I will reiterate it again, that 
while it’s important to have these projections, we have to be 
cognizant of the fact that sometimes they are off the mark and we 
have to be ready for that eventuality on some occasions. 
 
As it relates to the Saskatoon Community College, their budget 
has increased in the last year. That was an administrative decision 
within the community college to cut the community . . . What was 
the program you said — community development or whatever? 
There was a program with one staff person, as I’m informed here. 
The administration made a decision to put their priorities 
elsewhere, and that program or that one staff position was deleted. 
That’s really all the information I have on it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But, Mr. Minister, you appointed  

those directors. In general terms, boards follow the general 
directions outlined by this government with respect to advanced 
education and community development. I ask you, Mr. Minister, 
do you not feel that this community development program was a 
worthwhile program? It was intended to assist and did assist 
disadvantaged groups in taking their full place in society. It’s just 
another example, Mr. Minister, of this government cutting funds 
and resources for disadvantaged groups. I ask you, Mr. Minister, if 
you agree with the position taken by the board, and if not, what 
have you done about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — All I said was that they had an increase in 
their budget — they had an increase at that board of $70,000. And 
as it relates to the relationship between the department or the 
minister or the government and the boards which are appointed to 
administer these colleges . . . Now the member may say that you 
appoint these board members and, therefore, they should follow 
direction or seek direction from the minister or from somebody in 
the department every time they make a decision, I don’t adhere to 
that. I don’t subscribe to that theory. We appoint and make every 
attempt to appoint confident people; people whose judgement we 
can count on, and they carry out their responsibility on the board, I 
think for the most part, and, in fact, do an excellent job of that 
across the province. 
 
As far as the program that you mention — and I will admit to you 
here that I hadn’t heard of it before, of this one staff person being 
deleted, I haven’t heard of it before — and I just had this 
information given to me that it was one staff person, one program 
there which was not on the top of the priority list of the board that 
was appointed at Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is reflective of the 
general approach of this government with respect to disadvantaged 
groups. When this government finds itself short of money, in large 
part through its own mismanagement, the government looks for 
places to cut money, and you know who’s going to get cut. It’s 
those disadvantaged groups which I think this government feels 
are without voice and cannot help themselves and cannot raise the 
storm of protest which should arise when a disadvantaged group 
has been hurt. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is part of the mandate of the community college to 
assist in this sort of development work — other community 
college do it. It has been remarkably successful; has assisted a 
large number of groups which I could read those groups for the 
Mr. Minister if, as you say, you are unfamiliar with the program. 
A number of groups have asked for its reinstatement. The group 
. . . some of the following groups: Women and Health, Crocus 
Co-op, Saskatoon Native Elementary School, Equal Justice for 
All, Peyakowak Committee, the Handi-work Workers 
Co-operative. Those groups have asked that the program be 
reinstated. They have . . . Those are groups which work with 
disadvantaged people. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think this is a shame. I think it is most unfortunate 
that when you have to save money because of your own 
extravagance and mishandling of this government and this 
province, you do so at the expense of those who need help the 
most. Mr. Minister, it is  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2228 
 
 

insensitive, it borders on the cruel, and it is certainly a very, very 
bad administration. 
 
If nothing else, Mr. Minister — if you want to be terribly crass 
about it, forget the human suffering involved — expenditures on 
this kind of program are a good investment in our society. And I 
say, Mr. Minister, that this is a most unfortunate development. It is 
reflective of your general philosophy and reflective of the 
approach which this government has taken in so many different 
areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can’t agree with the 
member. I mean, if what the member is saying is true, then I 
would say that there is a problem. What the member is saying, that 
he does not agree with any kind of a change in direction in terms 
of relating to the people who are disadvantaged, who are 
disadvantaged . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Let me finish, Mr. . . . 
the member who doesn’t want to let me finish because he knows 
I’m coming to the Saskatchewan skills development program, the 
Saskatchewan skills developing program, which relates to people 
who are now collecting welfare and who are having an 
opportunity to receive training. 
 
The program has been in operation since September and October 
of ’84. More than 1,400 students have graduated. About 75 per 
cent of those graduated from the pre-employment program are 
securing employment within the first month of being out of the 
skills development program. And for those disadvantaged people 
which you purport to speak for, I would say that this program right 
here is an absolute success story as it relates to dealing with people 
who are disadvantaged and who are in need of training. And that’s 
what our mandate is in the department. 
 
And we are providing that mandate to those people who, 
heretofore and before the advent of this program, had little 
opportunity for training and for bettering themselves and putting 
themselves into the work-force. 
 
So we need not take a back seat, nor will we ever take a back seat 
to the comments of the member from Regina Centre as it relates to 
providing of training, increasing opportunity for the lesser 
advantaged people in our society. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to also refer the minister to another 
problem that Coteau Range Community College students 
encountered. It’s a specific problem, Mr. Minister, but you were 
contacted in respect to it. And the basic problem is this, that last 
year a group of students enrolled in the first year portion of what 
they were told would be two-year program in Moose Jaw, and the 
first year, just ending now, was in fact a day-care workers’ course, 
and the second year, which was to start this fall, was to be a 
day-care supervisors’ course. And as I understand it this was an 
extension of the course offered by Kelsey institute, and now 
apparently a decision was made at Kelsey not to offer the 
second-year course but to run the first-year program all over again 
for new students. 
 
I want to say to you that this is a great inconvenience and 
unfairness to some 10 students in Moose Jaw which enrolled 
under the information that they would be able to  

take the second-year course. This change would mean that 10 
graduates from Moose Jaw first-year course, who wish to proceed 
further, can only take this second-year course in Saskatoon, and 
nine out of 10 are not are not in a position to be able to do it. I 
think you, in fact, were contacted in respect to it, and I’m 
wondering whether you have had an opportunity to review it. 
 
Here are 10 people who are making every conceivable effort to get 
further education. They did it on a commitment that there was 
going to be a second-year course, and suddenly that’s changed. To 
say that they can go to Saskatoon, even if they could, apparently 
there’s only 20 spaces, and there’s 36 applications for the 
second-year term in Saskatoon from our information. And so I 
want to be able to hear your answer because you were contacted, 
and two members from Moose Jaw were contacted, and these 10 
people weren’t important enough to get a reply. I wonder if the 
minister can, in fact, indicate what he is prepared to do to help 
these very needy and trying students who are attempting to get 
their education and based on a commitment. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll give you a fairly quick answer and we 
can maybe get into it a little later. The program the member refers 
to is the first year of a program, a day-care workers’ program, or 
whatever. It was offered in Moose Jaw; it comes out from the 
Kelsey Institute at Saskatoon. The first-year programs — and this 
is the case in many programs — is offered off the campus of 
Kelsey or of Wascana or whichever institute it is. The second-year 
program is offered on the campus. At the end of the first-year 
program, which is offered off campus, there is a certificate issued 
which allows the person to work in the field of endeavour in 
which they have some training, and there’s no way of knowing — 
and this has been a problem for a number years — there’s no real 
way of knowing how many people who get that certificate after 
the first year of the program will in fact opt to go to the second 
year of the program. And so they’ve allotted a limited number of 
spaces in Saskatoon. 
 
I know the problem these people have raised is that many of them 
would like to carry on to the second year of the program in Moose 
Jaw. I would say to the member and to the people who are affected 
this way, that we’re monitoring the situation, but I’m not sure if 
anything can be fixed up for them right now. I do know that 
because this is one program in a series of programs that are offered 
in that way — first year off campus — second-year requirements 
are to go on campus for the further training. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 o’clock. 
 


