


















































July 3, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 3, 1986 
 
 

2427 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Public Accounts 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Tchorzewski, from the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts, presented the ninth report of the 
said committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee submits a progress report to the legislature 
for the Fifth Session of the 20th Legislature. 

 
Your committee commenced its deliberations on April 3, 
1986, and to date has conducted 13 meetings. 

 
The committee has completed its investigations on the 
Department of Health, the Department of Revenue and 
Financial Services, the Municipal Employees 
Superannuation Commission, the Department of Social 
Services, and the Department of Agriculture. 

 
In each case your committee has reviewed, pursuant to its 
terms of reference provided by the legislature, the issues 
raised by the Provincial Auditor in conjunction with the 
Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan for the 
year ended March 31, 1985. 

 
Your committee is satisfied that every effort is being 
undertaken by the appropriate department and commission to 
address the concerns raised by the Provincial Auditor and the 
committee. The results of our investigations will be 
monitored by the committee and Provincial Auditor 
respecting departmental compliance. 

 
Your committee recommends to the legislature to adopt, by 
way of concurrent in this report, the measure applied by your 
committee in its investigations this current session. 

 
Your committee anticipates meeting intersessionally to 
complete its business before the end of this calendar year. 

 
The committee wishes to express its appreciation to those 
officials who have appeared before the committee for the 
testimony they have provided. 

 
Your committee also wishes to express its gratitude to the 
Provincial Auditor and his staff and the comptroller’s office 
for the expert technical assistance they brought to the 
deliberations of the committee. 

 
On June 9, 1986, the member for Regina North East replaced 
the member for Regina Centre as chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Public  

Accounts. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Eastview: 
 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Lay-off of Saskoil Employees 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is to the 
Minister of Energy and Mines, and it deals with the decision by 
Saskoil to lay off 60 workers from Saskoil and put them and their 
families on the unemployment line in Saskatchewan. Yesterday 
you said that the decision was a difficult one, and the Saskoil 
executive and president agonized over the issue of laying off these 
60 people, and I quote, “It was something they agonized over a 
great deal,” is what you indicated to the Assembly yesterday. 
 
Can the minister confirm that the Saskoil board of directors and 
senior executives agonized over the details of the terminations at a 
little retreat up at Waskesiu, and at the same time you will be well 
aware that it is a championship golf course near at hand for them 
to use while they’re agonizing over the lay-off of 60 families. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the lay-offs were 
decided while they were on a little retreat up in the resort up at 
Waskesiu? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot confirm that they 
were at Waskesiu. If in fact they were somewhere in 
Saskatchewan doing some long-term planning, it seems to me 
that’s a good idea for a corporation that has gone from being a 
Crown corporation to a mixture of a company that’s publicly and 
privately held. And if they were doing some long-term planning in 
Saskatchewan, I applaud them for doing so. 
 
I can say that the decisions to downsize the corporation were taken 
something in the order of a month ago, approximately one month 
ago that I was made aware of it. As I said yesterday, they 
undertook to downsize in a very humane way. They used a 
two-pronged approach; offered early retirements; and those who 
want to take, for example, educational leave, there was provision 
to do that. And then obviously there was some very hard 
decisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are concerned not only, Mr. Speaker, as a government about 
the lay-offs occurring at Saskoil, but we’re concerned about the 
lay-offs that are occurring generally in the oil patch, and that’s 
why we undertook some of the things we did in April, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m happy to report to the House today that the 
program is working. We have less lay-offs. We have something in 
the order of 1,230 wells that were brought back onstream, Mr. 
Speaker, since April 25th, and of those that were shut in due to 
price related shut-ins, we have something over 220 back in 
production. So, much as we haven’t been able to maintain all the 
jobs out there, Mr. Speaker,  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2428 
 
 

certainly we’ve stopped the slide, if you like, in the oil-patch 
employment, at least temporarily. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister took notice 
yesterday of a number of questions with respect to Saskoil’s 
decision to lay off 60 families and put them on the unemployment 
line. So I want to ask the minister again today: can you tell us of 
the five senior executives and the president, that is the president as 
well as the four vice-presidents, how many of those executives did 
you terminate in the process of laying off the 60 families? Were 
any of the five senior executives laid off at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, my officials are in touch 
with Saskoil to get that specific information for you. I do not have 
it here for you today, but I can tell you that the restructuring was 
across the board, and obviously things like voluntary retirements 
could come from anywhere in the spectrum. So it would be hardly 
fair to say that they were targeted at one end or the other. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. You also took 
notice of the salary increase for the president of Saskoil. I wonder 
at this time can you inform the Assembly whether or not an 
increase took place in 1986 for the president of Saskoil, the 
individual who was at the same time, as we understand, getting an 
increase in pay and fringe benefits and a new car, was laying off 
60 people, 60 taxpayers and families in the province who are now 
unemployed while the president is getting fringe benefit increases 
as well as salary increases. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t have the information to the 
questions that were raised yesterday, today for the hon. member, 
Mr. Speaker. I will . . . as I said earlier, my officials are working 
with Saskoil to get that information. 
 
I can tell him this: in the cursory conversation I had with one of 
the board members who happened to be in the House for a 
committee during yesterday’s session, I can tell him that it’s my 
understanding, at least at this very moment, that any salary 
increases were across the board and in the new year shortly after 
what had been a very, very good year for Saskoil, and well ahead 
of the 60 per cent decrease in the price of oil — if the hon. 
member would listen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can also tell you that the board has eliminated EDOs 
(earned days off) as I understand it, in order to cut back and save 
money and have more money to provide jobs, Mr. Speaker. So I 
think some responsible management has occurred there, not only 
on behalf of Saskoil employees, but on behalf of all the 
shareholders of Saskatchewan, in facing some very difficult times 
in the oil patch, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question to the 
Minister of Energy. Mr. Minister, you have indicated previously 
that Saskoil has put 60 Saskatchewan families on the 
unemployment list because the company is facing, you know, 
serious financial difficulties. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: are you aware of the story from 
the president of Saskoil is telling investors in Vancouver? I have a 
copy of the speech by the . . . where  

he says, headline, “Saskoil has cash to shop” — lots of cash. In the 
article he says that Saskoil has bulging pockets; it is hunting for 
acquisitions. In fact, he said that Saskoil could acquire a company 
or producing properties for as much as 200 million, and its debt to 
total capitalization ratio would still be under 40 per cent. 
 
I want to as you: can you explain this bragging session to 
Vancouver . . . can you explain this bragging session to the 60 
people that have been laid off and unemployed here in respect to 
Saskoil’s operation in Saskatchewan while they’re bragging about 
having bulging treasuries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What that article suggested to me, Mr. 
Speaker, and I referred to it yesterday as well, is that Saskoil is a 
well-managed company and it’s not bleeding the public treasury to 
death like some other Crown corporations in this province have, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question. New question to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, I have a further document here which suggests and tells 
the real reason why you forced 60 Saskatchewan people, families, 
on to an employment line. And this document here indicates that 
Saskoil’s new corporate strategy, dated June 17th of this year — 
I’ll show it to you in case you aren’t aware of it — Saskoil, 
Corporate Strategy and Objectives, dated July 17, 1986. 
 
This is the strategy of Saskoil, and this document, do you know 
what it states? It states that over the next four years Saskoil plans 
to reduce its operation in our province and to expand rapidly in 
other provinces, primarily Alberta. 
 
I ask you: can you explain why a Saskatchewan oil company has 
decided to abandon Saskatchewan and plans to expand almost 
exclusively in the province of Alberta during the next decade? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is trying 
to suggest to the people of Saskatchewan that Saskoil should have 
continued to operate as a $30-a-barrel oil company when oil prices 
are $15 a barrel. They are trying to say to all the grandmothers and 
grandfathers out there who may have bought shares for their 
grandchildren, that yes, any good financial position we have, we 
should squander it away so that down the road there’s no company 
to employ anybody, and nobody will enjoy dividends down the 
road from those shares they have bought, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It surprises me as well, Mr. Speaker, that the only concerns that 
the NDP opposition have raised in this legislature relative to the 
oil patch have been about a former Crown corporation, Mr. 
Speaker. It seems to me that what that article is saying, in very 
glowing terms that the hon. member referred to, is that Saskoil is 
well-managed. They’re not going to squander away a very low 
debt situation . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If the hon. member would read all of 
that article for the hon. members in this House, would also go to 
tell where it sits in the 500 in Canada in terms of returns to its 
shareholders and maintaining employment out there and the record 
that it’s done 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2429 
 
 

 relative to other oil companies during some very difficult times 
. . . Mr. Speaker, we, on this side of the House, are proud that that 
company is headquartered in this province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I’m not surprised that you haven’t referred in your answer to the 
document my colleague mentioned. It is Saskoil, Corporate 
Strategy and Objectives, dated June 17, ’86 on Saskoil letterhead. 
This document lays out the objectives and the intention of Saskoil, 
and I want to refer you to one particular quote, Mr. Minister, 
which seems to summarize the matter: 
 

Therefore, by 1990, Saskoil will achieve considerably more 
balance; at least 50 per cent of our production base will come 
from higher productivity wells located outside of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
The minister is quite correct. It is selectively, chosen because it 
summarizes the document. It is selectively chosen indeed. 
 
This document, Mr. Minister, explains that Saskoil will sell or 
abandon a third of its marginal wells in Saskatchewan over the 
new year and that within . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m asking for order on both sides 
of the House. There’s too much shouting. We cannot carry on 
business that way. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The document explains, Mr. Minister, that 
Saskoil will sell or abandon one-third of its wells in Saskatchewan 
over the next year, and that within four years, 50 per cent of the 
total production base will be outside Saskatchewan. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is: how can you explain, or can you 
explain how abandoning Saskatchewan and creating new jobs in 
Alberta is in the best interests of Saskatchewan families? Will you 
admit that the practical result of the privatization of Saskoil is that 
Saskatchewan capital and Saskatchewan jobs are fleeing this 
province for Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The board at Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, 
wants to make that a very, very strong company, even stronger 
than it is today, and it has very, very good financial data today. 
 
The NDP somehow, Mr. Speaker, are suggesting that they want 
that company to fail. Don’t do anything that’s positive. Don’t 
develop. It’s okay for a company, a Crown corporation, to 
hemorrage $91,000 a day, but it’s not okay to be a success. They 
want it to fail. They also believe that big bureaucracy and big 
government is good, that the more people you’ve got, that might 
somehow make the oil industry better. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that one of the reasons that that 
company is as successful as it is today is because they (a) have 
very little long-term debt, and (b) because of the co-operation that 
Premier Devine enjoys with his counterpart, Prime Minister 
Mulroney; in Ottawa, the  

PGRT further removal went right to the bottom line of that 
company and means some substantial millions of dollars for that 
company, Mr. Speaker. We make no apologies for the soundness 
of that company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, new question. Mr. Minister, let 
me remind you that the Government of Saskatchewan, the Crown, 
is the majority shareholder in Saskoil. What you are saying to this 
Assembly, Mr. Minister, is that by locating Saskatchewan capital 
and locating Saskoil outside this province, you and your 
colleagues in cabinet no longer have any confidence in 
Saskatchewan as a place to invest. 
 
How, Mr. Minister, do you expect this province to develop if the 
government doesn’t have any confidence in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I have lots of confidence in 
Saskoil, and if they’re of the view that there’s a good purchase to 
be made in Alberta and in heavy oil, which Saskoil is heavily 
involved in, as the hon. members may or may not know, and tends 
to straddle the border, then I say go for it if the price is right, if it 
makes sense. Because that’s the way, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 
going to have more people brought back on the production side 
and the drilling side at Saskoil, and at other companies in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you stated that it was an 
acquisition of heavy oil. Let me assist you by reading again from 
this document: 
 

Purchase New Reserves in Alberta: By deploying our cash 
reserve and using our substantial financial capacity, to gain a 
significant Alberta light oil production base. 

 
Mr. Minister, do you have the faintest notion what this Crown 
corporation is doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose, given that the 
average well in Saskatchewan produces 20 barrels a day, and the 
average well in Alberta produces 60 barrels a day, if they can get 
into a property that is very productive in light oil at the right price 
— good, go for it! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, will you explain to me how you 
expect investors to invest in Saskatchewan if the cabinet of the 
Government of Saskatchewan has no confidence in this province 
and wants to invest its money in Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to showing 
some confidence . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to showing 
some confidence in this province by the oil industry, I would 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the oil industry has responded in 
spades to the initiatives of a PC government as opposed to an NDP 
government. t doesn’t matter what measure you use, Mr. Speaker 
— wells drilled, capital dollars invested, or more importantly 
number of people employed — Saskoil and  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2430 
 
 

virtually every other oil company that were chased out of here 
under the NDP have now returned. And albeit they’re in a 
downturn, we certainly have a much broader and substantial base 
than we had four years ago, Mr. Minister, when things were 
heated up, so to speak, under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister indicates that the main drive 
for Saskoil is to find heavy oil in Saskatchewan . . . I want to quote 
as well from the document which deals with exploration and 
development. The paper refers to exploration and development 
and says that the capital expenditure “will comprise 70-75 per cent 
of cashflow over the next several years, and will be directed 
towards high productivity light oil in Alberta.” 
 
And what they’re saying here is that 75 per cent of their drilling 
program will be in Alberta and will be for light oil. How do you 
square that with your previous public statements that Saskoil was 
the main tool being used to find heavy oil in north-western 
Saskatchewan? Obviously they have now changed, and they’re 
laying off their staff in Saskatchewan and will be rehiring in 
Alberta. Do you think that’s fair use of the taxpayers’ money in 
this corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First, the correction for the hon. 
member: I did not say Saskoil was the government’s main tool to 
develop heavy oil in north-west Saskatchewan. I say they are 
heavy into that kind of play, heavy oil. That was my point of 
correction. 
 
The two points I would like to make in response to the question is: 
(a) there is nothing wrong with a company pursuing growth and 
strength; and (b) the realities of the Saskatchewan oil patch today, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member for Shaunavon asked 
a question, and you’re not giving an opportunity for an answer. If 
you asked the question, I think you should be considerate enough 
to give the minister an opportunity to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And the other very important point, Mr. 
Speaker, that we must make when it comes to the oil patch in 
Saskatchewan is this: that based on what we’re pumping out of the 
ground today, we have something in the order of less than 10 years 
of conventional reserves left in Saskatchewan — something less 
than 10 years of conventional. 
 
Now it seems to me, unless a company continues to develop and 
explore — an oil company — and with those kinds of numbers, if 
you don’t continue to develop and explore and go where the oil is, 
pretty soon you’re not going to be an oil company. And I think the 
shareholders of Saskatchewan are probably happy to hear that that 
company is taking an aggressive approach. 
 

1982 Campaign Commitment to Eliminate Taxes 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, my question deals with 
certain commitments that you made in 1982, the Conservative 
Party. We are in the dying days of your government, which is now 
in its fifth year in office, and  

Saskatchewan people want to know the status of these 
commitments. 
 
In 1982 you promised very clearly that your government would 
eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax. That was a commitment, and yet 
the March budget forecast that you will be collecting $386 million 
in sales tax out of the pockets of Saskatchewan citizens. Is that 
1982 campaign promise going to remain a broken promise, Mr. 
Minister, or do you intend to do a death-bed repentance and do 
something about this in the next few days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just can’t believe 
what we’ve seen here today. I just can’t believe it. We’ve got these 
guys sitting over there talking about saving jobs for the people of 
Saskatchewan. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, this government 
has invested time and money and people and time and money and 
people in major, major projects in the province of Saskatchewan, 
projects that these people actively tried to kill, projects, Mr. 
Speaker, like the upgrader, like the paper plant, like Du Pont in 
Saskatoon, like Phillips Cables in Moose Jaw . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. The member 
was not on the subject of the question at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, since the minister refuses to 
answer the question and chooses to talk around it in his usual way, 
I will ask him another question in the form of a supplementary. 
 
Mr. Minister, you also in 1982 promised a 10 per cent cut across 
the board on income tax. Instead what you did is you gave 
Saskatchewan people a flat tax on income, which was a massive 
tax increase for Saskatchewan citizens. We are now the only 
province in Canada with two provincial income taxes. And I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, does your government plan to make good on 
this promise of an income tax cut, or is this yet another broken 
promise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try to answer the 
question directly. I don’t know if it’s parliamentary or not to use 
the word “hypocrite,” but rather than use the word “hypocrite,” I 
will say less than sincere in their motives, Mr. Speaker. That man, 
that member, Mr. Speaker, belongs to the party that promised a 
pension plan for home-makers in . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That member, Mr. Speaker, belongs to 
the party that promised to remove education from property tax in 
1971, Mr. Speaker. That party is the party that nationalized potash 
mines and put a burden around the people of Saskatchewan’s neck 
probably for a very long time. And that party, Mr. Speaker, that 
party is asking us why we haven’t delivered. Well we’ve spent a 
lot of time delivering on things that they promised as far back as 
1971. 
 
And I don’t intend, Mr. Speaker, to stand here and apologize for 
all of the positive things that we’ve done by  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2431 
 
 

way of tax measures as well, Mr. Speaker. There was the 
elimination of the gas tax. Let’s talk about that for a while — $130 
million a year, each year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was the reduction of interest rates, the MIRP (mortgage 
interest reduction program) program we called it, when interest 
rates were 20, 21, 22 per cent. And those people, Mr. Speaker, 
said, I’m sorry, Mr. Home Owner, we can’t help you. We came in, 
Mr. Speaker, and we helped. We removed the gas tax; we 
removed sales tax from clothing up to $300. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t apologize for the tax measures that we’ve 
taken in this province, and the people of Saskatchewan are very 
pleased with it. You talk to the people on the west side of 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, and see how much . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, in 1982 and again in your 
throne speech, your government promised freedom of information 
legislation. You promised this to the Saskatchewan taxpayers and 
you said that you would provide them access to information on 
how you spent their hard-earned tax dollars. Now, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, can you explain why you haven’t kept that ’82 promise 
and why you haven’t kept your promise of the throne speech 
either? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know when we will 
get the legislation tabled, so I can’t answer with precision, Mr. 
Speaker. But let me say that we have given more information on 
the PAPCO deal than members opposite have given on any deal 
that they’ve ever put together. I could name a few more. We have 
television, Mr. speaker, in the legislature. The forum is now used 
by people right across Saskatchewan. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that it hasn’t served members opposite that well. Television in this 
Chamber has cost them dearly. 
 
The final point I make, Mr. Speaker, half if jest, is I’m not sure 
that we need any freedom of information legislation based, Mr. 
Speaker, on the truck loads of brown envelopes that members 
opposite seem to show up with on a regular basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Page 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day I would like to 
introduce to you a page that has served in our Assembly before 
and is back to serve again. Lani Knaus has served us earlier in the 
year and is back now, and we welcome Lani back. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I wanted you to explain about 
the interest that may be unpaid by Weyerhaeuser as the 30 years 
progress, in which time they may or may not pay back any of the 
principal. Can you tell me: what is the interest rate on the unpaid 
interest? Can you tell me: does the 8.5 per cent apply to the unpaid 
interest on an annual basis? Can you explain to us what the 
arrangement is on that part of the deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, I’m informed that there is no interest 
on unpaid interest. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can you confirm that? I find it hard to 
believe what you’re telling us, that if the corporation in the first 
year misses an interest payment, then that interest could remain 
unpaid for 30 years and there’s no penalty for not paying it. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In response to the member from 
Shaunavon, his question — and we’ve been through this before in 
terms of how interest becomes due. After a certain level of 
earnings, interest becomes due. So if that was the case and there 
was interest due and was for some reason not paid, well then that 
overdue interest, there would be interest paid on that, and it would 
be at the rate of the debenture, 8.5 per cent, or slightly more than 
that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well this deal gets better and better for 
Weyerhaeuser as we go along here. Let me use the example of 
1987. There’s no paper-mill built; they have a loss of $50 million. 
They can write off the $50 million against what they owe, the 
$248 million, and then at the end of the year they would owe $198 
million. And you go through that scenario for three years. They 
end up owing about $98 million if they lost $50 million for three 
years. Then after that if they didn’t make enough money to pay the 
interest, they wouldn’t have to pay any interest on the debenture. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, interest accrues on to the 
debenture in every year beginning in 1987 or ’86. The interest 
becomes payable at the point — and we’ve been through this 
before — the interest becomes payable at the point at which the 
combined project, pulp-mill with paper-mill, reaches the level of 
earnings whereby payments are made. And we’ve been through 
this. And the point that has to be made here is the only hope of that 
kind of earnings, or earnings to that level being made, is from the 
combined project. I make that point once again. 
 
So for those who would oppose the deal, as the members opposite 
have been doing, what they are really saying is: maintain what we 
have and continue to pay out this  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2432 
 
 

interest with no hope of making money with the stand-alone 
project. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I want 
to refer you again to your expectations with respect to repayment 
of interest and principal. I took the figures for 1981 which was a 
banner year. If you take the profit over the assets listed on that 
financial statement, they achieved a return of 12.5 per cent on 
assets. A pulp company isn’t going to do a lot better than that; 
that’s a banner year. 
 
I took the figures for that year as best I could, because I admit I do 
not have complete financial information — you won’t give that to 
us — but as best I could, I started on the assumption that 1981 
would have been the start-up year. Mr. Minister, under that 
formula in 1981 they would have fallen far, far short of paying 
anything on interest. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you will tell us what your expectations 
are? What level of profit does this company have to make before it 
starts to pay interest on dividends? If I am correct, and nothing 
would have been payable in 1981 had ’81 been the start-up year, 
when on earth do you expect this company to ever repay interest 
on principal? 
 
There are those who have said that you are giving away a 
pulp-mill in order to get a paper-mill. Correct? Are you in essence, 
Mr. Minister, giving this thing away with no expectation of getting 
anything on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. The simple answer to the member’s 
question is that the expectation is that they will pay, once a return 
of 5.5 per cent on the combined investment. And the very key 
word here is “combined investment” because there is almost no 
potential for profit to be made given today’s market and the 
markets projected into the future for northern kraft pulp — which 
is what is made at the Prince Albert pulp-mill — for very many 
factors, and I can go through those again. We’ve done that with 
the Leader of the Opposition the other night. 
 
(1445) 
 
So the potential for a return or for the provincial government, if 
you maintain the status quo, which means the people of 
Saskatchewan continuing to own the pulp-mill, the potential for 
return on that investment is almost nil, given the market today and 
the changing markets and the changing competition system out 
there, or situations with third-world countries and the fact that 
there’s no premium any more on northern kraft pulp. 
 
And so with the forest mix that we have — and by that I mean 
with the introduction of aspen or hardwood into the pulp which 
will then be made into paper, which will then be sold — the 
projections in the paper industry are such that we believe that it’s a 
very realistic expectation to see a profit from the combined 
operation. And that’s the only hope for the operation at all, and it’s 
certainly the only hope for the viability of the forest industry. That 
is the basis upon which this is an excellent deal for the forest 
industry in northern Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — What do you anticipate the combined 
investment will be? What’s the figure? What’s the combined 
investment? What’s that figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The combined investment we’re talking 
about is $498 million: $250 million for the construction of a 
brand-new paper-mill and $248 million which is the debenture 
value for the assets which now exist. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Now, Mr. Minister, going back to the 
schedule then, we are talking about 2(d), are we? We are saying 
that if the profit earnings — as they’re normally calculated, 
according to the principles generally followed by accountants — 
exceeds 5.5 per cent of the combined investment of 498 million, 
then you expect that the earnings will be . . . that the definition of 
earnings in 2(d) will achieve a positive balance; that then there 
will be something there. Is that what we’re saying? Under 2(d), if 
the earnings as normally understood exceed 5.5 per cent, then for 
the purpose of 2(d) there’s something there, and there are some 
earnings with which to pay interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, that’s if you’re referring to 2(d) in the 
schedule which I provided to you, that’s right. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Then with respect to paragraph 3, paragraph 3 
of this agreement explains how money is actually paid. Starting 
with 3(b), interest after the start-up period, it states that you use 
available cash flow minus these deductions. 
 
At what percentage point would you anticipate the profits to be 
before available cash flow was sufficient to pay anything? As I 
calculate the figure, Mr. Minister, the figure needed so that 2(d) is 
higher than a zero balance is considerably less than what is needed 
under 3(b) to pay anything. So I wonder, Mr. Minister, what 
percentage of profits is needed under 3(b) before there’s 
something available to pay? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, I think neither the 
member from Regina Centre nor I pretend to be accountants; at 
least, I know that I don’t. But I will give you the answer as it’s 
provided to me and as it relates to 3(b), I believe, to make a 
clarification — 3(b) in the schedule which I provided to you: 3(b) 
is a cash flow calculation; it’s not appropriate to express as a 
percentage of assets. The cash flow is the income plus non-cash 
charges such as depreciation and deferred income taxes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well now that is an amazing statement — 
that is an amazing statement. I knew that years before I ever got to 
this legislature, Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d deal 
with the question. I hope that wasn’t taken to be a serious answer. 
I’m well aware of what cash flow is. 
 
Let me then give the minister some assistance. Paragraph 3(a) 
states: 
 

Cash flow from operations of the combined assets equals 
earnings as determined in accordance with paragraph 2 (that 
is, earnings exceeding 5.5 return on assets) plus depreciation 
and depletion;  

  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2433 
 
 

plus the lesser of net book value of fixed assets sold or actual 
sale price during such year, less the non-cash proceeds of 
such sale, plus the cash proceeds received during that year 
for any previous sale . . . 

 
Mr. Minister, I think in general terms the only thing unusual about 
cash flow in this paragraph is it means earnings less a 5.5 per cent 
return plus the usual depreciation and sale of assets, etc. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. . . . And then from cash flow in paragraph 3(b) 
as thus defined — cash flow minus the 5.5 per cent return on 
investment — you then take off scheduled principal due that year; 
maintenance in the amount of 12 million; changes in working 
capital in accordance with 3(c); any unpaid balance and any 
third-party debt, whatever that may mean; $1 million to be 
allocated in accordance with 3(c); and the cumulative balance of 
the investment reserve, which appears to be a straight 20 per cent 
of the aggregate investment. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: what does cash flow . . . what return on 
assets has to be achieved before there’ll be anything to pay on 
interest? Because you start out, Mr. Minister, saying that the cash 
flow equals earnings less the 5.5 per cent, and then it goes on to 
make a bunch of deductions. So I ask you, under 3(b) what level 
of earnings do you have to have before you have anything to pay 
on interest and principal under this schedule of 3(b)? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the return on assets must be 5.5 per 
cent before there’s any kind of a . . . before there’s any deduction. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, this is absolutely impossible. I 
might as well be asking the minister for the finer points of nuclear 
submarine technology as ask him to deal with this. Mr. Minister, I 
told you that about 20 minutes ago. 
 
What I want to know is what . . . The only variable, it seems to 
me, in this formula is earnings. All the rest are flat sums that are 
unrelated to earnings. All right? And we can calculate most of 
those. I can calculate, I think, most of those. What level of 
earnings has to be achieved before you have anything left, after 
making all those deductions from the cash flow? I say it’s an 
impossibly high figure. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’ve said before, they will make 5.5 
per cent on the total assets which, if you calculate it out, and the 
total asset I’ve said is $498 million, which if you total that out is 
calculated as $27,390,000, and they’re allowed to make that return 
in terms of dollars or five and one-half per cent before payments 
accrue on the principal of the debenture. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I get the unfortunate impression, Mr. 
Minister, that you came to this Assembly not understanding the 
principles upon which this operates. I can only assume that from 
the kinds of questions I’m getting. I’m getting absolutely 
nonsensical answers to questions. I can only assume, Mr. Minister, 
that you came to these estimates not knowing how this formula 
worked. I can well understand that you can’t figure it out in this 
Assembly under the heat of battle. 
 

(1500) 
 
All I can say, Mr. Minister, is the deal is so bad it’s apparent that 
you went into the negotiations and came out and signed this 
agreement not knowing how this formula worked, because as I 
figure it out, even if you take the combined assets, the level of 
earnings has to be at least 10 to 11 per cent before there’s anything 
payable, which means before you pay interest you’ve got to pay 
eighteen and one-half to nineteen and one-half per cent. It’s just 
impossible. They’ll never do it. There isn’t a prayer, with the vest 
will in the world, if they wanted to do nothing but show profit, if 
they wanted to arrange their bookkeeping in such a fashion to 
maximize the profit, they wouldn’t pay anything, Mr. Minster. So 
I say, Mr. Minister, the only assumption I can make is that you 
entered the negotiations as you came to this Assembly, not 
understanding the formula, not understanding how it worked, and 
I think that may well be an explanation for how you and this 
government got cleaned so badly. 
 
Mr. Minister, you and your colleagues came into office promising 
industrial development and new jobs. Mr. Minister, it is not 
acceptable to achieve that by giving away the heritage of this 
province as you’re doing. Mr. Minister, I refer you to Saskoil — I 
refer you to Saskoil, Mr. Minister. You privatized Saskoil. You 
maintained a 60 per cent interest in it, if my memory is correct, 
and what happens . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 58, all right. I’ll 
accept that figure. You’ve maintained a 58 per cent interest in it 
and what happens? Jobs and Saskatchewan capital flee the 
province. The money which Saskatchewan people invested in 
Saskoil, we’re now told, is going to be put in Alberta. That, Mr. 
Minister, is because private companies operate in the vest interest 
of their shareholders and not in the best interest of this province 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . .No it isn’t. That is a fair way for 
private companies to operate. 
 
But I am saying to the member from Prince Albert, who appears to 
have a better understanding of it than the minister, I say to the 
member from Prince Albert, you may forgive Weyerhaeuser if 
they do the same thing — if they look after their shareholders first 
and this province comes second. And if that happens, you’re going 
to find that their financial statements are arranged without lying, 
cheating or stealing — to quote an unfamous Canadian — without 
laying, cheating or stealing, their financial statements will show 
such that there will be very modest payments on interest if any. 
That, Mr. Minister, is not an acceptable way to bring about 
industrial development to give away the assets of this province. 
 
I know you were coming to an election knowing you had to show 
something. You’ve been in office for four years and you’ve got 
nothing to show for it except one of the sorriest records of any 
government in the history of this country. You came in, Mr. 
Minister, promising tax cuts, and we have experienced tax 
increases. You come in promising jobs, and we have a much 
higher level of unemployment than we had then. You come in, 
Mr. Minister, promising industrial development and have achieved 
virtually nothing. 
 
I can understand, Mr. Minister, why you felt, before you  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2434 
 
 

faced the people, that you were going to face annihilation unless 
you could show something, but I say to the minister, this kind of 
give-away is not an acceptable way to achieve industrial 
development in Saskatchewan. There may be provinces, there may 
be areas, there may be states where this kind of thing’s acceptable; 
it’s not acceptable in Saskatchewan. 
 
I will make you a prediction, Mr. Minister. I will make you a 
prediction, Mr. Minister. I will predict that we will be 
campaigning on this issue in the election and you won’t. You may 
be mentioning it in Prince Albert. The member from Prince Albert 
may be mentioning it in his riding, but I’ll darn well bet you that 
the member from Meadow Lake isn’t going to mention it out of 
Prince Albert. The proof, Mr. Minister, the proof of the pudding, 
Mr. Minister, with respect to this issue, will be in the election; 
we’ll be campaigning on it, and you won’t. 
 
And I will tell you something else, Mr. Minister; the proof of the 
pudding is your unwillingness to give us the answers. If this were 
a defensible deal, this committee of the whole would not have 
dragged on for days as it has, with us trying to get some 
information out of you. Mr. Minister, if you could defend the deal, 
you would have. 
 
It is apparent, Mr. Minister, that you came into this Assembly not 
knowing the deal. I think you signed the agreement not knowing 
the deal. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, here is the member, comes 
in and purports to give me a lecture about how this is done. Mr. 
Chairman, I asked the member when he was in his seat a few 
moments ago, I asked him where did the — and this relates very 
much to his comment in talking about Weyerhaeuser Canada 
looking after their shareholders — and I ask this rhetorical 
question of the member from Regina Centre and all his other NDP 
colleagues; where did you look after your shareholders, or the 
shareholders — meaning the public of Saskatchewan — where did 
you look after them when you borrowed — borrowed — at the 
bank, at prime rate, $162 million to purchase 70 per cent? How 
did you look after the shareholders of Saskatchewan when you did 
that, and since that time — that was at the end of 1980, right in the 
last month of 1980 — and where did you look after the 
shareholders — being the public of Saskatchewan? 
 
And let’s hearken back to those days of 20 per cent and 18 and 19 
per cent interest rates, that type of interest rate, certainly in the 
high teens; we’ll go back to those kinds of interest rates and look 
at the numbers, the numbers which I’ve released before that really 
come out to one thing. In interest alone, $68,000 a day — $68,000 
a day — being lost in interest alone; $98,000 a day losses to the 
public of Saskatchewan, being the shareholders of this corporation 
which you people are so, so reluctant to let go. You just cannot let 
go. You cling to it with your very fingernails because you must 
not let . . . and one of the jewels of the great family of Crown 
corporations go by the board. You cannot let it go, even though 
your head, your heart, everything that is anything about common 
sense around you would say, this is a good deal; but you can’t say 
that because your philosophy will not allow it to happen. 
 

Mr. Chairman, $91,000 a day is a number. The member says the 
member from Meadow Lake will not talk about this in the 
election. I’ll relate a story to you from this very weekend, this past 
weekend in Meadow Lake. Here’s what the people in Meadow 
Lake think of your stand o this deal. And that’s an area, I might 
remind everybody in the House and the people in this province, 
that’s an area that understands the forest industry. 
 
I was in . . . and a little plug for the Meadow Lake stampede as 
well, Mr. Chairman. In the rodeo parade in Meadow Lake where 
there’s several thousands of people, one person in the crowd 
yelled at me when I was introduced going by, “Never mind 
Blakeney,” and I quote, Mr. Chairman, “Never mind Blakeney. 
Sell that pulp-mill.” And there was spontaneous applause up and 
down the street. That’s the same public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That’s the same public of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Chairman, that pinned your NDP ears back last weekend. 
That’s the same public in Saskatchewan that pinned your ears 
back wherever you went when you tried to make a big issue with 
your phoney little ad campaign. I’ll tell you, that public in 
Saskatchewan pinned your ears back and they said this thing 
should be sold. This is a money-losing proposition, a proposition 
that you should never have entered in the first place. And why do 
you cling to it? Why do you hang on to it like this when you know 
in your heart that it’s wrong. 
 
They say we, the public of Saskatchewan, know that it’s right. 
This deal is right, and this paper-mill which will be built, which is 
the one portion which you refuse to talk about — the fact that 
there will be a $250 million paper-mill. Not only do you refuse to 
talk about it, you have even gone so far as to say that the 
paper-mill will not be there, as you have gone so far as to say that 
the upgrader’s a phantom project, and that this other, Gainers in 
North Battleford, even though steel is up and the building is there, 
is a phantom project. 
 
You guys will be phantoms in the political scene of Saskatchewan 
in a very short time whenever that election is held. There will be 
the late member — the former member from Regina Centre, the 
former member from Cumberland, the former member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and whatever others of your colleagues 
that want to come into the House and debate this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just note, Mr. Minister, coming back to the 
facts you conveniently overlook. When the NDP were in office, 
the pulp-mill made 27 million in 1980, 24 million in 1981. Not 
until it came under the kind auspices of the Tory administration 
did it fall out of bed. I say, Mr. Minister, when we had it, it made 
money. Like everything else when you get a hold of it, because of 
patronage, because of mismanagement, they don’t make money. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Prior to your government  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2435 
 
 

borrowing the money at two chartered banks, even though the 
member from Regina Centre says that the money came from the 
Heritage Fund . . . He says the money came from the Heritage 
Fund. His leader says the money came from the Heritage Fund to 
purchase, and they told all of the people of Saskatchewan, we will 
buy the remaining 70 per cent of this pulp-mill because the 
Heritage Fund has this overflow of money and we’re going to use 
it to invest on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. And you told 
people that story, and you, to some extent, sold that story to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the truth is this: the truth is that they went to 
two chartered banks and they borrowed the total amount of $162 
million — $162,370,000. They borrowed that total amount, 
borrowed it at those high teen rates in 1980 to purchase 70 per 
cent of that pulp-mill asset. And he talks about the profits in 1980 
and ’81. He says in 1981 it made $24 million. It made $24 million 
in operating, and you paid out in interest, on that very ill-advised 
loan that I just referred to, $36 million you paid out on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan. But did you ever tell them that? 
 
At no time did your government, did that leader of yours, at no 
time did he ever say to the people of Saskatchewan: we are paying 
$36 million interest in 1981. Nor did he ever say in 1982 that 
we’re paying out $29 million in interest, and he did not say in ’83, 
or ’84, or ’85 that we’re paying in the area . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . He did not say that. That is the kind of interest that 
is accruing. That’s the kind of interest that’s being paid by the 
public of Saskatchewan because of the ill-advised deal that he 
entered into. That leader of yours who now stands and says and 
will not defend that it was a good deal. He knows it was a bad 
deal. He knows very well that it was a bad deal, but he does not 
stand and defend it. 
 
Mr. Yew: —Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want to 
raise a few very important questions with you regarding the 
Weyerhaeuser deal. The people on this side of the House, the New 
Democrats, have had the courtesy and the sensitivity to try to 
inform the public regarding the Weyerhaeuser deal. In doing so 
we have not only communicated in person with the people of this 
province and with our constituents, we have put ads in the paper 
and we’ve had a tremendous amount of response regarding the ad. 
 
I want to put it in the records, Mr. Minister. We’ve asked the 
people of this province regarding Weyerhaeuser: a good deal or a 
give-away? Put it in big, big, black, bold headlines: you be the 
judge. On March 25, 1986, the Devine PCs announced a sale of 
the Prince Albert Pulp Company to a giant multinational 
Weyerhaeuser corporation. Weyerhaeuser gets in this deal, Mr. 
Minister, the Prince Albert pulp-mill, number one; number two, a 
Saskatoon chemical plant; number three, the Big River sawmill, 
like my colleague pointed out from Athabasca, the Bodmin mill; 
and number four, they get 30 years of exclusive timber rights to 
seven million acres of Saskatchewan’s best commercial timber. 
 
And Weyerhaeuser on the other hand pays zero down. 
Weyerhaeuser gets ownership of these public assets for  

nothing down, not one red penny and a $248 million loan 
repayable for 30 years that can even deduct losses at the pulp-mill 
for what they pay back. Secondly, zero later; zero down, zero 
later. Weyerhaeuser won’t have to make payments on the loan 
unless profits are 12 per cent or more in any given year. 
 
(1515) 
 
And then the final paragraph reads: 
 

Zero for ever. If Weyerhaeuser still owes any of the loan 
after 30 years, it can avoiding paying Saskatchewan people a 
penny — not a penny — by issuing them non-voting 
preferred shares which will pay no dividends whatsoever. 

 
Based on the facts, and still quoting from our article: 
 

The Devine Progressive Conservative is selling important 
public assets for nothing. 

 
It is a bad deal; it is a give-away. The message we’re getting from 
the people of this province, and particularly the people in the 
North, present it’s a bad deal, and it’s a give-away. It’s a 
sweetheart deal and nothing more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: —We’ve had a lot of feedback on the northern forests. I 
happen to represent the top half of this province which this deal, 
this bad deal, this give-away deal, this sweetheart deal to a 
multinational corporation from the United States, is been dealt 
with. I happen to represent that constituency where those prime 
timber resources are, and, Mr. Minister, I want to tell you that I 
heard a different song when I was in your constituency the other 
day. I heard a different song. 
 
You noticed I had well over a half a dozen people talking to me 
while you were standing in front of the Co-op story with one 
individual person, and I think, Mr. Minister, he was chastising you 
for selling out our resources. I think you came out of that little 
conversation without a smile. I think you were getting a pretty 
rough time there from one of your constituents, to tell you the 
honest truth. But every single person I talked with told me that this 
is a bad deal; that this is a give-away. 
And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, some very important 
pertinent questions. Can you provide, Mr. Minister the people of 
this province documentation which make it clear that the northern 
commercial fishermen, the trappers, the wild rice growers, people 
of native ancestry, the traditional resource users — I’m talking 
about the Indian, the Metis, and the non-status people in this 
province — will they or will they not have access to the 7 million 
acres of northern forests which will be restricted, I’m certain? But 
I’m asking you: will you not provide any documentation to ensure 
that they do not get a restricted, no trespassing policy implemented 
or imposed upon them by Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, 
Washington from the United States? I’m asking you that question, 
Mr. Minister, the number one question. 
 
We want to know and we want to ensure that the people 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2436 
 
 

in the North are not restricted in their traditional life-styles and 
traditional pursuits, because with the present and current policy of 
your government, we have had nothing but high unemployment 
and high welfare dependency rates. That is all we have had 
through your administration, through the Progressive Conservative 
government of this province. I ask you in all sincerity, Mr. 
Minister; I want to know what is your position on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, my colleague, the Minister 
of Parks and Resources answered that very question on two 
occasions in question period. He answered the very question asked 
by the member today., whether there would be access for the 
traditional pursuits and so on, and the answer to that very clearly 
is, yes. 
 
What the management agreements, forest management 
agreements, whether it’s with Weyerhaeuser Canada, or with 
Simpson timber, or with MacMillan Bloedel, or Sask Forest 
Products, or the Meadow Lake sawmill, L & M Wood Products at 
Glaslyn, whichever one it is, all of those will provide for 
integrated resource management policies because forestry, 
wildlife, all of those aspects are part of the jurisdiction of that 
minister, the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. And 
he’s given that assurance to you, sir, and to the House and to the 
people you represent. 
 
But what I am sensing here is another of the NDP scare tactics, 
Mr. Chairman, typical NDP scare tactics — divisive attitude of the 
New Democratic Party. You see it in so many areas. They first of 
all said there’ll be no paper-mill. There will be no paper-mill, they 
said; that’s just a phantom project. Remember when they said 
there would be no upgrader — just a phantom project. And now 
their folks are out there saying, well hey, this phantom project, 
there’s actually some people working there in this phantom 
upgrader project. 
 
So they’ve abandoned that argument. And then they say, oh, 
there’s no paper-mill. Now they’re acknowledging, yes, there will 
be a paper-mill, but we don’t like it. We want to kill it anyway 
because it would be too good for Saskatchewan’s development 
and growth. And if they’re not the government, they don’t want to 
see any development and growth in Saskatchewan. 
 
We saw the divisive attitude of the NDP yesterday in this very 
House, the Leader of the Opposition talking about western 
representation or what he pretends is the lack of western 
representation in the federal cabinet. Divisive attitude. Divide — 
east versus west. 
 
And here’s this member from Cumberland standing here as he has 
done so many times in the House and try to divide North versus 
South. He says, oh, I represent a northern riding. I represent a 
northern riding too, Mr. Chairman, and I do not stand in this 
House at any time and suggest that there should be a division 
between North and South in this province, nor do I suggest there 
should be a division between East and West in this country. You 
NDP are always like that. You will divide North, South, East, 
West, labour-management, urban versus rural, whatever kind of a 
split you can develop, you will try to develop it. Well I don’t buy 
that kind of policy. 
 

And just the short answer to your question, just so that you are not 
able to carry on with the same scare tactics which you have been 
trying to do for some time, is that yes, people in traditional 
pursuits will have access as they do now, and there’s nothing in 
the forest management agreements which would suggest that there 
would be any change to that policy. 
 
Mr. Yew: —Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you then if you will provide the 
document to ensure the people of northern Saskatchewan that they 
will in fact have those rights. Will you table those documents, Mr. 
Minister? You’ve tabled schedule B when we have not seen 
schedule A nor schedule C of the agreement. 
 
Another major item that I’m concerned with, Mr. Minister, deals 
with the training and the hiring, the employment opportunities, 
jobs related to this major transaction or major bad deal or 
give-away, whichever phrase you want to use. 
 
I want to ask you questions about the health and safety standards 
of the worker. Are we going to be bombarded here with a whole 
migration of out-of-the-province and out-of-Canada technical 
experts and employees from the United States of America, or will 
you employ local people, particularly those people that are directly 
affected, or will you not? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the member . . . 
And I know that there was a delegation from the city of Prince 
Albert — representatives of the chamber of commerce, the local 
government, elected people, other representatives of Prince Albert 
and that area. Big River representatives were there as well, the 
R.M. around Big River. One of the things that Weyerhaeuser 
Canada is known for is their community relations, is their hiring of 
local people. All of those kinds of things are very well 
documented in other locations in this country. 
 
I member once again — I just make the point, and we have give 
that assurance — the member once again raises it. His colleague 
from Quill Lakes in the question period the other day used such 
tactics as to suggest that there would be tolls on the roads and toll 
bridges throughout northern Saskatchewan. So those are the kind 
of absolutely . . . those are incredible questions, Mr. Chairman. 
Such questions are incredible, to suggest that there’d be tolls on 
the roads. 
 
Now that’s nothing but scare tactics based on no fact, no 
information whatever, based on no even suggestion of fact 
anywhere. But they say toll roads; they say all these employees are 
coming from the United States of America; Weyerhaeuser, 
because shareholders are in the United States and so on, they’ll be 
bringing American workers to Prince Albert. It makes no sense, 
based on no information at all that the member has, and in fact it’s 
quite false. 
 
So it just goes on and on. Like I say, it’s a typical story and it’s the 
same story that’s been raised. First of all, no paper-mill will be 
built. Now they’ve abandoned that. Well, there’ll be toll roads. I 
haven’t heard that since the other day, since the people of the 
province, you could almost hear them laughing in unison all across 
the province when that question was asked. They certainly  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2437 
 
 

laugh in unison across northern Saskatchewan; that member 
knows it. But he’ll stand down here in his way and trying to divide 
North and South, trying to tell people in southern Saskatchewan 
that, oh no, it’s all doom and gloom in the North. 
 
It’s not the case. It is not the case. And I just want you to know 
that I do not believe the arguments that you’re using. I haven’t 
believed those arguments for some time, and I want to make sure 
that I tell you that on behalf of the northern people that I represent 
here as well. 
 
Mr. Yew: —Mr. Minister, I don’t want to argue about the split 
between the North and the South. But I will tell you, Mr. Minister, 
that you are the one that told us and the people in northern 
Saskatchewan that you wanted to bring northern Saskatchewan 
into mainstream Saskatchewan. But to date, through your fifth 
year in terms of your government’s term of office, we are still not 
with the mainstream Saskatchewan, and statistics will prove that, 
Mr. Minister, statistics will prove that. 
 
If you look at the unemployment rates, and they’re 95 to 100 per 
cent high unemployment in the North, where in the South we have 
7, 8, maybe 10 per cent, which is far . . . where there is an 
outrageous difference, Mr. Minister. The statistics related to 
welfare dependency rates are extremely high as compared to the 
rest of the province. That indicates to me, Mr. Minister, that you 
have . . . you yourself and your Progressive Conservative 
governments have isolated and abandoned and neglected the 
North. You’re the ones that are separating the North from the 
South. 
 
But regardless, I just thought I’d raise those points. 
 
The other question I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, with regards to 
this major give-away: have you completed any major 
environmental impact studies with regards to the Weyerhaeuser 
deal and with regards to the proposed paper-mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member will 
come with his concerns about unemployment in the North which, I 
believe, and you’ve heard the Premier express and we have 
expressed, across northern Canada there’s a problem with 
unemployment. We know that’s the case; there’s no question that 
that’s the case. And we know there’s no question, as well, that the 
forest industry, by and large in this country, is located in the 
northern portions of our country. Okay. 
 
What we have here is an opportunity. So the member will on the 
one hand argue about the problem that there is unemployment in 
the northern part of this province, that part of northern Canada 
which Saskatchewan takes in. He argues against, and all of his 
colleagues have argued against, the development of a paper-mill in 
Prince Albert which will have accruing to the province 215 new 
jobs — 215 new jobs, and yet in one breath too much 
unemployment in the North, and in the other breath kill this 
paper-mill because there’ll be 215 new jobs. There is no logic to 
that argument, sir, none. No logic. 
 
I ask you one more question . . . you say keep the status quo on 
these assets which the public of Saskatchewan  

own. I’ll say the status quo is a cost to the public of Saskatchewan 
of $91,000 a day — $91,000 a day from the beginning of 1981 to 
the end of 1985. And I ask the member: what could have been 
done with that kind of money in his portion of northern 
Saskatchewan or across northern Saskatchewan where 
unemployment is a problem; what could have been done with that 
kind of money on a daily basis had it not been hemorrhaging from 
this company, this pulp-mill company, on a daily basis? 
 
Mr. Yew: —You didn’t answer my question, Mr. Minister. I 
asked you: have you completed a major environmental impact 
study with regards to the Weyerhaeuser deal, with regards to the 
proposed paper-mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The provisions of the environment Act — 
I’m not sure if that’s exactly the name of the Act — but those 
provisions are being adhered to. In fact, that’s ongoing right now. I 
think if you look in last night’s Leader-Post, in the Leader-Post of 
last night, and I’m sure in other publications across the province, 
there’s an advertisement in there for people to make submissions 
and so on regarding this project. So the project is put out, and 
there’s an address there in the Department of Environment, the 
name of the person, the representative of the Department of 
Environment, and also the representative of Weyerhaeuser Canada 
who should be contacted by people who have comments to make 
as it relates to the project. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Yew: —A moment ago, Mr. Minister, you argued that the 
Prince Albert pulp-mill was losing $91,000 a day. Do you know 
that under your administration, Mr. Minister, under the leadership 
of the member for Estevan, Premier Devine, under the leadership 
of the Progressive Conservative party, that we are losing, through 
bad management, through the bad policies and the philosophy of 
your government a total . . . The people of this province are losing 
a total, every day, $548,000 a day. That’s from the bad 
management of your government, we are now — I’m referring to 
the deficit that you have accrued since you took office — 
$548,000 a day is now being paid by the people of Saskatchewan 
to people that don’t need that kind of money, the banks and the 
bond dealers from the East. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you call our questions, on this side of the 
House, as irrelevant. And you tell us that your give-away, your 
bad deal to Weyerhaeuser — and I continuously call it a bad deal 
because you will not go to the public and you will not disclose the 
information that is relevant to the questions that the people of this 
province want to know. You released a general outline of schedule 
B, but where is the other pertinent information that is required? 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, if anybody has made a bad deal, bad 
management and bad judgements, that’s your government. That’s 
your Progressive Conservative Government on that side of the 
House. You’ve put this province well over $2 billion in the red, 
and the people of this province now have to pay back just on 
interest  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2438 
 
 

payments alone, and not on the principal, but on interest payments 
alone $548,000 a day and you complain about the $91,000 a day 
loss. That is nothing compared to what you guys are paying out 
from the people of this province to banks and bond dealers from 
the East. If you want to get into an argument, I can very well get 
into an argument with you on that. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, you have not held one public 
meeting that I know of with the 24 organized and unorganized 
hamlets that nine local communities authorities which were 
referred to under The Northern Municipalities Act as villages. You 
have not held meetings with the Saskatchewan Association of 
Northern Local Governments. Nor have you held meetings with 
the two native organizations. You have not actually had the nerve 
or the guts or the sincerity to . . . You were elected to be 
responsible and responsive to the . . . You were elected to do a job 
for the people of this province. 
 
You were elected, not as masters of the people in this province, 
but as servants of the people of this province. You were elected to 
respond to the needs of the working people of the ordinary 
families, of those people that are unemployed. That’s what you 
were elected for. 
 
But what you do with regards to the Weyerhaeuser deal is, you get 
chummy and you get a hug and a big . . . while your leader, 
without first consulting the people of this province, without first 
consulting the people in the North, just goes right ahead and 
makes a sweetheart deal out of desperation. You guys have been 
down in the polls for so long now that you just don’t know who to 
turn to. 
 
You know, that little do in Saskatoon has turned against you guys. 
You know, we’ve got . . . You guys, your leader here, the member 
for Estevan, the Premier, Premier Devine and the Conservative 
government of the day is so desperate they have to rely on their 
counterparts in Ottawa to bail them out. That’s basically what 
you’re doing. It’s nothing but a strategy to try to alleviate some of 
your difficult, very difficult problems. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: have you met with the native 
organizations to discuss the outstanding land claims settlements, to 
discuss issues pertinent to the first ministers’ constitutional talks, 
aboriginal rights? What about major issues of that nature? Have 
you met with the native organizations, MR. Minister, to discuss 
the Weyerhaeuser deal? And if you have — and I doubt very 
much if you have — but if you have, what was their response? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, what I have said to the 
House and to the public of Saskatchewan: that when the final deal 
is signed, the total deal, all documents will be released to the 
public. All documents will be released to the public of this 
province, including you people in opposition. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just ask the member one rhetorical question 
without trying to get into a long answer to a . . . I’m not sure where 
the question was. 
 
But the point is: negotiations are going on; the forested area 
belongs to the Crown in right of all the people of  

Saskatchewan; that forested area belongs to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and we will be good stewards over that through the 
Minister of Parks and Resources. Any agreements that are signed 
will have the rights of the people of Saskatchewan and the 
revenues which can accrue to the people of Saskatchewan in line. 
There’s no question about that; in fact, it’s foremost. 
 
And the third question that I . . . the question I would ask the 
member, as I’ve asked several of his colleagues before this: who, 
which person, which taxpayer, which citizen, did you ever consult 
with when you decided to buy this pulp-mill, to borrow $162 
million to purchase the last 70 per cent of this mill? Who did that 
leader of yours ever consult with when he decided to buy it? 
 
Mr. Yew: —The procedures of the Assembly, Mr. Minister, if I 
may remind you, is for the opposition to raise questions of the 
government of the day. 
 
I want to ask you my question, Mr. Minister, which you 
deliberately ignored. Have you met with the two parent native 
organizations, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and 
the Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan, 
to discuss the Weyerhaeuser deal? Have you met with them on 
issues pertinent to the constitutional talks? Have you met with 
them on issues pertinent to aboriginal rights, to land claims? Have 
you met with them to discuss major issues related to the Indian, 
the Metis, and non-status people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said, the paper-mill 
will be built. The integrated facility will be there. Profits of it will 
accrue to people of Saskatchewan. And the answer to the question 
is that all of the people of Saskatchewan will see the details of the 
deal at the same time, which is right after closing, which is at no 
time done by your government. 
 
And as far as the specifics of your question as to whether or not I 
have asked, or the government has asked Sol Sanderson and 
Wayne McKenzie if they approve of the paper-mill, the answer to 
that is no. 
 
Mr. Yew: —Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. You finally 
answered the question to a very important aspect of this major 
give-away. It’s a bad deal, and I repeat to you, Mr. Minister, it is a 
bad deal because you’re telling me, and the people of this 
province, that you will not meet and to disclose any information 
with the people of Saskatchewan until the deal is finalized. That is 
what you said a moment ago. 
 
But you did, in a general way, approach Wayne McKenzie and Sol 
Sanderson, and no doubt they said no, because you have not met 
with the people that they represent. The Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian nations represents 72 major banks in this 
province. You have not met in the terms of the people directly 
affected; you have not met with Chief Roy Bird of Montreal Lake; 
you have not met with Chief Myles Venne of the Lac la Ronge 
Indian Band; you have not met with Joe Laliberté of the 
Cumberland House Band. You have neglected to meet with 
Hector Kailther of the Wollaston Lake Band. You have not met 
with the Canoe Lake Band. You have  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2439 
 
 

not met with any bands whatsoever to discuss the possible 
implications or possible involvement. They may, you know, have 
very genuine concerns and interests, but you have failed to meet 
with those people directly affected. 
 
And you know, there are issues that are outstanding in terms of the 
native people in this province, and in terms of the people in 
general, the common, the ordinary working families. I’ve been 
into Saskatoon and Regina. I’ve been into many other 
communities — Yorkton, Moose Jaw — and I’ve met people on 
the streets, you know, unemployed, and they, you know, indicated 
that they need work, certainly. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, as a minister and as a government, you are 
delegated the responsibility of consulting with the people of this 
province before going through with a major give-away, a major 
deal. You’re supposed to go back to the people of this province, 
and that’s why you’re going to lose the next election, Mr. 
Minister, because you deliberately, continuously ignore . . . your 
government is arrogant; it ignores the people of this province; it 
does not have any compassion or sensitivity when it comes down 
to the people of this province. 
 
Our people in the North, Mr. Minister, are genuinely . . . and 
they’re interested to know what will happen to our lakes, our 
streams, our prime forests. 
 
The Progressive Conservative government on one hand advocates 
a strong policy for tourism. The other day I heard the minister for 
Tourism and Small Business indicating in this House that tourism 
would become the major industry, the number one industry in this 
province. 
 
An Hon. Member: —In the world. 
 
Mr. Yew: —Now he tells me, he repeats, maybe in the world. 
But, Mr. Minister, when it comes to consulting and meeting the 
public in a public forum to discuss a major deal like the 11,000 
square miles of prime timber that is being given away to the 
United States of America, to that Washington multinational 
corporation from Tacoma, Washington, you’ve failed to consult 
and to meet with the public of Saskatchewan. And yet on one hand 
you say one thing and do another. 
 
You state that the tourist industry will be the number one industry, 
but I said to you, Mr. Minister, when it comes down to natural 
resources in this province, when it comes down to the natural 
environment of our province, the only last remaining frontier in 
Saskatchewan, you’ve failed to consult the people. That’s why, 
Mr. Minister, you will be ousted out of office. You will be, in the 
next election, I’m certain of that. 
 
You’re having so many internal problems with your own cabinet. 
You’ve given away so much of our assets already. You’ve given 
away so many incentives and royalty breaks to multinational 
corporations, banks, and bond dealers. 
 
Today, Mr. Minister, the ordinary working families of this 
province have nothing but food banks, food kitchens, soup 
kitchens, high welfare dependency rates, a high  

incarceration for sure of native people, and nothing but high 
unemployment throughout the province and, in particular, in the 
northern administration district in the top half of this province. 
 
(1545) 
 
You will not consult with the people in the North about the very 
thing that is going to affect the North, the very thing that will 
change the face of the North for the next 30 years. That agreement 
is for 30 years. Perhaps that agreement will change the face of the 
last frontier for ever, and you will not consult the people on that 
respect. 
 
What about my question? The minister was so busy trying to get 
consultation from the member for P.A. that he forgot. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
obviously . . . I didn’t detect a question in there. I really didn’t. His 
question in the former long statement that he made was: did I 
consult with or did the government consult with the two native 
organizations as to whether or not there should be a paper-mill? 
The answer to that was no. The other question that he asked was: 
will they find out what the deal is and so on? The answer to that is 
yes, when the citizens of Saskatchewan all find out, which is 
exactly . . . which is much more than was ever related to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan by the government when your party was 
in government. 
 
I ask the member from Cumberland, who says consult — and he 
named the people. I ask the member, when he was an employee, a 
high-paid employee of the old department of northern 
Saskatchewan — and I think he was that at the very time when 
this pulp-mill was bought and when the money was borrowed; the 
money was borrowed from the Bank of Montreal and the 
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce; I have a couple of 
documents here — when that money was borrowed on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan to buy the pulp-mill for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, did you consult? Were you sent out as the emissary 
of the New Democratic government to consult with all of the 
people whom you listed? No, they weren’t. You did not. You did 
not consult. There was never a consultation on that basis. I’m not 
saying that there should have been; I’m just saying to you that 
there wasn’t, and there isn’t now, with the two organizations that 
you suggest. 
 
The two organizations certainly will have a point of view to 
express, and I’m sure they will express it; and the citizens of 
Saskatchewan will have a point of view to express, and they did 
express it to you in the last weekend when you tried to drum up 
your opposition to this building of this paper-mill. When you tried 
to drum up opposition to it among the people of Saskatchewan, 
you fell flat. That opposition fell flat. 
 
And I submit to you, as I have once before — on this past 
weekend, when you went out and faced the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they said, why are you not allowing this deal to 
go forward? They said, why are you not letting this deal go 
forward? And quite frankly, as I said before, you folks in the New 
Democratic Party had your ears pinned back by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2440 
 
 

Mr. Yew: —Wishful thinking, George . . . oh, pardon me, Mr. 
Minister — wishful thinking on your part. Your answers to our 
questions, Mr. Minister, are not actually clearly relevant to the 
major concerns being expressed to us and being expressed here in 
regards to the estimates before us, or the Bill 56. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister. The other day I asked the Acting 
Minister for Parks and Renewable Resources a number of 
questions which were taken notice of, and I have to this point in 
time not received any response to. I want to ask you or the 
Minister for Parks and Renewable Resources. There was a task 
force report that recommended the creation of a forestry advisory 
committee. And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: with regards to 
that recommendation, how many northern native people, or people 
form the North, will be on that committee if it is the government’s 
plan to proceed with the establishment of a northern forestry 
committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know about the 
committee you refer to. I’m quite frankly . . . It’s not, certainly, 
part of my responsibilities, and I’m not sure of what the member is 
referring to. 
 
I know the committee . . . There’s one committee that exists as it 
relates . . . that could be remotely related to this Bill — because I 
think that’s what we should be doing, Mr. Chairman, and get back 
to the clauses of the Bill — and that is a forestry development 
committee which has been struck in Prince Albert with various 
representatives of various groups and labour groups and, I believe, 
some native representation. 
 
I know that my colleague, the member from Prince Albert, is on 
that committee as well. And that committee is a very positive one, 
looking at what benefits will accrue to the community of Prince 
Albert and the communities surrounding Prince Albert and the 
rural people around Prince Albert, the people . . . and northern 
people as well, who can benefit from this extra development in the 
forest industry. 
 
Mr. Yew: —With regards to the committee I was referring to, Mr. 
Minister, the member for Turtleford, your colleague, established a 
task force consisting mainly of political patronage appointees 
from, you know, friends of your Tory government — did not have 
one single northern native person on that committee. 
 
However, the committee did recommend the establishment . . . If 
you want, Mr. Minister, I can read you your own press statement, 
your government’s press statement: 
 

Herbicide task force report released. Parks and Renewable 
Resources Minister Colin Maxwell today released a report 
prepared by the Task Force on Use of Herbicides in Forest 
Management. 

 
Now we’re dealing with forest management, Mr. Minister. And in 
part the report suggested and: 
 

Maxwell stated that after thoroughly reviewing the report he 
accepts in principle its recommendations, but plans to 
discuss the report  

with his colleagues before deciding on a course of action. 
However, Maxwell said he will proceed immediately with 
the report’s recommendation on establishing a Forestry 
Advisory Committee. 

 
That’s basically what I’m talking about, Mr. Minister. But now 
you’re referring to another committee, a forestry development 
committee, one that is composed by members on that side of the 
House, the member for P.A. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: what are the terms of that 
committee, and do you have any northern native people in that 
committee? Have you consulted with the small sawmill operators 
like Benny Campbell of La Ronge? Have you consulted people in 
Weyakwin, people that have that Chisholm log-mill operation? 
Have you consulted with the Cumberland House sawmill small 
operators? Have you consulted with other small-forestry 
operators? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As it relates to the forest advisory 
committee, my colleague, the Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources, is sitting near me here now, and he tells me that that 
committee is in the process of being put in place. I don’t know 
anything more than that. It’s certainly not in my area of 
responsibility. 
 
Forestry development committee, I’m informed, there is a 
representative of the Indian forestry institute, which is, I think, an 
institute that you are aware of. It’s operated by the . . . I think it’s 
the Meadow Lake district chiefs, which has several of their bands 
in the northern region. Most of them are in the northern region. 
And that’s a positive committee which, as I said, the make-up is as 
I described a few moments ago. 
 
Mr. Yew: —Mr. Minister, I cannot understand the mentality of 
your government. You know, when we talk about a major deal . . . 
you know, giving away provincial assets which total $248 million, 
and giving exclusive timber rights for 30 years to Weyerhaeuser of 
Tacoma, Washington, without going to the people. 
 
I’ve had discussions with people in my constituency, the people in 
the North, and they are afraid, Mr. Minister, we are giving away 
our renewable resource, doing something to the effect that will 
change this province, particularly the face of northern 
Saskatchewan, the last remote northern frontier that we have, 
without consulting the people. 
 
We are going to have a firm brought here which we don’t know 
very much about. We don’t know their credentials; we don’t know 
their record; we don’t know how sensitive they will be to issues 
like the high unemployment rates in the North. We don’t know 
how sensitive they will be for issues such as the constitutional 
discussions under way with the two parent native organizations I 
mentioned a moment ago. We don’t know anything about their 
record, period. 
 
This is a bad deal. It’s a give-away. And before we know it, the 
people in the North are saying, we’re going to be owned by the 
United States. We’re going to be controlled by Ronald Reagan. 
That’s what’s going to happen. That is what’s going to happen. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2441 
 
 

For 30 years . . . The people of the North are afraid that they will 
lose both their non- and their renewable resource areas to a 
multinational corporation that will not be sensitive to the needs of 
the people in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. That is what’s 
going to happen. 
 
He called DNS “run amuck” the other day. Well if this deal ever 
goes through, then it will be called the Ronald Reagan run amuck 
over the north top half of this province. That’s what’s going to 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well what assurance do we have? 
You have not met the people of this province; you have not met 
the people of the North. You’re going to strike up a major deal 
without consulting the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce some guests that we have in the legislature. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have the distinct 
pleasure of introducing two different groups at the same time, 
almost. I will first introduce a group of 44 tourists from 
Minnesota. They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery, escorted by 
Mr. Dave Zimmer. They are of course touring our beautiful 
legislature here in Saskatchewan. I want to welcome all of you 
here to our legislature. I trust you will enjoy the discussions and 
debate that are ensuing here. You’ll pardon the legislature from 
time to time as we get a few shots at the American friends that we 
have, and you’ll stand that, I’m sure. 
 
I also have another group, Mr. Chairman, seated in the west 
gallery. I’m to understand they are 43 tourists from Mount Forest, 
Ontario and area, and they’re escorted by Christine Russell and 
Brian Milne, the bus driver. I want to, as well, welcome you 
people to the legislature and trust that you have a good visit here to 
our fair province and to our legislature. 
 
And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 
distinguished guests to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you stated that the $187 million 
or the purchase price of the shares was borrowed from chartered 
banks. Do I take it it was CIC (Crown investment corporation) 
which borrowed the money? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, that money was borrowed by the 
Crown investments corporation, Mr. Chairman. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — From who, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well $162,370,000 was borrowed, which 
is what was borrowed to purchase. The remaining 70 per cent 
when your government exercised its right of refusal when Canfor 
wanted to purchase the pulp-mill assets from Parsons and 
Whittemore, that money was borrowed by Crown investments 
corporation; $80 million from the Bank of Montreal, main branch, 
Regina, Saskatchewan; $82,370,000 from Canadian Imperial 
Bank of Commerce. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I have the bank indebtedness, 
bank loans, from the annual report filed by the then minister, who 
admittedly was not a member of this government. It shows no 
such loan, Mr. Minister. You may say that’s inaccurate, but I 
notice in 1982 the same amount of bank indebtedness is shown, 
and, Mr. Minister, there appears to be no increase in bank 
indebtedness by CIC during the period in question. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, how they could have borrowed the money 
from the bank if there is no increase in bank indebtedness shown 
in the annual report . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well the then 
minister may have cooked the books, but so did the former 
member from Regina South because he provided the same 
information the next year. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m not sure which annual report the 
member from Regina Centre refers to. I can’t say why the former 
government of which he was a part did not report the borrowings 
which they had undertaken, but I can say to the member that the 
loans that were taken out for the purchase of the pulp-mill assets 
are as I have outlined.  
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I can tell you why the annual 
report does not contain the information. I want to point out again, 
the 1980 annual report contains no record of the loans. The 1981 
annual report contains no record of the loans. And the 1982 report 
which was signed by Paul Rousseau, former member of this 
Assembly, contains no record of that bank loan. I’ll tell you why it 
contains no record of the bank loan. Because that information isn’t 
accurate . . .(inaudible interjection). . . You’re darn right. That 
information is not accurate. This money did not come from a bank 
loan. 
 
An Hon. Member: —Misleading the House again. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, he has been misleading the House. It’s 
not intentional, Mr. Chairman; it’s abject stupidity. He’s leading 
this House on this issue for the same reason that he has been 
unable to give us any information with respect to these formulas. 
Abject stupidity! 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll tell you why the information wasn’t disclosed in 
the annual report. Because you didn’t borrow it from the banks, 
You’ve been misleading the House on this issue. So I say to you, 
Mr. Minister, this information is not accurate. The money did not 
come from the banks. If it had, it would have been in the annual  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2442 
 
 

report. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I will stand by the report 
that I gave to the House a few moments ago about the two bank 
loans in the amounts which I outlined. The former government, 
under the leadership of the former premier who is now the Leader 
of the Opposition, borrowed — I repeat, Mr. Chairman — 
borrowed $162,370,000 from two chartered banks in order to buy 
the assets of Prince Albert Pulp Company. And they borrowed that 
at an interest rate which was, as I will say, in the high teens, very 
high interest rates. And we’ll remember at the latter stages of 
1980, we’ll ask all members to hearken back to that time when 
interest rates were very high. 
 
And so the interest rates were in the high teens. The member may 
say, and I heard . . . I’m not sure if I heard the member accurately, 
Mr. Chairman, but did he say that the loans as I have outlined 
them it’s inaccurate? Did he say that the information is inaccurate? 
I’m not sure if he said that. I’d like him to clarify that, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you are obviously reading from 
a document. Would you send it over? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m reading now from a term sheet, 
Crown investments corporation of Saskatchewan financing offer. 
Borrower: Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
Lender: Bank of Montreal, Main Branch, Regina, Saskatchewan. 
Amount: up to $165 million Canadian or the equivalent in U.S. 
dollars. Purpose: to assist with the purchase of Prince Albert Pulp 
Company shares pending resale to an investor yet to be named — 
pending resale to an investor yet to be named. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is the minister going to give me a copy of 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said to the member 
from Regina Centre, the information as I have given about the two 
loans are as I have outlined — one from the Imperial Bank of 
Commerce; one from the Bank of Montreal. 
 
What is very clear here, Mr. Chairman, very clearly what the 
member from Regina Centre stated — I want this to be very clear 
— what the member has said is that they did not borrow money. 
All members of the committee have heard that. They did not 
borrow money; they did not borrow to purchase the 70 per cent of 
the Prince Albert pulp-mill. He said in this House that it was 
simply not accurate. He said that they did not borrow $162 million 
to purchase that. I heard him say it, and I know all members of the 
committee have heard him say that. 
 
Now either the member did not know — which I don’t believe, 
because he was a member of the treasury benches of the former 
government; he was a member of the cabinet of the former 
government. The member who sits there, the former minister of 
Finance, whose signature appears here, whose signature appears in 
one of the pages that I have, on either of the loans, will know that 
that’s the case. 
 
But that member very, very clearly said, Mr. Chairman,  

that they did not borrow $162 million, which only once again goes 
to show, Mr. Chairman, that the position of this New Democratic 
Party on this deal to build a paper-mill in Saskatchewan is based 
on misleading information, on the scare tactics which I have 
outlined prior in the answers to the questions from the member 
from Cumberland — the scare tactics, the divisive tactics, the 
scaring the public; the talking of all of these so-called catch words 
of theirs — give away this, and sweetheart deal this, and so on; the 
kind of terminology that’s used by these guys, the kind of 
terminology that comes from the mouths of those NDP members. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the proof is in the pudding. The proof is in the 
pudding and the proof is in these two documents: one a loan of 
$80 million from the Bank of Montreal, main branch, Regina, 
Saskatchewan, interest rate 17 per cent, Mr. Chairman — 17 per 
cent; one other one a loan of $82,370,000, interest rate 17 per cent, 
Mr. Chairman. And yet that member and that New Democratic 
Party opposition says they did not borrow it. They have said since 
1980, Mr. Chairman, that they got all of that money from this 
phantom Heritage Fund. The Heritage Fund bought that; the 
Heritage Fund bought it on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What did they do? In fact, what did they do? And by his own 
admission, it didn’t show up anywhere. It didn’t show up 
anywhere, this kind of borrowing, and the purposes of the 
borrowing did not show up. But they said, oh, we’re buying this 
from the Heritage Fund. 
 
Well I submit to you, Mr. Chairman, I submit to the committee, 
and I submit to the people of Saskatchewan, that is the kind of 
misleading tactic that they have been carrying on through this 
debate and through 11 years in office and through all of these 
years in opposition, and they will continue to carry it on because it 
is the nature of the NDP and they will continue to carry it on in 
opposition, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is the minister going to give me the document 
and prove me wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, in the term sheet which I 
quoted from earlier — and I’ll just quote once again the purpose of 
the loan which I outlined, this being the one loan from the Bank of 
Montreal: 
 

Purpose: to assist with the purchase of Prince Albert Pulp 
Company shares pending resale to an investor yet to be 
named. 

 
Pending resale to an investor yet to be named. I ask the member 
from Regina Centre, or any New Democratic member: who was 
the investor that you resold it to and when did that resale take 
place? And if that resale actually took place, why is it that the 
people of Saskatchewan are the sole owners of that pulp-mill asset 
right now? Who was it resold it, that’s the question? Nobody. It 
was not resold. 
 
(1615) 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2443 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I can well understand why the minister wants 
to get off the subject of that bank loan. I can well understand, 
because that bank loan was not in existence at the end of the year. 
That was just bridge financing. The whole business about 
borrowing money, and $69,000 a day interest this was costing us 
. . . Incidentally, has anyone stopped to calculate what $69,000 a 
day amounts to? . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Is it 91,000? Well 
then I’ve been too kind to the Premier. 
 
This is just a figure concocted by the Premier out of mid-air. It’s 
the same as 40 cents a gallon off the gas, for the reduction of gas 
tax. The fact that there never was 40 cents a gallon on it didn’t 
bother him. This is the same individual now who says $91,00 a 
day — $91,000 — $69,000 a day comes to an impossibly large 
sum of money. It would mean that the province is paying 14 per 
cent interest. Of course the province these days is not paying 14 
per cent interest. 
 
What does it come to? Sixty-nine thousand, which was the figure 
that I heard him use — the member from Lakeview has no doubt 
heard him use a larger figure — comes to 14 per cent. And 91,000 
would come to 17, 18 per cent interest. This province is not paying 
14 per cent or 18 per cent. The province does not pay prime plus 
one. Now the member from Lakeview has been in the banking 
business longer than to know that . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . .Well, he’s been out of the banking business for 
quite a while. I say to the . . . I don’t pay prime plus one, much less 
the government. 
 
I say to the minister that these figures are concocted; the bank loan 
was interim financing. Mr. Minister, you are calculating interest 
on an equity investment and you’d get laughed out of any 
brokerage house or chartered accountant’s firm in the province 
calculating interest on an equity investment. It does not make any 
sense. Either you make a loan to someone or you make an interest 
investment, but you can’t calculate the two of them. 
 
To take as you do in the sheet which you distributed, the interest 
costs — which incidentally are not a whole lot easier to figure out; 
they don’t come to any interest rate that I think this province 
would be paying — and then to deduct from that profits is just 
ludicrous. This government is playing with figures as you did with 
the gas tax. Once again, you’re playing with figures. 
 
The fact remains that when the pulp-mill was purchased, it made a 
profit of $27 million which was a return of about 14, 15 per cent 
on assets. The next year it made a profit of 24 million, and that’s a 
return of about 12, 13 per cent on assets. That’s a good return. 
That pulp-mill made money when we had it. When you people get 
a hold of it, it loses money. You’ve lost money on everything 
you’ve done. You people couldn’t manage a three-house paper 
route. You really couldn’t. You lose money on anything. You 
people could buy the Royal Mint and you’d lose money on it. I 
guarantee you it would happen. 
 
I say to the minister, you are playing with figures here, the same as 
you’ve been playing with figures elsewhere. That bank loan, if it 
exists at all, exists as interim financing, Mr. Minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member from Regina 
Centre says that . . . I heard him say it and all members of the 
committee will have heard him say, that the $162 million was paid 
directly out of the Heritage Fund, this phantom fund that they said 
was rolling in all of these millions of dollars, and they said it was 
paid directly from the Heritage Fund; that’s what they said. And if 
I remind all members of the committee what they also said about 
that Heritage Fund — they said they had so many investments 
paid for by the Heritage Fund. 
 
I guess the question becomes now: now that it has been shown that 
they borrowed the money to buy the assets of Prince Albert Pulp, 
$162 million, which is not a small amount of money, Mr. 
Chairman, but that $162 million is a very small amount of money 
compared to all of what they said they spent out of the Heritage 
Fund. And the question becomes: how much really was spent out 
of the Heritage Fund, and how much of it was, in fact, borrowing 
that was not reported? That’s the question for the member from 
Regina Centre and for all of his NDP colleagues. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If I were wrong, you’d give me a copy of that 
and prove me wrong. I am right, and I know I’m not going to get a 
copy of it, and I know you’re going to continue to insist that I’m 
wrong, but not give me the evidence. I say, Mr. Minister, that your 
reticence to give me that document proves I’m right. There was no 
bank loan, except perhaps interim financing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member referred to the 
1980 annual report of Crown investments corporation. He said that 
it’s not reported; this bank indebtedness is not reported. One can 
look at page 17 of that annual report, wherein which bank 
indebtedness went up $256 million in that year — $256 million 
increase in bank indebtedness which one now knowing these facts 
which I’ve outlined today, can only assume that that bank 
indebtedness, that $256 million increase included the $162 million 
which I’ve been referring to. 
 
As well, Mr. Chairman, from that very same annual report in 
1980, on page 12, I draw the members attention to page 12 of the 
annual report to which he referred earlier, and it’s just the report of 
the purchase. And I quote from that annual report, Mr. Chairman: 
 

In December 1980 Crown investments corporation exercised 
its option to purchase the remaining 70 per cent of the shares 
of Prince Albert Pulp Company when they were offered for 
sale by the owner, Parsons and Whittemore of New York. 
This purchase will provide an opportunity for the 
government to revise outdated royalty structures and forest 
management agreements. CIC intends to sell a major interest 
in PAPCO to an operating partner on revised commercial 
terms. The great intentions . . . 

 
And that was in 1980, I remind you, Mr. Chairman, and members 
of the committee. 
 
So I remind the committee once again, Mr. Chairman, as I did in 
the earlier portions of this debate, because the one stated reason 
here, “to revise outdated royalty structures  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2444 
 
 

and forest management,” those things which we have done — 
forest management agreement revisions, outdated royalty 
structures — those things which have been outlined by my 
colleague, the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources, that 
was your stated reason. The stated reason in this annual report and 
the stated reason in this House by the former minister in charge of 
Crown investments corporation, Mr. Cowley, when he said that 
that was important to do. 
 
And that was the one selling point that you used in trying to 
convince the people of Saskatchewan that it was a good 
investment. And you said, we will invest this money from the 
Heritage Fund at that time; at that time, you said, from the 
Heritage Fund. You said it’s from the Heritage Fund. In fact, Mr. 
Chairman, it was not from the Heritage Fund; it was from two 
banks loans which added to a total of 162 million — 
$162,370,000. 
 
Mr. Yew: —Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I and my 
colleagues have raised a number of issues, very important, very 
relevant to the people of this province with regards to the 
Weyerhaeuser deal. 
 
I’d like to indicate to the chairman and to the minister that I will be 
introducing an amendment to the Bill before us after I’ve made a 
few remarks regarding the Weyerhaeuser deal. 
 
Just for the record again I want to say to the minister and to 
members of the Assembly and to the people of the province, that 
this Weyerhaeuser corporation, this document tabled in the 
legislature, shows that under the terms of the agreements 
Weyerhaeuser corporation is paying nothing down — not a penny, 
not a red cent — towards the purchase of Saskatchewan’s $240 
million asset referred to as PAPCO, the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company. 
 
And again, the Weyerhaeuser corporation will be able to deduct 
any losses it suffers at the Prince Albert pulp-mill in the years 
prior to the construction of a new paper-mill addition from the 
final purchase price. As well, Weyerhaeuser corporation has 30 
years to pay the $240 million purchase price but will not have to 
pay principal or interest during that time unless its return on 
investment is in the 12 to 13 per cent range. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a level neither the forest industry nor the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation has ever achieved in the past 10 years. 
 
Further, Mr. Minister, even at the end of the 30-year repayment 
period, Weyerhaeuser corporation would be able to avoid paying 
any of the $240 million by simply issuing an unique form of 
shares to Saskatchewan taxpayers which appear to be all but 
worthless. 
 
Any sale of a public asset like PAPCO — provincial asset — must 
be on the best possible terms for Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. 
Minister. This deal appears to me, and to us on this side of the 
House and the people of this province, to be little more than 
another of the Devine — the PC government’s give-away to 
another multinational corporation. 
 

We have raised issued about jobs, about training. We have raised 
issues about major environmental impact, that this major 
give-away may have implications regarding our northern frontier. 
But, Mr. Minister, we have not received any relevant information. 
We have not had any major public inquiries. We have not had any 
major public meetings to discuss the details, the terms of 
reference, the clause by clause implications of this major 
give-away introduced and agreed to by the PC government of this 
province with the multinational corporation from Tacoma, 
Washington. Therefore, Mr. Acting Chairman, I would like to 
move an amendment to the motion before us — pardon me, for the 
Bill 56. I would move that: 
 

Notwithstanding any agreement or arrangement with respect 
to the sale of assets of Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation in exchange for a 
$248,000,000 debenture from Weyerhaeuser, under no 
circumstances shall the Province of Saskatchewan assume 
responsibility for the construction or maintenance of roads in 
any area covered by a forest management licence granted to 
Weyerhaeuser. 

 
That is the amendment, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Acting Deputy 
Chairman. I so move that motion. 
 
(1630) 
 
For the record, I want to say to the people of this province, and 
particularly to the people of the North, that we have to this point in 
time received no information — even the media has picked that 
up. I’ve got in big bold headlines here in front of me, dated the 
26th of June: “Freedom of information unlikely in this session.” 
That’s headlines coming from that side of the House because your 
people, the PC government of the day, of this province, will not 
provide any detailed information pertaining to any project, any 
proposal, any policy that you guys have introduced in this House. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I so move the motion that I read a moment ago. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, this is the third instalment 
in the attempts by the opposition to negotiate this very major deal 
for Saskatchewan in this forum, the legislature, and as they said in 
government, and as I say now, a deal like this cannot be 
negotiated, nor can any of the aspects of the deal be negotiated 
here in the legislature. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, once again, I will say that the final 
agreements, as it relates to road agreement, as it relates to the 
forest management agreements, as it relates to all aspects which 
relate to this very good deal for the people of Saskatchewan, will 
be made public after closing. 
 
It’s obviously, Mr. Chairman, another example of the New 
Democratic Party opposition doing some political posturing and 
some grandstanding, and all I can say, what I would do, Mr. 
Chairman, is urge all members of the committee to vote no to this 
amendment and reject the political posturing of the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2445 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: — If, indeed, as the minister said, this agreement 
will be nothing but sweetness and light, I do not understand why 
you wouldn’t accept this amendment. This amendment states in 
the clearest possible terms: 
 

. . . under no circumstances shall the Province of 
Saskatchewan assume responsibility for the construction or 
maintenance of roads in any area covered by a forest 
management licence granted to Weyerhaeuser. 

 
What is wrong with that, if that in fact is going to be the deal? 
 
What you want, Mr. Minister, is a carte blanche, and you say trust 
us. All I can say is that the government which has saddled this 
province with a $2 billion deficit, a government which has saddled 
this province with massive give-aways to the oil industry, he’s 
hardly in a position to say trust me. That was a mistake the public 
made in 1982 — they trusted you. As the polls show, they’re in no 
mood to do it again, Mr. Minister. And as your vacillation with an 
election shows, you know that the public don’t trust you again. So 
for you to say, trust me, is a variance with public sentiment. 
 
If, Mr. Minister, you are going to . . . If, Mr. Minister, there isn’t 
going to be any cost to the province for these roads, then accept 
this. If not, Mr. Minister . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well the 
minister may be too dumb to realize what’s going on out there. I 
say, Mr. Minister, that there’s a good deal of public concern out 
there, and if you’re so insensitive you don’t know that, then you’re 
going to find out when you call an election. 
 
If, Mr. Minister . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well I don’t know 
how the member from Esterhazy would know. He’s been on his 
feet so much and made such a contribution to this session — just a 
tower of strength to the government. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, if indeed it isn’t going to cost the province 
anything, then accept this amendment. If not, we’ll take it that this, 
as well as everything else, is up for sale when you sign that final 
agreement. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Tchorzewski Lusney 
Engel Shillington 
Lingenfelter Yew 
Koskie  
 

Nays — 27 
 
Birkbeck Duncan 
McLeod Pickering 
Berntson Hardy 
Lane Hepworth 
 
Mr. Chairman: Order, please. Order, please. The  

member from Regina Centre has not stopped talking while this 
vote is being taken. I would ask him to please be quiet. 
 
Embury Johnson 
Klein Young 
Currie Hopfner 
Martens Rybchuk 
Maxwell Meagher 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) Muller 
Morin Baker 
Muirhead Petersen 
McLaren Swenson 
Parker  
 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you just 
voted down a perfect amendment that would have been very 
reasonable. I think, in this case — one that would be at least 
providing to the people of Saskatchewan some assurance that you 
wouldn’t be spending their money in the forest area, in the area 
which you are giving to Weyerhaeuser, rather than putting it into 
highways where it belongs. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Minister of Highways wouldn’t answer the 
question; you didn’t in the past. Would you answer now: if you 
have such a good deal with Weyerhaeuser and a good deal for the 
people of Saskatchewan, whether you are going to be covering the 
costs of the maintenance and construction of the roads in the 
forests, or if Weyerhaeuser is going to be responsible for the 
maintenance and construction of the roads in that forest? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as I have said before, I 
believe, to that member but maybe to one of his colleagues, there 
will be a roads agreement with Weyerhaeuser. There is at present 
a roads agreement with Weyerhaeuser. There is at present a roads 
agreement with Prince Albert Pulp Company. There is at present a 
roads agreement. Roads agreements are a normal process which 
must be entered into between the Crown who owns the forested 
land and the company which receives a licence to harvest in a 
certain area. That is a normal process and will take place in this 
case. The roads agreement, as is the case with quite a number of 
the other clauses, continues to be under negotiation. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, at present PAPCO looks after 
the maintenance of those roads. Why would you be considering 
any other type of agreement? Why not, if you’re going to give all 
of that forest to Weyerhaeuser, why wouldn’t you say that they 
would also have to be responsible for the maintenance of those 
roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have not said that it was other than that. I 
have not said one way or the other what the roads agreement will 
contain. What I have said is that there is a roads agreement 
presently with PAPCO. 
 
In my own . . . Near my own community of Meadow Lake, in fact, 
there’s a major road which is known in that area as the mill road, 
which was built by Prince Albert Pulp Company. That road was 
built by the Prince Albert Pulp  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2446 
 
 

Company originally, and it is now in the provincial highway 
system. That was a part of an agreement, a long-standing 
agreement, and that’s the way it’s done. 
 
And, quite frankly, that road is very well received by the people of 
the area. Many people use it. People from the home area of the 
member from Cumberland use that road on a daily basis, because 
it’s much straighter, cuts off a good number of miles from Canoe 
Lake area into Meadow Lake, much under what was once the case 
when they carried on the old road on No. 4 Highway. 
 
So those roads . . . And there is a road agreement presently with 
PAPCO; there will be a roads agreement with Weyerhaeuser, and 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . No. The member from Shaunavon 
wants to interject and say, we agreed there will be. He doesn’t 
agree at all. He’s one of the members of the House who was 
suggesting in the House that there will be tolls on the roads, and 
there will be toll bridges, and all of these incredible statements — 
incredible statements coming from these masters of the scare 
tactic. 
 
I can assure the House, as the Minister of Highways did 
previously, there’ll be no tolls on the bridges, there’ll be no tolls 
on the roads, and there will be access for the normal pursuits of the 
people in the traditional pursuits across northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, you keep talking about the 
agreement that PAPCO had previously, and we’re well aware of 
the agreement PAPCO had and what they did with some of the 
roads and who looked after them. 
 
What I was asking you, Mr. Minister, was a very simple question. 
You keep talking about freedom of information in this House, and 
you keep trying to tell the people, as you did in ’82, that this 
government, when you got elected, that you were going to provide 
all the information the public wanted. Your books were going to 
be open to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, where are those open books today? Why don’t 
you tell the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers, whose money 
you are giving away and going to be spending in that forest area, 
whether they are going to be responsible for the maintenance of 
those roads or whether in your agreement you are going to be 
saying to Weyerhaeuser that they will be responsible for those 
roads — pure and simple. It’s a yes or a no. Who’s going to be 
responsible for them, Weyerhaeuser or the government? Just tell 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have told the member that that is a 
portion that’s still under negotiation, will continue to be under 
negotiation for several weeks, and the agreement will be made 
available — the total agreement including the roads agreement 
will be made available to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
The member would even have the gall, the unmitigated gall, to 
talk about freedom of information, information going to the public 
— a member of the New Democratic Party who, when in 
government, gave no information to the public, none; and the 
information that they did give was misleading information. 
 

We’ve seen that this afternoon, when they suggest that . . . they 
said that there was $162 million spent in late 1980 to purchase the 
assets, the 70 per cent of the assets of the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company. They said it came form the Heritage Fund. They said it 
was not borrowed; that member from Regina Centre clearly stated 
that — clearly stated that. And the fact is, they borrowed the 
money, Mr. Chairman. And the member, his seat-mate there, will 
say, he’ll talk about freedom of information. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, as you know and as all members of this 
committee know, this government stands head and shoulders 
above that group over there when it comes to releasing 
information to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, talk about misleading the 
House — you are really one to talk about some of the information 
that we’ve been receiving from that end, or from that side of the 
House, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you continually avoid the question. You just say that 
the people are going to get a good deal; you go off on another 
tangent altogether; you won’t give any information to the people 
of Saskatchewan. And all I asked you was, who is going to be 
responsible for those roads? And you say that you are going to 
negotiate some type of agreement. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, if you are still negotiating some type of 
agreement, why are you asking the people of Saskatchewan to 
approve that agreement before you even negotiate it? Why don’t 
you negotiate it, come back to this House, tell the people of 
Saskatchewan just what it is you’re going to be doing, and then 
ask them to make a decision? 
 
That’s what you should doing, Mr. Minister, if you want to be fair 
and open with the people of Saskatchewan, but you’re not. Mr. 
Minister, you certainly are not being open with the people of 
Saskatchewan and you are not being honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. That’s what you are not being. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have been always telling the people that you are 
going to be giving them all this information and that you are going 
to be providing in this agreement the best deal for the taxpayers. 
Well, Mr. Minister, we have seen part of the documents; we have 
seen the principle of the documents, and they certainly don’t 
indicate that you are somehow going to be giving the people of 
Saskatchewan the best deal. You are going to be giving a good 
deal all right, but it isn’t for the taxpayers; it’s a good deal for 
Weyerhaeuser of the United States. That’s who the good deal is 
for. 
 
I think it’s about time that you became honest with the people . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — It being 5 o’clock the House is now recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


