


















































June 10, 1986 Hansard  Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 10, 1986 
  
 
 

1837 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dutchak that Bill No. 46 — An Act to 
amend The Court of Appeal Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I made a few brief 
comments the other day in respect to The Court of Appeal 
Amendment Act. I want to indicate that there are two essential 
substantive changes introduced in the amendment: one having to 
do that no appeal lies to a court from the interlocutory decision of 
Her Majesty's Court of Queen's Bench; and the other is also 
requiring leave of the Court of Appeal. 
 
I have had an opportunity to take a look at this and to contact some 
of the members of the bar, and I think that generally speaking that 
there is some agreement. I think it's very important, though, Mr. 
Speaker, that whenever leave is not automatic from one court to 
the next that we have to be very conscious of why we are 
eliminating that basic right, whether it's to convenience an 
inadequately staffed Court of Appeal, or whether we are in fact 
increasing and protecting the rights of the individual citizens. And 
I think that whenever we're taking a look at modifying the right of 
appeal automatically, we have to be very careful that we guard, 
protect the rights of the citizens. 
 
I want to know from the minister . . . In his introductory remarks 
basically said nothing in so far as his contact with the judicial 
body in Saskatchewan. He did not in fact give any statistics as to 
whether there was an abuse of the process which necessitated that 
leave be granted by the Court of Appeal, nor did he in fact indicate 
what particular problem he was attempting to overcome. I would 
only say that his introduction in the second reading left a lot to be 
desired. And so I took it upon myself to contact the legal fraternity 
and I think that, Mr. Speaker, I will have some detailed questions 
dealing with a couple of the provisions here when we deal with it 
in committee of the whole. 
 
I only say that it is incumbent upon us to make sure that if we are 
depriving a basic right of appeal that we know that we are making 
it better for the general rights and privileges of the citizens, rather 
than correcting a situation where we may have in fact a Court of 
Appeal which cannot handle the volume of work and accordingly 
we start eliminating rather than increase the number of justices on 
the Court of Appeal. It has been said that in certainly the northern 
half of the province, having a resident member of the Court of 
Appeal in the city of Saskatoon for the northern half certainly 
would facilitate dealing with any chamber application of the Court 
of Appeal. But I will deal with these matters in some detail with 
the minister in committee of the whole and I can only say that I 
hope that he will be able to indicate the  

information that we request as to what input he has had in respect 
to it. So we'll be supporting it in second reading on principle. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill NO. 53 — An Act to amend The Forest Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the forest companies in 
this province, members of the Saskatchewan Council of 
Independent Forest Industries, and many small operators have 
expressed some discomfort with the present forest Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I agree with the concerns expressed by the forest 
companies and small operators. This government is currently 
renegotiating forest management licence agreements with the 
major forest companies in Saskatchewan. 
 
Two of the key objectives of these negotiations are: (1) to provide 
forest companies with a secure fibre base and security of tenure 
within the limitation of the resource base; and (2) to conduct 
relations with the forest industry in general on a more 
business-like basis through contractual arrangements that specify 
the terms and conditions of operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proposing an amendment to The Forest Act to 
assist in meeting these two objectives. This government is 
committed to developing a strong and healthy forest industry in 
this province, an industry that will trust the government and enjoy 
security of tenure. 
 
I now move second reading of Bill No. 53, An Act to amend The 
Forest Act. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find it 
quite interesting that the Minister of Energy gets up here and 
talking about how strong and healthy the forest industry is going 
to be in the province of Saskatchewan, and especially because of 
the amendments that they're bringing in; especially when you take 
a look at the fact that they've sold pretty well everything that we 
have in Saskatchewan regarding the forest industry. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of concerns that we see in 
this Bill, and we have our officials looking it over. It looks like 
this Bill is going to remove the rights of municipalities to regulate 
timber companies in this province. They will be out there just 
operating and free-wheeling in our forest industry and we most 
certainly want to take a look into this further. And for those 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Labour 

  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1838 
 
 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 20 
 
Item 1 ( continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I understood you to say 
yesterday that the gentleman to your right has been appointed 
deputy. Was the appointment made by order in council or by 
contract of service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — It was an order in council — September 
18th, 1985. And it was a very good order in council. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I hope this is not the resumption of the silly 
season that started last night. 
 
Mr. Minister, with respect to the video display terminals. Mr. 
Minister said last night that the video display terminals . . . There 
was no evidence that radiation from the screen caused any health 
problems. I think that's perhaps accurate. There are some 
disturbing statistics which don't constitute evidence. That is, there 
seems to be a far larger volume of complaints from people who 
use them than from the general public. But the available evidence 
does seem to suggest it's ergonomics and not radiation. 
 
Mr. Minister, most — indeed, I think all — of the 
recommendations in that report relate to ergonomics. And I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if it's the government's intention to act on 
those recommendations. None of them, I think, relate to any . . . 
None of them, I believe, bear any relation to radiation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — If we're going to take up where we left off 
last night, and you suggest that things are rather silly, I agree with 
you. Because in all the time I've been the member for Melville no 
NDP has ever called me a jackass, and I have to come to the 
legislature to be called that by an NDP. And so I would say that 
my constituents, no matter what their political strife, expect some 
common sense in this Chamber. 
 
With respect to the video display terminals, we are getting 
feedback from the employees, the union groups, from 
management and employers, and so far the response to the report 
has been quite positive. Once we have allowed a sufficient time 
for feedback as to the reaction, then we will develop a policy as to 
exactly how much action we should take on the report. Up to now 
the response is positive, and we haven't made a final decision on 
how far we should go or how far we have to go. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, over what period of time do 
you see this happening? I ask this question with a note of concern 
in my voice. Other matters which admittedly were commenced by 
your predecessor have dragged on for very long periods of time 
before any action is taken. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Minister, when do you see this process being 
brought to a conclusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well actually there have been a lot of 
changes made in Labour recently and a lot of progress has been 
made. I think you've forgotten that we brought in the occupational 
health and safety regulations, which  

had been in preparation for quite some time. 
 
And you will recall that shortly after my appointment as minister, I 
spoke in Saskatoon, and I'm sure you have all the information. 
Miss Hunt and many other people were there and heard me speak. 
And if your people aren't reporting back to you, I am sure that if 
you check with them they'll give you the information. But I 
promised them that I would have them ready within six weeks, 
and they were passed within four. So we've been making a lot of 
progress and cleaning up some backlog. 
 
Building accessibility has moved along, and we are now writing 
the regulations, and we're also consulting with people and we're 
getting the reaction. The response on the building accessibility 
regulations has been so overwhelming that it's taken a few extra 
months to try to process this and put it all together into some 
sensible regulations. 
 
(1915) 
 
With respect to your question on the video display terminals, I 
would expect in about three months we should have it all together 
and be ready to move on it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — One of the things that would be useful, Mr. 
Minister, is a publication, is a pamphlet in fact, that the 
department, I think, might put out to be made available to 
employers, and employees. Part of the problem is that people 
simply don't . . . Neither employees nor employers understand the 
technology, understand the potential ergonomical problems, I 
guess the word is. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if it might not be 
an idea to put out a pamphlet which might be made available to 
potential users, which would explain to them many of the simple 
precautions that should be taken when using these machines, such 
as getting up and leaving the machine once an hour and so on. It 
doesn't require a rest break once an hour; it just requires some 
minimal degree of organization of the operator's work-load. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Minister, if this might not be one case; if you 
might not redirect some of the advertising dollars that you're using 
to pat yourself on the back; if you might not direct some of them 
to this area and put out some information which I think would be 
genuinely useful to the employers and the employees who use 
them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don't know where you get the idea that 
I'm using advertising to pay myself on the back. You'll notice, if 
you go into the elevators, we haven't changed the signs. The 
former minister's name is still on the signs. I'm not exactly a 
publicity-monger, except when the media comes to my office, 
marching with 70 or 80 people trying to take my picture and 
getting my comment on things. But other than that, I'm not exactly 
a publicity-monger, and sometimes you're surprised where you 
find your face. 
 
Now we are printing reports on the occupational health and safety, 
and we're printing about 40,000 of them. I would hope that you 
wouldn't criticize that as too may, because we have more 
employers than that in the province. But we thought we'd take a 
conservative sum of  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1839 
 

40,000 of the occupational health and safety brochures so that this 
information will be public. 
 
On the video display terminals, it's a bit premature because we're 
still receiving input from the various groups as to the reaction of 
the report and what they think we should do with it. I could dash 
out and do something, but then of course nobody would be 
satisfied. This way we'll give everybody a chance to give us their 
opinion, and then I'll decide what should be done, because I don't 
think we'll have total agreement. 
 
As for other advertising, I don't really know what you're talking 
about. maybe you've seen advertising I haven't seen or you've been 
looking at old advertising from five years ago. But I'm working 
right now on some safety pamphlets on gas, propane. I don't know 
what kind of political advertising you suggest that might be. I 
would think that if people are not blown up, that would be good 
politics, but it certainly isn't party politics. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me how many 
claims the Workers' Compensation board received from law 
offices in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well this is not the Workers' 
Compensation Board estimates here. We'll try and get you the 
information and report. I don't think it's very many. Law offices 
are very safe places to work. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It's my assumption . . . Do you want to deal 
with Workers' Compensation Board under a separate estimate? All 
right, if you'd rather do that. No, I'm told . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Workers' Compensation board is part 
of the Department of Labour estimates for the purposes of this 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I wonder, now that we've got the 
minister partially informed at least as to what his department 
includes, I wonder if the minister might try and answer the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I can't argue with the chairman, but the 
Department of Labour and the Workers' Compensation Board are 
entirely separate, and I don't have the Workers' Compensation 
Board people here. We will undertake to send you the information. 
 
As you know, having run a law office, the rates are very low, so 
that means that the claim level is very low. I think it's something 
like . . . The last I recall when I was still actively in practice of law, 
I think it was 15 cents per hundred or something like that. It was 
rather insignificant. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I would be surprised to hear that there were 
any claims by law offices in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
suspect there isn't any. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to thank you for your courtesy in sending me 
a merit award. I received a merit award presented to myself and 
my colleagues on maintaining a safe workplace during the 
preceding three years. I deeply appreciate the honour. In fact, we 
had a small celebration when we got this. It just meant so much to 
us. 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, what these things cost to send out and 
whether or not you might have been more selective. I suppose it 
might be one thing to send them to a mining company if they 
achieved a three-year safety record, but I really wonder about 
sending them to professional offices. My guess is you haven't had 
any claims in three years from professional offices. They just don't 
arise. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, how much this gambit, clearly 
designed to enhance the reputation of the government before an 
election, I wonder what, Mr. Minister, this cost you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I think you've only told us half of the 
story. You've probably got a refund cheque with that document. 
And you're not sure. Well don't tell us just half of the story, but it 
seems to me that the postage was already paid on your refund 
cheque. Next time we'll just keep your refund cheque if you're not 
happy. And it seems to me that . . . I'm only guessing, but I expect 
it cost about maybe half a cent to print that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
And your colleague there suggests it cost more. I know that the 
NDP printing company charges more, but I'm sure that out in the 
free market that about half a cent is probably all it cost. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it was accompanied by a letter 
which did include a merit rebate award. I just wondered what the 
purpose in sending that certificate was. The letter informed me 
how proud you were of my office and how much it meant that 
someone with my sense of responsibility and my ability to 
administer and manage an office is carrying on business in the 
province. And I recognize that's sincere and I appreciate those 
deeply-felt comments. But I really wonder, Mr. Minister, if you 
needed to send me a certificate as well. I really wonder what that 
contributed to these sentiments which I know were deeply felt by 
yourself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I advise the hon. member that I sincerely 
meant that. You do run a very good law office. It's very safe; it's 
very efficient; and it's something you're good at. And I think you 
should really stick with it and stay there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I may well do that — I may 
well do that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder how many of these certificates you sent 
out. Would you undertake to give me the cost of the certificates, 
the merit award 1986 program. You may not have it. If you do I'll 
take it; if not, would you undertake to give it to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don't have the information, but I'll try to 
track it down for you. 
 
It seems to me that when people do something good you should 
recognize it and encourage them to keep up the good work. And 
when people have a safe record in the workplace . . . And I know 
that you consider safety insignificant at your law office, but safety 
is a major problem. We have between 25 and 46 people in an  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1840 
 
 

average year killed on the job. And I might say that law offices are 
not that safe; there's been a few lawyers shot at. So you should 
keep that in mind. But safety is an important factor, and it seems to 
me that it is not a waste of the taxpayers' money to recognize a 
good safety record. And you still have not admitted that you 
received a refund cheque . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I did. I said that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Oh, you now acknowledge that you 
received a refund cheque. It seems to me that that is an incentive. 
An incentive, I know, is something that's hard for your party to 
comprehend, but that is an incentive. You get a refund; you make 
a little extra profit, it's an incentive to run an even safer workplace 
next year and make a little extra profit. I know this is dirty 
language I'm talking — profit — to the NDP, but people do 
appreciate profit in this province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in mines and in the 
smoke-stack industries, safety is a serious problem. I tell you, it's a 
fairly minor problem in a law office. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could just undertake to give me the 
cost of those things, and I will then go on to the next question. But 
I didn't hear you, Mr. Minister — in the midst of your strong 
compliments — I didn't catch your undertaking to give me the cost 
of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We'll track down the cost and we'll let you 
know. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, before getting into the 
estimates in detail, I want to draw to your attention what I think is 
a decline in this department that didn't begin with your ministry, to 
be sure, but which has gone on over the four years. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have with me the 1983 Estimates which is the first 
set of estimates presented by your government, after the first year 
in office, I guess I should say. At that point in time, by my 
calculation, excluding the women's division which has now been 
transferred out of the department, there were 280 employees on a 
comparable basis. You had 280 employees. Now you have 225. I 
think the decline in the size of the department matches the decline 
in the prestige of the department and, as I want to get on to later 
on, matches the decline in the living standards of working people 
in this province. One follows the other because I think one has 
been a cause of the other. 
 
Mr. Minister, I notice this year again there are seven subvotes. In 
five of them there's a decrease in staff. That's happened virtually 
every year that these estimates have come before the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I know, Mr. Minister, that you will rise and give us the standard 
Conservative rhetoric that you're doing more with less. The fact is 
you're not, Mr. Minister. This department is no longer seen as 
being the spokesperson on behalf of working people, the 
department that protects the rights of working people. It has 
become, I think, at best a joke; at worst a real tragedy. 
 

I'm going to deal with that comment in more detail, but I say, Mr. 
Minister, that the decline in the size of your department represents 
a decline in the stature of this department and certainly, Mr. 
Minister, a decline in its effectiveness in terms of its ability to look 
out for working people. And I would appreciate your comment on 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well there are many, many ways of 
running a department and we believe, and particularly I believe, in 
running it efficiently. 
 
First of all, with respect to the 65 people, I believe it is — or is it 
55 people? — that you refer to, that we have fewer, I'm not 
apologizing for that at all. First of all, 12 of those went to the 
Advanced Education department; some of them with Women's 
Secretariat; 22 went on the apprenticeship program that went to 
Advanced Education; and three went to the Public Service 
Commission, for a total of 37, which leaves me — what is it? — 
about 18 fewer people. 
 
(1930) 
 
And quite honestly, the Labour department as I knew it in the old 
days and as we found it in 1982 was the front for your NDP hacks. 
They used to hide them and train them and groom them for 
politics. And when we cleaned those 18 out, we found that we 
didn't have to replace them with Conservatives. So that we were 
able to save the taxpayers an average of 24,000 times 18, which is 
quite a lot of money per year. 
 
With respect to my department as it now is, you can see we've 
kept the professional people. We've thrown the politicians out. The 
only politician in my department is myself. And we've kept the 
professional people who get the job done, and they're not busy 
campaigning. So that has narrowed it down. And you've noticed 
that I only have two executive assistants and we've been able to 
operate very efficiently. 
 
With respect to your comment that my department is a joke, you 
may have noticed that the militancy is down somewhat in the last 
few months. The labour scene has been a lot quieter over the last 
three and a half, four years, and therefore we haven't needed as 
many people in the department. The people I've got work very 
hard; done an excellent job. And as a matter of fact they have 
made my job as minister quite easy because they are so 
professional and so good at what they do. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I'd ask you, Mr. Minister, not to drag your 
officials into this discussion. We agree upon their competence. 
What I'm talking about is not the competence of the officials, but 
the leadership of the government. That, Mr. Minister, begins and 
ends in your office. 
 
Mr. Minister, there may be an apparent calm. I think it is largely 
because most working people anticipate a change in government 
and they're biding their time until that happens. And I really think, 
Mr. Minister, if there is an apparent calm it is an expectation that 
the long night is about to end and that a new day is going to dawn, 
whenever the Premier has the courage to call an election. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1841 
 

But this department, I tell you, has regained none of its prestige 
and none of its credibility with working people. they don't exactly 
refer to individual subvotes that have gone down. They don't refer 
to fewer people in administration, or one less in policy and 
planning, or one less in labour relations, or one fewer person in 
labour standards. But they do, when I am talking to them, talk 
about the inability of the department to meet their needs and to 
provide the kind of services which working people have come to 
expect of this department, through governments of very different 
political views. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want specifically to go to the question of pension 
benefits. There was a time when this department had the 
wherewithal to provide some leadership with respect to pensions. 
Admittedly there might have been more that could have been 
done, but the department was certainly seen as the department 
which was in charge of developing policy and administering 
police with respect to pensions. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me ask you a question. Do you anticipate that the 
home-makers' pension legislation, if I can call it that . . . It not yet 
having been introduced, I don't have a name for it and if I am 
misdescribing its function and scope, I'd be happy to be corrected. 
I am as irritated as anyone that this legislation has not been 
introduced. But the pension legislation which has been referred to 
in the throne speech, do you see this, do you anticipate that this 
legislation will be administered by this department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well first of all, you're still concerned 
about the operations of my department. And I can tell you that my 
department is getting along just fine without Larry Brown. He 
doesn't work there any more. And we're getting along just fine 
without Mr. Mitchell, your candidate in Saskatoon. He doesn't 
work for me any more. And we're getting along just fine with Mr. 
Ching. He doesn't work for us any more. And as for your 
provincial campaign manager, Mr. Garry Simons, we're getting 
along just fine without him. We haven't found any need to replace 
them. And there's a whole long list. Well Craig Dotson doesn't 
work for us any more either. And I understand he works for the 
Leader of the Opposition. And I'm getting along fine without him. 
 
So without these political hacks in my department, we've been 
able to save the taxpayers some money. And while the contact that 
these political operatives used to have with your socialist friends is 
not there any more . . . I mean it's there but they're now doing it on 
their own payroll. There may be some complaints from your 
socialist friends who have their own hidden agenda, but the 
average working person, the little man and the little woman out 
there, and the young people who are out there working, making a 
living, paying taxes, are getting along just fine without these 
people in my department. 
 
With respect to the home-makers' pension, it is a truly amazing 
piece of legislation. You will be totally against it when you see it, 
as is your habit. I mean, I don't yet know what you people are for 
over there. You won't tell us what you're for; you tell us what 
you're against. You're against everything that any government ever 
does. However, you will not tell us what you are for. So if you 
could ever come  

up and give us your hidden agenda as to what you would really do 
if you were ever government again, or if you ever came up with 
constructive criticism, then the duties of the opposition and the 
way this legislature should function would be greatly enhanced 
and you would be doing a service to the people who elected you. 
But however to be against everything . . . And I see you're getting 
ready to be against this home-makers' pension plan. 
 
I can tell you this: first of all, you will be very, very disappointed 
because it is going to be an innovative piece of legislation that will 
be copied all across Canada. It will receive national attention, and 
even your left-wing friends will find it hard to criticize. 
 
But you will be against it. You will be against it because it will be 
popular among the people, the poorer people who have never had 
pensions. So you will be against it. But in the end the question of 
who will administrate it has not been decided. I would be pleased 
to have my department operate it. However, it may be the 
Department of Finance. And it has not been decided which 
department will operate that, nor has it been decided where the 
office will be. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I take it then, Mr. Minister, that your 
department is not involved in the drawing up of the legislation, 
and is not responsible for the drawing up of the legislation, and 
you are not the minister who is responsible for taking to cabinet 
recommendations with respect to the form and shape of this 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I'm the chairman of the legislative 
review committee so nothing gets to this Assembly without me 
seeing it and having some input in it. And in particular, I have had 
an awful lot of input in that legislation with a view to protecting 
workers and non-workers because a lot of people covered by this 
plan are going to be non-workers — people who work but don't 
receive any pay, so maybe a "non-worker" is a discredit to them. 
But a lot of these people are people who don't watch the clock, 
who don't get overtime, who don't get fringe benefits, and now 
finally they're going to get a pension plan. 
 
My department has followed it very close. I've officials in this 
room who have been at every meeting and I have been at 80 per 
cent of all the meetings with respect to that particular Act. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm concerned about the 
legislation. I ask the question for two reasons. One, to express a 
note of concern. This legislation will now, I think, inevitably be 
brought into the legislature in the dying days of the session when 
there is no . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, there is not lots of 
time. If the member from Saskatoon Sutherland believes there's 
lots of time, then he's not much of an observer of legislative 
processes, because we are in the last weeks at least of the session, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
We have not seen the legislation; the public have not seen it; no 
one has had a chance to react to it; and no one has had a chance to 
study it. And I suspect, Mr. Minister, that that is part of the game 
plan — is that legislation will  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1842 
 
 

be brought in late in the session, after an opportunity for proper 
scrutiny escapes us. 
 
I'm concerned, Mr. Minister, because I think something this 
important should have come in early in the session and the public 
ought to have had a full opportunity to look into it. We, as their 
representatives, ought to have had a full opportunity to get their 
views, and there ought to have been a good discussion. The 
discussion, Mr. Minister, is inevitably going to be truncated now, 
just by the sheer legislative process. It's either intentional, or it's 
incompetence in the sense that you can't make up your mind what 
you're going to do. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask the questions with respect to the pension 
legislation for a secondary reason, and that is that the . . . it is not 
clear to us which minister we should be asking questions about. If 
it is the Finance minister, if someone would tell us that, in 
unequivocal terms, then I will save the questions until the Finance 
minister's estimates comes before the House. But we have in the 
past left these questions only to find out that the minister who 
would have been responsible for answering them has already 
sneaked his estimates through. So that's why I ask you if you're the 
minister responsible for the legislation. If you are, I have some 
questions. If you don't, I have made such comments as I'm going 
to, and I'll leave the balance for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well with respect to the pension 
legislation, it will be forthcoming very soon, and you won't have 
to study it very long to say you're opposed to it, so I wouldn't be 
concerned about the amount of time it takes you to say no, but you 
will be given enough time. And quite honestly the concept is so 
novel and it takes a great deal of thought and skill. I really doubt if 
the average socialist could ever understand it or would want to 
understand it. So just try your best, and say no like you always do. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, if the minister is going to 
snarl like a dog every time I ask a question, then these estimates 
serve no purpose at all. There is no way in the world, Mr. 
Minister, I can make you ask questions. If you want to respond to 
every question with sarcasm or some inane allegation about the 
New Democratic Party, then we might as well get on to the next 
department. I have no desire to waste my time with you, if this is 
the way you want to carry on your estimates. If you're prepared to 
answer questions honestly and reasonably put, we will carry on. If 
not, this is a pointless process. No one can make you answer 
questions. If you want to behave like a mad dog, then these 
estimates make no sense at all. 
 
So I'd ask you, Mr. Minister, if you're prepared to answer the 
questions, then start doing that, but if you view this as a 
gladiatorial contest, then these estimates are absolutely pointless, 
and we go on to somebody who has some sense. I ask you again, 
Mr. Minister: are you the minister responsible for the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The Minister of Finance is responsible for 
the legislation. If you will ask a simple question, I'll give you a 
simple answer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I don't know why you didn't tell  

us that 10 minutes ago instead of making all those inane 
comments . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, you didn't. No, you 
didn't. You said it may be the Minister of Finance, or it may be us. 
We don't know. That is what he said. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note with respect to the technical safety services, I 
assume this includes furnace inspection. If I'm wrong, I wait to be 
corrected, but I assume that's the section. It's gone down by five 
people. I ask you, Mr. Minister, what positions were deleted in this 
section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I would answer your question: three of 
those five positions were communications people who were going 
around school to schools doing the "Sparky the Dog" program, 
which has been replaced with a "Learn to Burn" program which is 
cheaper and we find will hit more students. We can cover them all 
in a year. 
 
One curriculum development officer for the fire college was 
deleted because we didn't proceed with a fire college at this time. 
One building inspector was deleted because the building standards 
have not gone up and rolling yet, so we didn't need an inspector to 
inspect nothing. And we added one new boiler inspector. So that 
gives you the explanation of the reductions there. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I don't wish to rehash the tragedy of 
Polly Redhot. I do ask you, Mr. Minister, if your inspections are 
current. They certainly weren't at that time. They were running a 
very long period of time behind. The member from Yorkton was 
never candid enough to admit that, but they were running many 
months behind time. And inevitably the tragedy which we might 
have expected occurred — someone was killed. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, then, if your inspections are now current? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well we've been trying to take care of the 
backlog; it's been there for quite a long time. We've been giving it 
priorities, and we've had an extra person paying particular 
attention to gas defects. But I'm doing everything possible to try 
and cure this backlog, and it is something that concerns me and it 
has concerned me for a long time. 
 
And I'm holding a tag here, which I'm sure you will question 
whether this is accurate or not, but I can tell you that I personally 
took this tag off my furnace in my house. And this tag is this gas 
safety unit inspection tag, dated January 1, 1977 — and I moved 
into my house on January 1, 1974. So three years after I moved in 
my house, my furnace was inspected. 
 
And I don't recall who was the minister in 1977 or in 1974, but it 
seems to me it was probably Gordon Snyder for all of that period 
of time. And it seems to me that you had a blatant disregard for 
my safety and that of my family, and I've been trying to cure this 
backlog ever since I've been appointed the minister. So that three 
years after I moved into my new house my furnace was inspected. 
It  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1843 
 

seems to me, three years later it's rather a waste of time coming 
around and inspecting it. And as somebody suggested, it says, 
"Not to be removed." But I think, for the sake of political truth, I 
will break that small law and bring it into the Assembly; I'll take it 
home, put it back on my furnace — so that I have history there to 
show how bad your gas inspections have been for 10 years. And 
we're trying to get the backlog cleared up. 
 
I'm working on a new proposal, which I will try to introduce in the 
next few months, that will greatly increase the number of 
inspections and reduce the requirements for as many inspections 
as we do have now. And so we're making progress. It's not as fast 
as I'd like to see it, but we are making progress. And we have put 
safety as the number one criteria in inspections rather than just 
going through the mundane inspections of inspecting something 
three years after the fact. Now we are going out and doing the 
most important things first. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if everything possible 
— you said you're doing everything possible — I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if that includes hiring more staff. The controversy was so 
fierce last year, the minister will recall, because your department 
had a number of vacant positions, were running a very long period 
of time behind. and one of the officials of your department said 
rather candidly that they were unable to keep up with the matter 
due to the number of vacancies in the department. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if all those positions are filled, and if you 
have considered — when you say you're doing everything possible 
— if you've considered hiring enough people to get those things 
done, and get them done in a timely fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We filled all the positions, and the people 
that are filling the positions are working better than ever. In the old 
days when you were the government, the efficiency of your 
inspectors left a lot to be desired. And we had instances, when you 
were the government, where we found inspectors going out of 
town and then spending an afternoon at the mall, and we had 
instances where inspectors were spending an afternoon at the golf 
course. And we've now weaned them from those kind of habits 
that you allowed them to develop, and the efficiency of their 
inspections is up considerably. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I suspect, Mr. Minister, that then, as now, 
most of the inspectors were conscientious people who attempted 
to do their job. I suspect that you comments about the people who 
were there in the '70s are inaccurate, and I suspect that they're 
unfair. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would give me the number of 
positions you have as inspectors now so that we might compare it 
with the number that was in existence, the number of positions 
that were there when this tragedy occurred. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — In this budget year we have on the job, to 
my knowledge: boiler and pressure vessel inspectors, 13; electrical 
and elevator inspectors, 25.5; gas safety unit, 20; fire 
commissioner's inspectors, 21. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the  

Workers' Compensation Board, I wonder if you would tell us 
when you expect the report of Judge Muir and company. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I'm hopeful that his report will come in in 
August. As you know, you can't hurry a judge. They work on their 
own time and decide when they've decided. So I would expect that 
he's going to try and have it ready in August. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, members of the commission 
were quoted by the media as saying they were appalled by some of 
the stories they heard. I've also been appalled by the operation of 
the Workers' Compensation Board. This is not a subject, this is not 
a matter about which there exists any fine legal proof or any 
mathematical proof. These are observations which I have made as 
an elected member, that the volume of complaints with respect to 
the Workers' Compensation Board has increased very 
dramatically. The complaints — many of them I simply have no 
answer for. The disposition of some of these claims defies any 
rational explanation, and the approach defies a rational 
explanation. 
 
This is by and large not the government's money. In a very real 
sense it's not the employers' money. The money belongs to the 
workers. It's their money. It's what is paid into the fund by their 
employers in return for an age-old compromise by which they 
gave up their right to sue their employer. To then turn the 
thumbscrews on them when they come to make some legitimate 
complaints is really, I think, Mr. Minister, very harsh. 
 
A number of things that seem to be happening, which I have not 
witnessed before . . . I had nowhere near the volume of complaints 
I've got recently. One of the things that seems to be happening is 
that people are deemed to be fit to go back to work even although 
there is patently no conceivable way in this economy they can ever 
find employment. Their workers' compensation is then reduced 
and they are left with a real shortage of money to live on. 
 
I want to read for you an advertisement that was clipped out of 
The Regina Shopper on March 4th, 1986. It's a classified ad. It 
says: 
 

Job Wanted. SASK INJURED WORK ASSOCIATION require 
employment for a male, age early 50s. Education: public school 
graduate. Previous experience: landscaping . . . Physical 
restrictions. Specialists' Reports. Cannot bend forward or 
sideways. Sitting and walking time limited . . . Requirement 
minimum: 8 hours per day at $6.70 per hour, as established by 
the Workers Compensation Board. 

 
It's a true case. I actually got the name of the individual and talked 
to him. That individual — and that accurately describes him — 
has actually been deemed to be fit to work for eight hours a day, 
five days a week, at 6.70 an hour; and his compensation was 
reduced accordingly, even though there is patently no way in the 
wide, wide world such a man would ever find a job in this 
economy. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1844 
 
 

And there are other difficulties with the Workers' Compensation 
Board, but the most recent and the most severe seems to be this 
system of deeming. I have put these questions previously to your 
predecessor, the member from Yorkton, and all I got was a song 
and dance that nothing had changed, that everything was as it was. 
I admit that the regulations, the law, hasn't changed, but the 
administration most certainly has. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if the time is not overdue to adopt a more 
compassionate approach towards injured workmen. These are not 
the sort of people that are constantly castigated by the member 
from Regina Rosemont as being lazy or unwilling to work. These 
are patiently not people who are attempting to avoid work. They're 
people who can't work. By reports of medical officers, they're 
people who can't work. 
 
Equally patently, someone who's a male; age, early 50; education, 
public school graduate; previous experience, landscaping; who has 
the following physical restrictions — cannot bend forward or 
sideways; sitting and walking time limited — patently he's going 
to have the greatest difficulty finding a job. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Minister, if the time isn't long overdue for a 
more compassionate approach towards workers' compensation. 
Most of them aren't asking for charity. What they're asking for is 
what is theirs — fair access to the money in the workers' 
compensation, and fair and reasonable allowance when they can't 
find employment due to injuries at the workplace. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — In my short term as the minister 
responsible for the Workers' Compensation Board, I have found 
several problems. First of all, as a minister responsible, I don't 
have the complete power to correct any mistakes that they might 
make over there even if I thought they ever did do that. And so 
therefore I can only suggest to them that they review some of these 
matters and they give them a serious look. 
 
As you know, the Workers' Compensation Board as established is 
very autonomous. It's not a Crown corporation and it's not really 
part of my department. And so they don't, strictly speaking, come 
under these estimates; and they don't come under Crown 
corporations. 
 
So first of all you have to keep in mind that the Workers' 
Compensation Board is not a charity; it's a compensation board. 
And just because an individual declares that the individual is ill, 
sick, injured, not capable of working, that does not mean that that 
individual is necessarily perceiving the facts as they are. And 
you'd also know that the Workers' Compensation Board hires 
competent doctors to asses people, and they are doctors who do 
nothing but assess people and report to the board. 
 
The board members by and large are business orientated, labour 
orientated, and compassionate people. You have a religious 
doctor; you have an ex-union man — or maybe he still is, but he 
serves on the board — and you have group of very competent 
people. And they have to make judgement calls. And as you know 
as a lawyer that you were never . . . or at least I was not always 
satisfied  

with the decision of a judge. And they have appeal procedures, but 
the legislation does not allow for an appeal beyond the full board. 
 
So with respect to the question of deemed earnings, I agree with 
you; it has been a problem area. You have to have some degree of 
deemed earnings. I understand that this area will be reconsidered. 
There are isolated cases where an individual is, in your opinion, 
which I would think is not quite as professional as that of the 
board, not treated fairly. But you will have to admit that you have 
written me on several occasions and we've always looked into the 
matter and given you an answer. 
 
(2000) 
 
And on some occasions — and I won't mention the names of the 
people you've written for — but on some occasions I've indicated 
to you that I would ask the board to reconsider this. And they 
have. So that's the most I can do. It's a judgement call. 
 
There are some strange situations and I don't really want to stand 
up here and be sexist against men, but all of the problem cases I've 
had on workers' compensation have been men. In my term, I have 
not yet had a female complain that she's not being fairly treated by 
workers' compensation. And it seems to be a class of men that 
seem to have more problems than others. They seem to be 
recurring. I get them back from 20 years where these cases, the 
same people keep recurring. I had an example of a man the other 
day who they've assessed at 2 per cent, and he considers himself 
totally unfit to work. And they've assessed him at 2 per cent 
disability. So it's not a charity; we can't give people what they 
want. They can't necessarily retire on workers' compensation. It's 
for compensation if you're injured and can't work. 
 
The deemed earnings is a bit of a problem. I agree with you. And 
on occasion I've said to the board, would you please reconsider 
this because you have to be realistic on what a person can actually 
earn. But with workers' compensation it's quite lucrative if you get 
injured on a high-paying job that you may have held down for a 
very short period of time. 
 
And so if you were making . . . And there's instances of people 
making $17 an hour for a month or two on a job. They get injured 
and then they'd kind of like to get paid $17 an hour for the rest of 
their life; whereas they are healthy and the board says to them, 
listen, if you can't make $17 an hour, you've got to go out and 
work for 8 or 9 or whatever is realistic. Just because you got 
injured on a high-paying job, that doesn't mean you've got a life 
retirement. 
 
So I agree that there are some problems because when ever you 
have individuals you will have some disagreements. Now the 
human beings at the board make human decisions, and on 
occasion they may be wrong, but they have to make the decisions, 
not you and I. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I thank you for your 
admission that there are problems with the process of deemed 
employment. There certainly are problems. This, I think, 
eloquently illustrates the kind of problem  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1845 
 

that exists. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don't think it's all that strange, Mr. Minister, that 
there are more men than women who are injured. The vast 
majority of people who are injured come from people who do 
manual labour. It's inherently more dangerous and you're much, 
much more likely to drop something on your foot or put your back 
out, or something of that sort. But they're not all men. 
 
Mr. Minister, you and I have been corresponding for some time 
with respect to a nurse, who is patently a female, who got injured 
trying to lift a heavy patient. so the majority of them are men, but 
that's simply the kind of work that men do. Women are less likely 
to be doing heavy manual work, which is inherently more 
dangerous, both because of the nature of the workplace and 
because of the possibility of injuring muscles. 
 
Mr. Minister, if as I suspect, this government is roasted by Judge 
Muir for the whole program of deemed employment, Mr. 
Minister, are you prepared to reassess those people who have been 
denied their workers' compensation because of the deemed 
employment system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We have a problem in that the Act doesn't 
allow you to go back five, 10 years, or whatever, and pay people 
retroactively. We will try to do equity within the Act and look at 
those particular cases. 
 
There is a problem with workers' compensation and that, if 
anything, the employers are saying to us we are too generous; and 
the board, from what I can see, if they do err, err on the side of the 
worker, and take the employer's money and pay it out to the 
worker and give that worker the benefit of the doubt. Now I don't 
know what you want to do. Do you want to give the workers the 
benefit of the doubt or do you just want to give them all outright 
charity at the expense of the employers and the other employees 
that are out there? 
 
So you have to have some reasonable limits. We have, from what I 
can ascertain, one of the best workers' compensation boards in 
Canada. It's very efficient; it's very well funded; our rates are very 
low, and they pay reasonable amounts. The Workers' 
Compensation Board is contributing about 12 — it's either 12 or 
$14 million to the new Wascana Hospital for rehabilitation. 
 
But you have to admit that there are some workers who do not 
wish to be rehabilitated. They wish to be rehabilitated just enough 
so that they can play golf and fish, but not quite enough so that 
they have to go back to their job. And there are a minority of those 
people; there are a few. And as a politician, you will get those kind 
of calls, and I will get those kind of calls, and the board gets those 
kind of problems. And their duty is to sort the truly injured people 
from the fakes. And you cannot tell me that every person that puts 
in a claim is entitled to be paid. 
 
And I know of instances in my own city where there were a few 
people who were faking. And of course we're not going to use 
names today, but . . . And you know of a few instances; you hear 
of them. Everyone in this Assembly, the public out there, knows 
of people who have faked on  

workers' compensation. It's a very difficult job to pick out the 
fakes from the real people who have an injury that is hard to 
ascertain what it is or to what extent it's bothering them. 
 
So because there are one or two bad apples, a few innocent people 
sometimes suffer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in this case I think the one or 
two bad apples are sitting around the cabinet table and the 
innocent are suffering. That's quite right. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don't intend to pursue this subject. Suffice it to say 
it's an old movie. When the government of Ross Thatcher was in 
office, members of the opposition were just besieged with calls 
from injured workmen. It somehow or another seems to be in the 
handbook of right-wing governments that you should show no 
compassion to injured workmen. They are somehow or other 
thought to be an undeserving lot and you deal with them as 
harshly as you possibly can. 
 
I remember, Mr. Minister, that being the case when the Thatcher 
government was in office. Within months of the time that the 
government changed, those cases were all dealt with in a summary 
fashion and we went on. This is just an old movie. This is just an 
old movie, Mr. Minister. 
 
I sense, although I cannot provide, analytically or otherwise, that 
you're also dealing in a harsher and less compassionate way with 
claims in general; that there are just more people having more 
difficulty getting their injuries recognized. I can't provide that but I 
believe that to be the case, simply from the observations I've made 
as an elected member. 
 
The minister will no doubt benefit from the wise and learned 
comments of the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go on. I may say that I don't intend this 
evening to deal with unemployment. Following your estimates, 
we'll be having the department of economic development and 
employment. I may not have the name quite right; I don't think I 
do. But we'll have the department of employment and economic 
development, I guess, coming next. So we intend to deal with the 
unemployment issue in that department. I don't intend to raise 
them in your department. 
 
I do, however, want to raise the question of the average wage. I 
said that the decline in the size of your department mirrored not 
only a decline in its credibility and prestige; it also mirrors a 
decline in the economic stature and status of working people. 
 
Mr. Minister, I clipped two articles out of the Leader-Post. One 
followed so closely behind the other one that I'm surprised it didn't 
occur to the provincial editor to note the incongruity in the two 
articles. They were a scant few weeks apart. 
 
The first one said — this is on the front page of "Market Place," 
section C — "Executive pay likely to rise." The first paragraph 
says: 
 
  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1846 
 
 

Salary increases for executive are expected to be in the range of 
five to six per cent next year, with continuing emphasis on 
bonuses for good performance . . . 

 
That was followed a scant few weeks later by the following article, 
also on the front page of the "Market Place" section of the 
Leader-Post, which says: "Average wage drops in province." 
"Wage patterns in Saskatchewan . . . " I'm reading the first 
paragraph: 
 

Wage patterns in Saskatchewan are not moving in line with the 
rest of the country. Farm wages are moving ahead, while 
industrial wages are falling. 

 
Mr. Minister, this is a direct result of (a) a vastly higher number of 
unemployed, so that those who have jobs have a very poor 
bargaining position; and the changes to The Trade Union Act. 
Both of those, Mr. Minister, are reflected in large measure in this 
peculiarity: that while the wages across Canada have moved 
ahead, the average wage in Saskatchewan has dropped. It's most 
unusual for the average industrial wage to drop. It's happened here 
because of intentional policies of your government with respect to 
The Trade Union Act, and it has happened because of the neglect 
of your province to deal with the unemployment issue. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if this doesn't give you some smattering of 
an idea as to why it is that your predecessor was booed at two 
labour conventions and given a stony, silent treatment at the last 
one he attended. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if these articles don't give 
you some idea of why trade unionists are so unhappy with your 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I'm afraid that I've discerned and 
learned something very truly disgusting — that the people who 
shout the loudest about a social conscience have none at all. And 
that's your party and some of the union leaders that I've had to deal 
with. 
 
And I can tell you, I had some of them in my office one day. And 
they said, we can't get by on our increase; we can't survive on a 3 
per cent increase this year. And I said to those people — the 
people that you suggest have a social conscience, and you and 
your party suggest you have a social conscience — I said to them: 
have you no social conscience? Where do you expect the 
government and the people in general to give you more than a 3 
per cent raise? Do you expect me to go to the 2,000 farmers in my 
constituency who have had a 10 per cent cut in income this year, 
and a 10 per cent cut last year? Do you expect me to go into their 
pockets and give more money to you out of their pockets when 
their pockets are already empty? 
 
And if you at all believe in a social conscience, then you have to 
believe that everyone in our society has to share proportionately. 
And when our farmers and certain elements of our society are 
losing income due to the problems in international trade, you have 
the audacity to come here and say that you have a social 
conscience and I should go and take from the poor and give to the 
reasonably affluent in comparison. 
 
Now I know there are people in this city and in Saskatoon  

and every other city who are having to struggle, but I can tell you 
they are not struggling as much as the people in rural 
Saskatchewan. And that problem is, you only see to the city limits 
of Regina and you think that somebody with a two-income family 
and a motor home in their back yard is poor. 
 
You come into my constituency and look what the real people live 
like, and they don't think they're poor. They're wealthy in spirit; 
that's where it counts. But don't tell me . . . and your party every 
come to me and say that, we have a social conscience, when you 
want me to go to the people who have no money, take more from 
them and give it to the powerful, some of the people that you're 
talking about. 
 
I realize you can't get rich in Regina or Saskatoon on $401 a week. 
But that is more than virtually every farmer in my constituency 
makes. And that is a lot more than their wives make because they 
don't have any jobs at all. And it's a lot more than most of the 
women in Melville make, and in every other little town in my 
constituency and in half of this province. I don't know where you 
say it's gone down because the average increase in this province 
was 3 per cent, except for farmers and except for people in small 
business. 
 
So if you have a social conscience at all, you will share the wealth 
of this province. For example, I don't know how you think that this 
province is suffering so much when the statistics show that the 
people of Saskatchewan buy more big cars per capita than 
anywhere in Canada and more expensive trucks per capita than 
anywhere in Canada. What makes you think that this province is 
so badly off? 
 
You know, some of you people have a strange idea of what 
poverty is. I knocked on doors in Regina North East, and I 
remember knocking on doors and the people say, oh no, I'm poor. 
And I looked in the man's backyard and there was a motor home. I 
knocked on the next door and they said, oh no, I'm poor. I looked 
in his backyard — a $10,000 boat. You know what I got at the 
third house? The same answer, and there was a $12,000 trailer in 
the backyard. You are going around telling people who are 
affluent they are poor; and as a result, they have a poor attitude. 
You should be telling people that they have to learn to get by on 
what there is in this society and they have to be prepared to share. 
And I think your constituents should be prepared to share with 
mine. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Now that, I may say, is an altogether too 
typical example of Tory logic and ethics. Logic, because there isn't 
any; there is no way in the world that the impoverishment of 
working people in Saskatchewan will in any way benefit the 
farmers. It's also an example of Tory ethics, because it's in part 
intentional. You play the farmer against the worker, and you 
attempt to do the opposite. It's the old Tory trick of divide and 
conquer. You think if you can get the farmers angry enough at 
working people, and you can portray the NDP as being in the hip 
pocket of the trade unionists, then you'll get the votes of the 
farmers. Well, you may be right, Mr. Minister, but that's not the 
way I see it when I'm out in rural  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1847 
 

Saskatchewan, and I'm out in rural Saskatchewan quite a bit. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Minister, the member from Quill Lakes 
makes a good point; I am shouting to try to make myself heard 
over the braying of members opposite. Mr. Minister, I want you to 
note, if you'd been listening, that farm income, farm wages are 
moving ahead while industrial wages are falling. It's not farmers 
who are unfairly paying their workers less. It's people who are 
taking advantage of the unfair trade union legislation which your 
government brought in. 
 
And I want to say something about all the socialists you talk about 
in the trade union movement. I recall being interviewed by a 
journalist, a student from the university. She had just come from 
the Premier's office and she had asked the Premier . . . This was a 
month or so after your predecessor refused to speak to the 
federation of labour. She asked him why. His response, so the 
journalism student told me, was because, ah, those trade unionists, 
they're all a bunch of socialists anyway. Well, all I could say is 
that you made them that way, because there wasn't a whole lot of 
those people packing union cards who voted NDP in 1982. 
 
One of the reasons the member from Elphinstone and I are here is 
because we represent low-income ridings. By and large, if they're 
socialists, and that's my impression, it's because you made them 
into socialists with the vicious anti-union and anti-working 
legislation which were brought in. In some ways, I suppose, if we 
were as crass and as cynical as you people are, we'd thank you. 
But we're not. I am angry about what you have done to working 
people. Every time I meet with trade unionists and workers in this 
province, I get angrier. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me read you a couple of more paragraphs. Ah 
well, you're now in good hands. You're now getting the sterling 
advice from the member from Saskatoon Fairview who almost has 
enough nerve to let his name stand for nomination again. Mr. 
Minister, let me read you a couple of more paragraphs. Mr. 
Minister, it goes on: 
 

The drop is not an aberration. If one uses an average of the last 
three months available for 1985 compared with the same three 
months in '84, the same deadline occurs. Hourly, evenings were 
down in Saskatchewan, but up in each of the other provinces. 

 
Another wage trend charted by Statistics Canada — when you say 
you wonder where I'm getting it from, that's easy. It's taken 
straight from Statistics Canada. Another wage trend charted by 
Statistics Canada points in a similar direction: 
 

In December, union wage index for the construction trades was 
up in all provinces with the exception of Saskatchewan. 

 
That, Mr. Minister, is a direct result of the amendments to The 
Trade Union Act, and the ability of the construction industry to 
break the trades as they've done. They'd be the first to admit that if 
you set out with Bill 104 to break the  

trade union movement you've come very close to succeeding in 
many, and you have succeeded in some. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you don't think you can see in here 
some evidence of why you and your predecessor in office are 
treated so rudely by trade unionists. They're angry; they are very 
angry at you and your government for what you've done to them 
— for the cruel, unethical approach you have taken; for your 
despicable trading off. And you're playing farmers against 
workers. They're angry about that, Mr. Minister. And I wonder if 
you don't think that that anger has something to do with the stark 
facts set out in these two articles which appeared a few weeks 
apart in the Leader-Post. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the first thing I had to learn when I 
came to this Assembly was to never accept any figures or statistics 
that your party ever gave to us. And you haven't had the courtesy 
to send me a copy of that article so I can't even read it for myself. 
So I'm not sure what's in it. 
 
But your figures don't seem to match with the figures I have. And 
in particular, I really don't know why you seem to be hung up on 
some sort of a class struggle, other than possibly Marx told you 
that's how it had to be. That's what you seem to have on your mind 
— some sort of a class struggle. 
 
What I was talking about was sharing the wealth of this province, 
and that the powerful groups whether they be union or whether 
they be management, or whether they be churches, or whatever 
they might be, that the powerful groups have to have their power 
restricted for those people who have no power at all. And you 
seem to only be prepared to act on behalf of your favourite and 
special powerful groups. 
 
And that was the problem I had when I was a member of your 
party. I felt that a political party should try to represent all of the 
people and try to balance the interests and the power struggles of 
the people. But you seem to represent one group or two groups or 
three groups in society and the rest of society should work and 
share with your three or four powerful groups that you would like 
to have fed. 
 
And it is quite clear where your allegiances lie. Name me one 
other political party that receives union dues into their political 
party — one other than yours. None. And that makes it quite clear 
where your allegiances stand with respect to your party. The more 
union dues that are paid the more comes into your party. And so it 
makes it quite clear where you stand. 
 
But I can tell you that the union leaders in this province are of two 
kinds. About half of them are very professional union leaders; I 
have great respect for them and they do an excellent job for their 
members. The other half in Saskatchewan is the most politicized 
union situation in all of Canada. The other half are NDP 
politicians on the union payroll. So not only do you take the union 
dues but you park your hacks, and the ones that we fire you park 
them on the union payroll and support them on the backs of the 
workers. And that . . . 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1848 
 
 

An Hon. Member: — Name one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — You say name one. You give me the 
salary of Nadine Hunt; you give me the salary of Larry Brown; 
and tell me if they're working for the industrial wage. Did anyone 
ever publish the salary of the union leaders? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, indeed, that's public information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well then you send it over to me. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I must say that I think this is all 
a concocted effort to make the former minister of Labour look as if 
he knew what he was doing. That's the only conceivable 
explanation for this display that we have seen over the last few 
minutes. 
 
The suggestion that Larry Brown is somehow or other an NDP 
operative really is . . . I have every respect for Larry Brown. I 
think he's often not given credit by his critics for doing the job he 
is, which is looking out for the interests of people who are 
working for the public service. But to say that he has been an NDP 
operative — if he's listening, I am sure he will not know whether 
to laugh or cry at that sort of an allegation. 
 
You have to remember with respect to both of those individuals 
that they were elected at a duly-called convention and a 
hard-fought convention of delegates from the entire trade union 
movement in Saskatchewan — now with very, very few 
exceptions. 
 
Mr. Minister, you forget that these tyrannical labour bosses — you 
can never figure out whether they're tyrants with respect to their 
workers or our lackeys. I don't understand them being both, but 
that you paint them as both. You seem to forget that in all cases 
they are either democratically elected, as is the case with Nadine 
Hunt, or they are hired by people who are democratically elected. 
 
The minister keeps asking me what their wages are. I don't know, 
but I'll tell you it's public information. If you want to pick up the 
phone, they'll tell you with respect to Nadine Hunt. Larry Brown, 
I'm not sure — he's a staff member; he's not elected. But Nadine 
Hunt's salary I'm quire sure is public information. 
 
Mr. Minister, they're neither tyrants with respect to their workers 
nor are they lackeys of ours. If we share some common goals, it is 
because we speak for the same people with the same compassion. 
And we have, Mr. Minister, the same goals; that is, to assist 
working people in a better life. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say that . . . you talk about the class struggle. 
Well you ought to recognize it when you stand here as you did 10 
minutes ago and suggest that somehow or other the high wages of 
workers in the urban areas is responsible or the plight of the 
farmers. If that's not promoting a class struggle in classical terms 
in Saskatchewan, then I don't know what is. 
 
As I say, I was annoyed when this started, but I can only  

assume, Mr. Minister, that this is a very, very clever attempt to 
redeem the former minister and make him look good, because I 
think that's all you've accomplished in the last hour and a half. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I think we've accomplished a lot. At 
least this evening you haven't called me a jackass, so you're 
learning some manners this evening. 
 
Let me tell you about the boiler makers. As a Minister of Labour, I 
don't just look after the leaders; I have to look after the workers. 
The rank and file of the boiler makers have come to me, and keep 
coming to me. And the leaders don't know who they are because I 
won't tell them. And I've had to phone the president of the boiler 
makers in Kansas City, and I may even have to fly down there; 
and when I do, I will tell you how much it cost. 
 
And the reason I'm going to go is for the boiler makers of 
Saskatchewan, because they are one construction union that does 
not have their own local, and their local is run out of Winnipeg. 
And so they come to me and complain that the local out of 
Winnipeg is sending Manitoba workers into Saskatchewan and 
our Saskatchewan boiler makers are sitting idle. 
 
And, for example, at the P.A. pulp-mill right now where there's a 
refitting going on; on some shifts there are seven Manitoba boiler 
makers and four Saskatchewan boiler makers. And the 
unemployed boiler makers come to me, but their union leaders in 
Kansas City and at Edmonton will not give them a Saskatchewan 
local. 
 
So now I as Minister of Labour have got to try and help them. And 
they're rather leery because they have a closed shop. And if they 
petition for a local again as they did last time and sign their names 
with a closed shop, they may never work in Saskatchewan again. 
So they've had to come for the protection of the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
So you tell me about the fairness and the democracy that is 
practised. Unions are very essential and in many cases they protect 
the workers, but they also build their own empires. And what I'm 
telling you about the boiler makers is that if you think the workers 
think this minister is a joke, then you've got another thought 
coming because the workers, the rank and file, are coming to me 
for help. So I have to protect the workers, and not only the 
unionized ones, but the non-unionized workers. 
 
So don't you ever say that the Department of Labour is not 
protecting workers and has no compassion, because I will fly to 
Kansas City if necessary to help those Saskatchewan boiler 
makers get their own union in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the minister whether you are aware 
of the fact that a group of workers — some 290 members of the 
energy chemical union, local 922 — of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Lanigan mine, that they have in fact been on strike 
since March 10, 1986. I wonder whether you're aware of it, 
whether you're aware of the particular issues of concern to the 
workers at the Lanigan potash mine. 
 
I know that as minister you used your office to intervene in the 
MacDonalds lock-out, as I understand it, and I was  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1849 
 

wondering whether you intend to, in fact, take any steps as 
Minister of Labour to investigate, or have you appraised yourself 
of the major concerns that have been raised by the workers at the 
potash mine in Lanigan? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I am aware of the situation and there's a 
meeting scheduled with my conciliator for this Thursday to try to 
see what my department can do to help settle this strike. And with 
respect to personal intervention, that has not been asked for and I 
would not personally intervene until I thought the parties were 
ready to get serious and get down to business, and then I would do 
what I could as I did in the MacDonalds Consolidated strike. I'm 
pleased that you are congratulating me for the effort we did on the 
MacDonalds Consolidated strike and the amount of success we 
had in resolving the situation. 
 
As you recall, there the collective bargaining process did not work 
very well and they asked this minister to intervene. And contrary 
to what your colleagues say, I had enough compassion to try to 
help resolve that, and it is resolved and those people are back on 
their jobs. 
 
And with respect to the people in your constituency, I will do 
everything possible to help them get back to work, and on 
Thursday the process will continue. And I will be the minister for 
quite a long time, and however long it takes I will help them get 
their jobs sorted out. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well there's a fair amount of presumptions about 
you being around for a long time, because you can only make that 
presumption if you don't call an election. Because if you call an 
election, you're gone my friend, and we're rid of you, and the 
workers of Saskatchewan then will have a Labour minister that 
has some compassion and understanding, not an outcast that has 
lost all his principles and has run and joined another party and 
tried to inherit a philosophy which is obviously alien to you. 
 
But let's get a little bit more specific. Let's take the situation in 
Lanigan where it's over 15 months going on — it will probably be 
16 months by now — that they haven't been able to come to any 
settlement. And I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, you may not be 
concerned, but I'll tell you that the workers are concerned and the 
families are concerned. And there are issues which you should 
have been concerned with as a Minister of Labour. 
 
I want to go through some of the grievances that are raised by the 
workers in Lanigan. Some of the problems at Lanigan mine which 
led to the basic strike, Mr. Chairman, are first of all management's 
disregard for health and safety of workers and a disregard for 
occupational health and safety loss. This is a contention by the 
members of the union, and I'm telling you, Mr. Minister, that it 
can in fact be documented. 
 
There are cases where contractors were grinding and filing 
fibreglass pipe openly; glass fibres were being inhaled and 
ingested by workers. Company representatives did not respond to 
union complaints and workers continued to be exposed to this 
hazard. 
 
I want to say further that another safety — very much a  

concern to the workers — is that the underground cage which 
transports the workers to and from the work site was operated by 
an untrained, unqualified hoist operator and that management 
insisted that the workers jeopardize their safety by using the 
elevator anyway. 
 
These are some of the health and safety concerns of 290 workers 
in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Lanigan division. And 
this minister sits by idly and says, oh yes, I'll help. But these are 
the concerns here and they haven't been addressed. 
 
I'll tell you the workers of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of this 
anti-worker attitude of this party opposite. I want to say further 
that from the membership of 290 people there are hundreds of 
grievances that have been submitted. There are 150 grievances still 
unsettled, some up to four years old, and they haven't in fact been 
addressed by management. 
 
Arbitrated grievances resolved in favour of the union have not 
been implemented by the company. Grievances dealing with the 
seniority and lay-off had been lodged due to employees with five 
years seniority being laid off and employees with only two years 
seniority being retained. These are some of the concerns that have 
precipitated the strike. And for almost 15, 16 months now these 
people have not been able to get a contract. 
 
But I'll tell you, if you go over to . . . the workers at International 
Minerals at Esterhazy . . . The employees at Lanigan, what they 
have been asking for, the employees have not had a wage increase 
for two years. Workers at International Minerals at Esterhazy 
received a 5 per cent wage increase effective from February 1, '85 
to January 31, '87. And what the workers in Lanigan are asking for 
is fairness. And they're asking for some fairness, and there is no 
fairness with this government. 
 
We have seen that there has been also wage roll-backs. PCS wants 
to change the mutually agreed to interpretation of an article in the 
contract dealing with the pay for statutory holidays. Management 
reinterpretation would cost approximately 150 workers a loss of 
pay, from 60 to $1,000. And these are some of the areas of major 
concern that the workers who are mining in Lanigan are concerned 
with. 
 
The unions jobs, some of them have been taken over by 
management. Four employees in the control room were laid off, 
then recalled to different jobs. I can only say that the PCS wants to 
cut wages for 15 per cent of the workers of up to $5,000 a year. 
They've laid off some employees, called them back to work at a 
lower rate of pay, but doing the same job in an attempt to achieve 
a wage cut. The union has had to file additional grievances to stop 
this practice. 
 
These are the areas of concern, Mr. Minister, that you have stood 
by and watched and given no assistance. Mr. Minister, I ask you: 
are you concerned with the families here, 290 employees who 
haven't had a contract for over two years, who have sought a 
reasonable basis, some safety? 
 
And I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, you sit by idly and  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1850 
 
 

congratulate yourself in respect to the MacDonald lock-out. I'll tell 
you that labour has received the worse possible deal under this 
government. There's no doubt about it. And I'll tell you, the 
workers of Saskatchewan will show you people. I'll tell you, the 
workers of Saskatchewan deserve some of your support because 
many of them supported you last time. But there won't be a one of 
you that will be re-elected with the support of labour. 
 
I'll tell you, these are Saskatchewan men and women that are 
working in these mines — that's who they are — wanting to make 
a decent living for themselves and their families. And what we 
have here is a government standing by, idly by, precipitating, 
destroying families and destroying towns. That's what you're 
doing. And with hypocrisy say, oh yes, we're going to look into it 
Thursday. I'd like to ask you what you have been doing? I mean 
you're responsible as a member of the government. What have you 
been doing for the last two years, you and your predecessor? Why 
now on Thursday? Why can't you address those health and safety 
issues which are of major concerns? 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that there was a wildcat strike, and 
because of the safety issues, many of the workers wouldn't go 
down the mine. And they were reprimanded for it; they lost some 
wages. And it was over safety issues. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, these are Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan men and women, men and women and children of 
people who built this province. And one of the things that is 
necessary is fairness. That's what Saskatchewan people want — a 
government who are fair. Not a government who can give millions 
of dollars to oil companies and take the very livelihood from 
people because they want to precipitate a strike in the hope of 
getting elected. That's the policy of the members opposite — 
attempting to precipitate a strike. 
 
You know what? They made a mockery out of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan; they turned it over to Canpotex to 
sell and dispose of all of the potash. And the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan hasn't been doing very well. Something like a 
$67 million deficit during the past year. 
 
And what I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, you are the Minister of 
Labour. These are people, Saskatchewan people. They're workers 
and they're entitled to fairness. And I wonder, when in fact are you 
going to take action to be fair to 290 people out in Lanigan. I want 
to tell you that, you know, the public announcement to the board 
of trade in Lanigan, as the Premier of this province said that, oh 
yes, I'll look into it. The minister in charge of the potash 
corporation said, don't worry, we'll look after it; we'll get back and 
we'll get a settlement here. Yes, he sure did. They've continued to 
precipitate it. 
 
And I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, give some fairness. Rise above, 
rise above what is happening here. There's a community in 
Lanigan that wants to survive. There are families that want to feed 
their children and give them the education and opportunities just 
like the rest of us. And I say that there should be nor reason why 
this matter hasn't  

been resolved. There's a precedent, a precedent of a settlement 
over in the International Minerals and Chemical Corporation. And 
they're prepared to accept that. And I'll tell you they are prepared, 
and they haven't, because you want to readjust and turn back and 
deprive and reclassify some of the workers. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, what the people in Lanigan are saying, 
we want a government that's fair. We hope that this Minister of 
Labour, unlike the other one, which throughout his career 
demonstrated a pro-employer attitude — the former minister who 
couldn't even walk into a labour convention in the end; he didn't 
go — they're saying, we'll give you a chance, Mr. Minister. You're 
raised and born here. And what they're asking from you is some 
fairness. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, I'm pleased to hear that on 
Thursday that some action is being taken. But I'd like to ask you: 
are you aware of the nature of the problems which I have outlined 
to you, of major concern to the workers of this potash mine? And 
I'll ask you: how far are you prepared to go to get a settlement? Or 
do you want to continue to precipitate it because there's a surplus 
of potash and you want to give it over to the private sector and run 
down the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan as part of your 
conspiracy to destroy a once proud corporation? 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, in all sincerity, on behalf of 290 
workers, 290 workers and a town, and a town and a board of trade 
that thought they could trust the minister in charge, and they could 
trust the Premier that they would in fact legitimately help resolve 
. . . But for two years now, and for two months, they have been on 
strike. And I'll tell you it's not an easy situation for workers with 
families. 
 
(2045) 
 
We have seen the strife that your government caused in the 
construction industry. We have seen you allow companies to bust 
unions. We have seen the anti-union approach as practised by your 
predecessor. You have an opportunity to give some credibility to 
your government. 
 
So I ask you to take up that challenge, to use your good office and 
your basic fairness, Mr. Minister, to resolve this which will be of a 
benefit to the workers, the families, the business men who depend 
on them using their services or their buying and selling. the whole 
area is dependent upon it. The strike is really the last resort. It's the 
Peter Pocklington approach to management. We don't want to 
inherit, here in Saskatchewan, the Peter Pocklington approach to 
labour. What we want here is what we have built up in the past — 
a tradition of fairness. And so I ask you, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weiman: Mr. Chairman, point of order. I've sat and listened 
now for the last 15 minutes, literally, on a diatribe that in my 
opinion had nothing to do at all with the expenditure of the 
Department of Labour and the budgetary process of the Minister 
of Labour. It's regrettable that there are strikes in a province, in 
any  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1851 
 

province and Saskatchewan. It's regrettable that people suffer 
through strikes, but, however, I find no correlation at all in the 
member from Quill Lakes' diatribe on strikes and Peter 
Pocklington, or the attendance or the non-attendance to a union 
meeting, having nothing at all to do with the budgetary estimates 
before us. And I would refer the chairman to rule 494, under the 
topic . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would refer the chairman, 
before he decides on the ruling, Beauchesne's, rule 494, in terms of 
general administration, and I would ask for a ruling on that matter, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Minister, I would like . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like the member to wait until I rule on 
the point of order. 
 
Upon careful consideration of the member's point of order, I must 
rule that the point of order is not well taken. The member is 
speaking on issues which are within the mandate of the 
Department of Labour, and as such, he may continue. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Obviously the 
member didn't like what he was hearing, so wanted to interrupt the 
proceedings which were totally on point. 
 
And what I was about to conclude, in any event, but maybe I 
should just summarize what I have said since it's in order. So what 
I want to ask the minister, the Minister of Labour, is that what I'm 
asking you for is a new approach, not an approach of your 
predecessor, which was anti-worker, I ask you, and the workers in 
Lanigan and the workers throughout this province ask, for 
fairness. That's all they ask, is for fairness. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, the people of the workers of 
Saskatchewan deserve fairness, because in Saskatchewan since 
1944, when the CCF first became elected, it was under Tommy 
Douglas that established the most progressive labour legislation in 
North America, and I'll tell you that is a tradition, that is the 
tradition that we established here in Saskatchewan. And I'll tell 
you, our party, together with farmers and workers, will re-establish 
fairness in Saskatchewan — be it fairness to the worker, be it 
fairness to the business man, be it fairness to the professional. But 
that, I'll say, Mr. Chairman, is what the people of Saskatchewan 
expect. 
 
And I'll tell you, they got nothing of the course. This has been the 
most unfair government to labour that Saskatchewan has ever had 
— anti-working people. People who are building this economy, 
people who are mining, people who are earning with the sweat of 
their brow have been demeaned by this government. 
 
And so what I am saying, Mr. Minister: you have a unique 
opportunity, a unique opportunity to not be pro-employer, not 
pro-employee, but fair. That's what we're asking. That's what the 
people of Saskatchewan expect. And I ask you to take a look at it, 
to come to an assistance in the resolve of a problem which is a lot 
of stress to the town, to the business community in that area, to the 
workers, and to the families. 
 

A strike is not a very nice situation. You know what's happening 
in the bitter dispute in Alberta — the Pocklington dispute, if I may 
call it that. We don't want that. We don't want that type of labour 
management here in Saskatchewan. And all I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, is to give our commitment, to give the House and the 
people of Saskatchewan a commitment of fairness — fairness to 
the employer, fairness to the employee. Can we get that 
commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I can tell the member that in 15 years as a 
lawyer and four years as a politician, nobody has ever questioned 
my fairness. I don't have to give you a commitment. I was born 
fair; I was educated fair . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The member from Quill Lakes 
has had about 15 minutes to make his point, and the minister is 
attempting to reply. And immediately he starts to holler at the 
minister's reply. I ask him to please be quiet and allow the minister 
to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don't have to give the member a 
commitment to be fair. I am fair, and that's the end of it. There's no 
need for any commitment. That is my personality. 
 
The next point is that the strike at Lanigan is unfortunate, and I 
will do what I can from the point of view of my office. And as I've 
indicated, my capable assistants will be there on Thursday of this 
week to see if they can assist in the settlement of this strike. And 
it's quite clear that we will do everything possible to assist, but I 
implore management and the workers to act in a Christian way 
and try to be reasonable and resolve their differences. And I will 
help them in every way possible. 
 
Now I have to deal briefly with your 15-minute speech on labour 
and what we've done for labour. And I want to remind the member 
opposite that the most important and most essential working 
condition of any labourer or worker is to have a job. A job is the 
first essential working condition. And what we have given to the 
workers of this province is jobs — 35,000 more jobs in the last 
four years. And we believe in building the province for jobs for 
today and jobs for the future. 
 
So when the working people of this province look at our 
government, first of all they have to look at the existence of jobs, 
and that is what we stand for. After we have created jobs as a 
government, then fair and reasonable working conditions are also 
to be considered. But above all, we have given the people of this 
province jobs, and jobs is what they need and jobs is what they 
want. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Labour 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 20 

 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1852 
 
 

Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — This concludes then the estimates for the 
Department of Labour. I will give the Minister of Labour the 
opportunity to make some concluding remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank my 
entire department for the co-operation they have given me in the 
six months that I have been the minister. And I in particular want 
to thank the branch and department heads who are here today, and 
my deputy and assistant deputy who have helped me very much 
with respect to providing the answers here today. And I want to 
thank the opposition for not using up too much time and being 
direct and to the point. I look forward to having this experience 
again next year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well there may be a possibility there won't be 
an election before next year, but that's the only way that this is 
going to be continued next year. 
 
I want to thank the minister and his officials for the courtesy of 
making themselves available in estimates during this year. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Thank you. We will now move to the 
estimates of Tourism and Small Business and take a brief pause 
while the minister brings in his officials. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Tourism and Small Business 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 45 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
questions that I would like to ask the minister. It won't take a lot of 
time tonight. 
 
But I wonder . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, and I want to get 
back to your houseboats, Mr. Member. I want to ask a few 
questions about the houseboat venture in northern Saskatchewan. I 
see that the houseboat venture that was in La Ronge is no longer in 
La Ronge, Mr. Minister, and I wonder if you could just comment 
whether it came on hard times, or what just happened in La 
Ronge, why the move out of the community of La Ronge. I know 
last year when we were going through the estimates the former 
minister indicated that it was a good project and had lots of 
potential. I see now they have moved out of La Ronge, and I 
wonder if you could just comment on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, it's my information that 
the statement the member made is incorrect. The operation is still 
in La Ronge. There are approximately 20 boats. My understanding 
is that they are booked well into August; that the project is going 
very well and is, in fact, very successful. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Apologize. 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Well the member from Duck Lake thinks that 
I should apologize for asking a question such as that. I want to say 
to you, Mr. Chairman, and to the Minister of Tourism and Small 
Business, that the houseboat operation, I'm led to understand, has 
moved out of La Ronge. I have read articles where they were 
moving to Lake Diefenbaker. 
 
The latest article that I have read is that boats will be moved into 
Buffalo Narrows. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if this is a different 
group of houseboats or is it the same ones that are at La Ronge — 
or do we have two separate groups of houseboats operating in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the CWA or the 
Canadian Wilderness Adventures which ran the project in La 
Ronge last year is still there; are still running, as I indicated, some 
20 boats; and are in fact booked well into August. 
 
Some of the investors, people who had boats being operated by 
that group, have made the decision to move those particular boats, 
some of them to Diefenbaker Lake, and that is in fact taking place. 
So now we have two separate, I suppose, entities operating 
houseboats in the province. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate 
if Tourism and Small Business has invested any money in the 
operation that is starting in Buffalo Narrow re the houseboats. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This department? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Tourism and Small Business. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — No, Mr. Chairman, our department is 
not in the habit or the practice of investing money in ventures. We 
operate as an advisory department aiding business, but we don't 
directly invest. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I want to get this very clear, Mr. Minister. 
Tourism and Small Business has no money involved in the 
houseboat venture that is starting up in Buffalo Narrows and 
working from Buffalo Narrows out into the Churchill River 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — No, Mr. Chairman. My understanding 
is that, to date, we have not even received any application or 
requests, nor has the northern revolving fund. So the answer to the 
question is definitely no. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to . . . a couple of questions here, Mr. 
Minister, and it has to do with the press release . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Who was that? Oh that's the former minister. 
 
I want to ask the minister in respect to a newest tourist attraction, 
the Gopherville Tourist Attraction Inc. And it indicates there, Mr. 
Minister, that it will be receiving $100,500 under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan tourist agreement to complete this 
Saskatchewan tourist attraction. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1853 
 

What I ask you is: what is the basic criteria for getting such 
grants? I'll ask that question first and a few others. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, obviously what I'm 
going to give you is not a detailed, detailed outline of the criteria 
under which the program operates. But it is in a general sense I 
think explanatory of what is trying to be carried out. And I'll 
simply give you what I have. 
 
The primary purpose of the agreement, and of course we're talking 
about the Canada-Saskatchewan subsidiary agreement on tourism, 
is to strengthen the competitiveness of Saskatchewan's tourist 
industry; designed to enhance the growth of Saskatchewan's 
tourism industry and maximize the economic impact of travel 
activity; will stimulate participation and investment by the private 
sector. 
 
First-class shared tourism and development agreement between 
Canada and Saskatchewan. The emphasis will be on viable 
projects which expand the normal tourist season, and which 
contribute to the creation of tourism destination areas. In most 
cases you'll have to provide 20 per cent equity to demonstrate 
managerial capability. I think that in a general sense the general 
requirement is that it be something that creates a new attraction, or 
a new event that will in fact enhance the tourism or the tourist 
element in Saskatchewan. And I think that Gopherville is a very 
good example of the type of thing that we're supporting in the 
subagreement. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A couple of other questions. Can you indicate 
whether a feasibility study was carried out in respect to this 
project? Were the respective governments involved in the 
evaluation of the tourist attraction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, there was in fact a 
feasibility study carried out, and the results of that was reviewed in 
large part by the province. Our main role is to provide input into 
the federal people. In this case the federal people did in fact review 
the feasibility study as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And can you indicate whether there are other . . . 
how many other such Canada-Saskatchewan tourist agreement, in 
effect . . . any other projects in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, in terms of the projects, 
or the applications that have come in and been approved under this 
program, to date they're in excess of 14 capital projects that have 
had money accessed through the program. There are a number of 
other areas; marketing enhancement, marketing programs, some 
industry support — a number of things that have fit. 
 
And since this . . . These are the approved ones. We have several 
other . . . I suppose I could use the term many, although I don't 
have an exact number of other capital projects that are now being 
reviewed to see if they do in fact fit the criteria of the program. but 
in excess of 14 have been approved. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A couple other questions. This agreement, is that 
cost-shared by the two governments equally, 50-50? And 
secondly, can you give the approximate  

amount of dollars that had been put in under the agreement by the 
two governments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the program is 
cost-shared on a 50-50 basis. There is $30 million available over 
five years in the program. I think it's important though to note that 
the projects are not all 50-50. In some projects the federal 
government will make the major part of the contribution, if not all, 
and some we will pick up. But the key thing is that the program 
over its life is equally shared and there are $30 million spread over 
five years to be used in this program. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The $30 million over a five-year period, you 
indicate . . . I ask you, where is the money provided in the 
subvotes for the potential amount that the province may have to 
put up for any developments during the course of the coming 
year? I'm just wondering where that would be recorded. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, in the estimates, the 
money that we will be earmarking for this, there's $1 million in the 
Employment Development Agency, in their estimates. The rest of 
it is spread out throughout our budget in the tourist section, 
primarily in the marketing and development sectors. But it doesn't 
appear as a specific item, which I assume is the rationale for the 
question, but it is spread out throughout the tourist section of 
Tourism and Small Business's budget. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask the minister: 
in 1983 the financial records tabled in the Assembly here indicated 
that $212 million came out of tourist appeal in Saskatchewan, 
primarily coming out of the North. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you 
can indicate to me what the revenues were for the ensuing years, 
like 1984-85. I don't believe you'd have any statistics for '86. But 
the most current statistics — if you have that information, I'd 
certainly like to know. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not exactly sure 
where the member's numbers are coming from or precisely what 
they mean. The revenues that flow to the province of 
Saskatchewan from tourism come in many ways, and it's 
estimated that we have a billion dollar industry in the province in 
tourism at this time. Now it's estimated that that is going to 
increase over the rest of this decade to something in the area of a 
$3 billion industry by the end of the decade. 
 
I think the significant factor: there's no question that in tourism at 
this time Saskatchewan is in a deficit position. In other words, our 
people travel outside the province, spend more than tourists who 
come to the province. But in the last year we have reduced that 
deficit by $20 million. We see a substantial increase in the amount 
of tourist dollars that are flowing in relative to what's going out. 
 
So we're still in a deficit position. However, it is improving; we're 
cutting into that deficit. And in terms of returns, we're talking 
about an annual billion dollar industry. And I'm not sure what 
other numbers I could give you that would clarify the situation. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1854 
 
 

Mr. Yew: — In terms of angling licences issued, Mr. Minister, for 
the province — and much of this angling is done in the top half of 
our province — would you have the figures for the number of 
angling licences issued for the last three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — No, Mr. Chairman. I'm sure that would 
be relevant information; however, we don't have it. My colleague, 
the Minister of Parks and recreation, would be the individual who 
administers the angling licences. We see our role as attracting 
people. We work very closely with the outfitters and in our 
advertising programs outside the province to bring people here. 
But the actual selling, administering of angling licence, rests with 
Parks and Renewable. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I was in a meeting, a formal meeting 
with fishermen, when my colleague from Athabasca raised the 
issue of houseboats. I, myself, had some formal meetings with 
people right in La Ronge, various interest groups, and also Stanley 
Mission, Sucker River, Missinipe and surrounding communities. 
Generally the groups comprised of fishermen, trappers, the 
northern outfitters association, northern interest groups, the Metis 
society, and the Indian band. It was noted at that time that a lot of 
the tourist — your government has been promoting tourism — 
and that a lot of revenue is being generated out of the North 
because the North still has a lot of good appeal in terms of its 
natural environment. 
 
Generally when people come into the province, they want to go 
into the remote northern areas where it's isolated and quiet; the 
wilderness is still intact. But the question that confronts the people 
in the North is just how many jobs are being generated locally, 
permanent or otherwise — perhaps more seasonal than permanent 
— but how many of the 1 or $3 billion that you are estimating 
goes towards employment of local residents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, maybe I could ask the 
member to just clarify his question slightly. On the question of 
houseboats, are you asking employment generated by the 
houseboats? I wasn't clear how the houseboats and the meeting fit 
into the question. Are you speaking of tourism in northern 
Saskatchewan in an overall sense? And if you could clarify that, I 
will try to come up with a response. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well let me put it in more precise terms, Mr. 
Minister. Tourism in general, and also in terms of the houseboat 
development in La Ronge — in terms of the houseboats in La 
Ronge, Mr. Minister, there's been quite a number of controversial 
meetings held in that respect. I could go beyond, but the issues that 
generated related more to grey water that was being dumped in the 
lake — Lac La Ronge lake — and other environmental concerns. 
But those don't relate to your department. 
 
But the issues that did somewhat relate to your department per se 
is the jobs generated by the tourist appeal that comes from 
northern Saskatchewan. You're talking now in the billions of 
dollars, and if that is the case, I would think that it would be only 
fair that your department should put some emphasis, some priority 
or  

policy in place so that local northern people can take advantage of 
the billions of dollars that are being made from the North in terms 
of tourism. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I think just a general comment first of 
all on the houseboats. I know that the grey water question was one 
that arose last year. The grey water is now all being captured by 
the houseboats, and I don't think that will be an issue. I think the 
houseboats are an example of advancements that occur from time 
to time. I think that there is clearly room in northern Saskatchewan 
for a project, an attraction such as the houseboats. I don't think it 
interferes that greatly, and it does in fact provide some jobs and 
benefits to northern people and also some indirect things in terms 
of the supplies and so on. 
 
In terms of the specific question on general employment, we 
indicate that there are 32,000 people in Saskatchewan currently 
employed, directly or indirectly, in the tourist industry — 32,000. 
Now we don't have that broken down on north-south. We may, 
however, be able to do some extrapolations and some estimates on 
how many of those 32,000 do in fact live in the two northern 
ridings. We can't do that tonight, but I will commit to take a best 
effort at that and see if we can get those numbers, and we'll 
provide them to you in the very near future. That's the best I can 
do at this time. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'll look forward to getting 
some precise information regarding revenues generated through 
tourism in northern Saskatchewan, and also the related jobs that 
accrue from tourism, and just how many jobs are being 
implemented and emphasized for the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to make a comment, Mr. Minister. You may want to 
respond to it, and you may not. That's fine. In my years as a 
fisherman and a trapper — and my colleague from Athabasca and, 
I'm sure, maybe several other members of this Assembly will 
recall that prior to the development of the North we had 
commercial fishing and domestic fishing, hunting, trapping, and 
the like, food gathering, etc. You know, we were able to sustain a 
living through our natural environment through the North prior to 
major industrial development. but since the major industrial 
development started happening in northern Saskatchewan - the 
mines, the highways, the forestry, the major developments and the 
like — things have slowly diminished to the point where now we 
are confronted with a lack of fishing in the lakes. We have had to 
put emphasis on restocking lakes; we have had to put emphasis in 
silviculture; planting new trees, etc. 
 
But as I can clearly recall, Mr. Minister, we were able to fish 
annually, every year, and the fish population was stabilized; 
people made their living; people were able to supplement 
whatever means of other income they had through commercial 
fishing. And what I'm saying I guess, Mr. Minister, I'm not against 
development in any sort of way, but what I'm saying is that there 
has been an over-abundance of development in some areas 
whereby the commercial fishing industry, for an example, has 
been diminished. 
 
And I would hope that your department, along with the 
Department of Parks and Renewable Resources and the 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1855 
 

government of the day, would put some emphasis in restocking 
the natural environment and the natural habitat with resources that 
generally put food on the tables of many northern families. 
Nowadays it is hard to go out into the lakes, into the trap lines, into 
the hunting grounds, and to try to supplement the measly social 
assistance that many of the families have to rely on, seeing as how 
the government of today has been unable to provide a 
self-sufficient, economic strategy. We need to retain our natural 
resource. 
 
And I would hope, Mr. Minister, that you would be able to talk to 
your colleagues, try to put emphasis in replenishing and restocking 
our lakes, and replenishing the North with its natural wildlife and 
habitat, instead of just taking and taking and taking and never 
putting anything back. There are many fisherman throughout the 
northern areas that do not rely on any means of livelihood as they 
did when I was growing up. 
 
And another point I'd like to raise as well at this point in time. five 
of your ministers came to the North on March 5th to meet with the 
public Pardon? That's right. The member for Regina Wascana was 
there. And they were there to listen to the issues of people in 
northern Saskatchewan. But unfortunately they had to catch their 
planes back to Regina. They didn't have time, or they didn't want 
to allow time to listen to the specific grievances of Northerners. So 
what happened? The meeting was a flop. 
 
But getting back to the issue at hand. There are many people out 
there that rely on domestic fishing options but cannot get a 
domestic fishing licence. One case for an example was George 
Sanderson; he has a family of five; asked for a domestic fishing 
licence but could not get one. 
 
And nowadays I learned now that you need a permit to fish for 
mullets — what we call sucker fish. Those are very good eating 
fish. But all of a sudden your government has imposed so many 
other regulations upon us that we can't — we simply can't derive 
any food from the North as we normally would have prior to your 
major industrial plans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not exactly sure 
what the point the member was making. I think it's safe to admit 
that there have been some significant changes in northern 
Saskatchewan in terms of major economic developments; and I 
would suggest that tourism is one of them. 
 
And I sense that in the first parts of his remarks he was advocating 
a maintenance to the status quo and speaking against economic 
activity in northern Saskatchewan and maintaining the old ways. 
And I think that this government certainly has a sense of the 
tradition of the North and wants to work closely with the people of 
the North to advance it. And I would suggest that our department 
has spent a lot of time in consultation with various northern groups 
in the development of many of the projects that are in place and 
the development of some of the programs. In fact, my deputy 
minister tomorrow will be meeting with the northern advisory 
committee discussing various tours and small-business projects. 
 

So I accept that the member is indicating that there is a need for 
some maintenance of the traditional life-styles in northern 
Saskatchewan. I think at the same time he will admit that 
development and advancement have to take place within that 
context. And if we can work with northern people to make that 
happen, hopefully provide them additional opportunities for 
economic improvement, we certainly want to do that. And I think 
that this department has an opportunity there, both on the tourism 
side and on the small-business side, and we're trying to exercise 
that mandate. 
 
The only other comment I would make: I think this government 
has had a significant presence in northern Saskatchewan in terms 
of ministers who have visited there, probably as much because of 
the fact that all ministers in government now have responsibilities 
in northern Saskatchewan. In the previous administrative structure 
there was a minister who was responsible for northern 
Saskatchewan. Now we have the ministers of all the various 
administrative areas going to northern Saskatchewan, meeting 
with the people. 
 
(2130) 
 
And I suppose we could discuss which is the better way to do 
things. I have sensed in my visits in northern Saskatchewan that 
the people of the North do, in fact, appreciate meeting various 
ministers and getting possibly more in-depth discussion on the 
types of programs that are available to all of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I would simply commit that this department, I'm sure the 
government as a whole, will work as closely with northern people 
to maintain those traditional life-styles and yet develop that part of 
the province in the way that the residents would like to see it. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 10 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, if I might just ask the minister one 
question in respect to tourism marketing. I'm wondering . . . I'm 
under the understanding that the former minister was in the 
process of setting up a provincial association for the promotion of 
tourism. Some work had been done on it. Are my facts indeed 
correct, and can you indicate how far that has progressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Yes, I'd be very pleased to comment on 
that. The association, TISASK, which stands for the Tourism 
Industry Association of Saskatchewan, came into being earlier this 
year. They are headquartered in Saskatoon. Mr. Ray Carlson is the 
newly hired executive director. The first major thing that they 
have undertaken is to administer this year the Saskatchewan Host 
program, which is our host program with the front-line people in 
the tourism industry. 
 
They have some very ambitious plans. They are still working to 
expand their membership, and we are dealing with them in terms 
of funding over the long period. But I think that the association 
which my good friend and  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1856 
 
 

colleague from Regina South initiated and put in place, got started; 
is off to a very good start. I'm very impressed with the direction 
they've taken, and their energy and enthusiasm. I think they'll be a 
tremendous addition to the tourism picture here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Items 11 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Employment Development Agency — Tourism and Small 

Business 
Employment Development Fund — Vote 65 

 
Items 17 and 18 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Tourism and Small Business 

Vote 167 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 167 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Tourism and Small Business 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 45 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, in the Supplementary Estimates 
here you have $1.754 million for tourism or northern business 
development. In the main Estimates you had only something like 
. . . it was less than the amount that you have in the supplementary, 
in your main Estimates — 1.295 last year. How come you went 
over by this amount in your Supplementary Estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, first of all I 
should indicate that the two items you raise are not related. The 
subvote, northern business development, previously was the 
administration of the branch. If you look back to item — I believe 
it's item 3, subvote 3, you will see an increase there because that 
has been absorbed into that particular subvote. So they're not 
related. 
 
The specific one that we are talking about of the supplementary 
estimates — the situation there is that this money provides for 
accumulated deficit on forestry division, from the period of 
January 1, '984 to March 31, '85, of $1,073,533. 
 
We write off the loss on assets from winding down the operation, 
which were sold at market value; this is respecting sale of northern 
forest operations. And the payment is made from the Consolidated 
Fund to the revolving fund, and it's then credited back to the 
Consolidated Fund as revenue, and therefore there is no net impact 
on the Consolidated Fund. So it's a  

bookkeeping exercise in the one case. It's administrative money in 
the other case, which has been taken out of that subvote and put in 
subvote 3, where you'll see the increase. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this 
opportunity to thank the members opposite for their concise 
questions. I definitely want to thank the whole Department of 
Tourism and Small Business, particularly the people who have 
been in the House with me, and those were very actively involved 
in preparing these estimates. 
 
I think that this department, in the short time that it has been in 
existence, has become a very dedicated, hard-working department 
— some excellent people in it. I think the advancements that are 
being made on both the tourism and the small business side 
indicate that. 
 
While we're very pleased to have completed the exercise, we are 
disappointed that the member from Shaunavon has not been able 
to be in attendance as we completed these estimates. There was 
the outstanding issue of some of his comments about some of the 
practices of our people when they travel promoting the industry, 
which we did take some exception to, and I wish he'd had the 
opportunity to comment on that and possibly extend his apologies. 
But since that was not the case, we are pleased to be through and I 
would thank my officials very much. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to join also 
with the minister to congratulate and thank the officials for 
providing the information, and to thank the minister for the 
answers which he has provided for us. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Science And Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 15 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would request that the minister please 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's my 
pleasure to introduce to the Assembly the officials from the 
Department of Science and Technology. Here on my immediate 
right is Dr. Alex Guy, the deputy minister of the department. 
Immediately behind me is Richard Letilley, the executive director 
of the government research division. Behind Dr. Guy is Bob Mills, 
the acting executive director, industrial development division. To 
Dr. Guy's right is Frank May, the executive director of 
administration. And at the back is Wendy MacDonald, the 
manager of the advanced technology agreement. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I did have a rather extensive commentary that I 
intended to lead into this discussion with. We are very proud of 
the accomplishments of this department. but rather than get into 
that in an extended way, in the spirit of co-operation and execution 
that has been here this evening I will condense this and simply 
indicate that  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1857 
 

when this department was established on January 1, 1984 — 
which I'm sure all members will realize is just over two years ago 
— it was a signal from the Government of Saskatchewan that it 
was solidly committed to stimulating the industrial development 
of advanced technology here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the previous minister, the member from Regina Wascana, a 
strategy was put in place that recognized the foundation of 
economic, industrial, and social development in Saskatchewan; 
recognized that that depended on how well the province develops, 
transfers, utilizes, and exploits new or advanced technology. And I 
think we've made a strong start. 
 
To indicate the start, I will simply provide a few statistics for the 
members opposite. In 1982 the Saskatchewan advanced 
technology sector was made up of 39 companies. Today there are 
over 140 companies and, Mr. Chairman, just recently the 
department has completed a catalogue that we refer to as the 
technology transfer catalogue. It goes through the companies in 
the province and gives some details of each of them. And I will 
send a copy over to the opposition critic. We in fact have copies 
for each of the opposition members, and maybe we could ask the 
page to distribute those to the opposition. 
 
As well as the increase in companies from 39 to 140, when we 
look at employment in 1982, there were 1,750 people working in 
the advanced technology sector; today that number has grown to 
2,950 people who have skilled, permanent, well-paid jobs with 
high spin-off benefits for their communities. 
 
In 1982, the sales of advanced technology products totalled $81 
billion; today sales have quintupled to $400 million this year. I 
think, Mr. Chairman, the statistics, those very general ones, 
indicate very clearly that we have accessed an opportunity in the 
province for growth, for job creation, and have a very exciting 
high-tech industry now in the province. It's one that has a 
tremendous future. We have a number of very exciting companies 
and we're very excited bout the potential for further growth in the 
future. 
 
(2145) 
 
And with those few comments, I would be prepared to respond to 
any of the questions the opposition may have. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I want to make just a brief 
comment at the outset to indicate that there has been some 
progress made in the area of high-tech and to indicate that the 
base, in fact, was laid during our administration and has been built 
on since that time. 
 
I recall some of the areas that we had initiated — the support for 
basic and applied research at the University of Saskatchewan; the 
fibre optics arrangement between SaskTel and Northern Telecom. 
We built Innovation Place through Sedco, adjacent to the 
University of Saskatchewan, to facilitate the advanced technology 
industry. We had the science policy secretariat, led by Dr. Leon 
Katz, and we assigned a special adviser on science  

policy, Dr. Alex Guy, presently deputy minister. So that base, I 
must admit, has been built on and has grown. 
 
But I want to say that I don't think that we should be here slapping 
ourselves on the back in respect to what is committed to research 
and development. I want to refer the minister to a couple of 
articles in respect to the commitment of research and development 
that we have here in Canada vis-à-vis other industrialized 
countries of the world. And I would recommend the study to the 
department, and in fact the minister and his staff may indeed have 
reviewed it. 
 
But I refer, first of all, to an article as a result of a task force, word 
done by Mr. Al Johnson, entitled "Stop Neglecting Research." 
And it sets out basically an analysis of our funding capacity in 
research as it applies to the universities primarily. I want only to 
touch on a couple of items in respect to it, to draw to the attention 
of the minister and the department the need for further emphasis 
for greater funding for research and development. 
 
In respect to the article, I say here that he indicates that from 
1977-78 to 1984-85, government grants to universities and 
colleges, the principal source of their funding, rose by only 2.5 per 
cent in real terms, while enrolment increased by 27 per cent in 
universities and 36 per cent in community colleges. So he 
indicates that the principal source of funding rose only by 2.5 per 
cent, compared to a very significant increase in the enrolment both 
in community colleges and universities. 
 
It's an interesting article, but what I wanted to point out to the 
minister and the department, a couple of facts here in respect to the 
total commitment in Canada. We find that the amount of 1.22 per 
cent of the nations' GDP (gross domestic product) in 1981, 
compared with — Mr. Minister, these are the comparisons that he 
makes. The amount that we spend here in Canada, and that's in 
1981, is: 
 

1.22 per cent of the nation's GDP . . . compared (to) 2.52 per 
cent (in) the USA, 2.49 per cent (in) West Germany, 2.38 per 
cent (in) Japan . . . 1.97 per cent (in) France. (And he goes on to 
say) I repeat: 1.22 per cent (in) Canada. 

 
So what I'm saying is that there's a lot that has to be done here in 
Canada, and I know governments are taking a look at that. The 
other article that I would refer to is "Start Applying Research" by a 
Scott Tiffin. I want only a couple of excerpts from this, which also 
indicates what is happening. He says: 
 

While in 1985 . . . Canadian increase in Research and 
Development funding was 0.1 per cent (one-tenth of 1 per cent, 
at the same time) Korea's will increase (by) 18 per cent this 
coming year. (And) over the next decade, Japan plans to 
increase its R&D funding by 40 per cent. 

 
And here, as I say, in Canada, 0.1 per cent. He goes on again to 
contrast what is the commitment, and they're similar to the 
comparisons of other countries. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1858 
 
 

I want only one other comment in respect to this article. It says: 
 

With the creation of a Standing Committee on Research, (and) 
Science and Technology, Canada will cease to be one of the 
few advanced western countries without such a parliamentary 
forum. The investigations carried out by (the) parliamentarians 
will be of vital importance because there is little capacity 
elsewhere in Canada to study technology . . . 

 
All I want to point out here is, there has been some experts taking 
a look at the comparison of what we're doing in research and 
development and our commitment. And I appreciate, Mr. 
Minister, that your department started only very recently, as you 
indicated. 
 
I noticed that in 1984-85 that you budgeted for $1.038 million and 
you spent 0.979 million, less than the budgeted amount. You 
indicated in the Heritage Fund or in the estimates that there was $5 
million set aside or budgeted for research and development; and in 
1984-85 1.46 million, or 1.5 million rounded off, was spent. 
 
In 1985-86 I notice that in Consolidated Fund you have 1.53 
million budgeted and Heritage Fund, 4.5. So what we have here is 
an increase in the Consolidated Fund estimates, but a decrease in 
the Heritage Fund amount of expenditure from 5 million down to 
4.5 million. What I'd like is: could you indicate what is actually 
spent in '85-86 vis-a-vis the Consolidated Fund and also the 
amount of the Heritage Fund? The amount budgeted was 4.5 — 
I'd like to know what was spent. 
 
I make one other observation, Mr. Minister, and that is: in '86-87, 
if you look at the Consolidated Fund, the amount of expenditure 
budgeted has decreased from the previous year, and again we find 
that the Heritage Fund has decreased from 4.5 to 4 million. So I'd 
like to ask you to comment on those aspects. Could you give me 
the '85-86 actual amount that was spent, both Consolidated Fund 
and Heritage Fund, as opposed to what was budgeted? And why 
the decrease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, we'll gather those 
numbers and try to get them in a form that makes sense. But first 
of all, in terms of your comments in your preamble, we have to get 
this into context or we're not going to get these estimates to 
advance very quickly. 
 
Your comments on R&D funding are well taken. The money that 
you indicate, I have no reason to argue with. Canada, I think, as a 
country is aware that we have trailed in R&D research, and in fact 
members of our government have recently been in Winnipeg at a 
federal conference. 
 
The point, however, is that that is not what this department is 
about. General, basic R&D research would be the priority of my 
colleague, the Minister of Advanced Education. This is a very 
specialized department dealing with science and technology, 
high-tech advancement. The R&D money we spend is primarily in 
the industrial area. We spend very little on university R&D. It's a 
very specific type of program. 
 

And I think, when you check the catalogue that I sent over, the 
general fold-out, which indicates the tremendous growth in 
research and development activities in the high-tech sector, would 
indicate that what has become known as the Saskatchewan model 
in the last couple of years has been adopted across the country and 
is in fact having very positive results. 
 
But it's important to be clear, as we discuss this, that we are not 
here defending basic research and development expenditures, 
particularly on the university level, which is in Advanced 
Education. We are discussing defending the estimates that are 
primarily industrial and deal specifically with science and 
technology — or high-tech, as it's generally called. And if you'll 
just give me 10 seconds, I will get that information that you 
requested. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think the numbers that the member requested: in 
the Consolidated Fund expenditures, the budget — and I believe 
we're talking about last year — we had budgeted $1.538 million 
and spent 1.2. In the Heritage Fund, we budgeted 4.5 million and 
spent 3.75. Those are primarily start-up activities for most of these 
young companies, and we would anticipate that as we go along 
our expenditures will be equal to our budgeted numbers in future 
years. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I want to take a look and see 
whether or not you can indicate what is proposed to be spent on 
the various areas of initiatives by the department for this year in 
respect to the funds from the Heritage — the $4 million. There are 
a series of programs, initiatives. And I was wondering whether 
you can indicate to me or provide me with the proposed funding 
relative to these individual programs. 
 
If we take a look at your annual report on page 10, it sets out he 
various initiatives. And it deals there with the industrial research 
program and it describes the nature of that program. The program 
augments existing federal funding up to 25 per cent of the cost of 
eligible research. I was wondering whether the minister has the 
particular information: of the number of firms that applied for 
assistance under that particular program in 1985-86; the number of 
firms that were grants assistance; the total amount that was granted 
in that particular area. 
 
And I'm basically interested in the basic criteria for applying when 
qualifying under that particular initiative, and the budget for 
'86-87, to get a grip as to the disposition of the funds within the 
department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I'm not sure. The question is too 
detailed to answer, maybe. First of all, in terms of the various 
programs within that harried sector, there are about 14. I can go 
through them and give them to you while my department are 
gathering up the numbers of companies that have applied, as you 
requested. I'll start this. If it gets to be too much, you can let me 
know, and I can possibly send it over. 
 
(2200) 
 
The entrepreneur program furnishes a liaison, advisory, and 
facilitation role leading to establish new businesses; we have 
300,000 there. The inventors services program,  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1859 
 

which is an assist to inventors and property researching and 
documenting, has 50,000. 
 
Offices of university research: to optimize resources available to 
conduct research; stimulate research activities between the 
university, the private sector, and government; and to increase new 
technology transfer and development — 300,000. 
 
Special studies: this is to review and make recommendations in 
the area of provincial research institutions — 160,000. Industrial 
research: $1,014 million to encourage research and development 
of new products. There we cost-share 25 per cent of a new 
product. Joint high-tech research to encourage R&D in areas of 
mutual government industry interests — 604,500. 
 
I can read them all into the record, or maybe it would be easier if I 
simply sent them across to you and let you take the time to peruse 
them and possibly ask questions on the ones that are of specific 
interest. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That would be fine if you would send across a 
copy of the individual initiatives and the basic amounts that you're 
proposing to . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — For the second part of the question, Mr. 
Chairman, I have the seven general categories and the seven 
programs. In industrial research we had $1.5 million, roughly, 
budgeted; 53 companies made applications under that category 
and in fact were funded. Those are successful applications. 
 
Joint high-tech: roughly $1 million, not quite, 5 companies there; 
requests for proposals, 13 companies; feasibility studies, 1; capital 
equipment, 1; information transfer, 3 companies. Total number of 
companies involved in the programs in those categories were 80. 
So we had 80 companies in that general R&D Heritage Fund 
group who made contracts with this department and did, in fact, 
receive some assistance in the past year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well in respect to the $4 million that is budgeted 
this year, I guess what I'm asking you initially is why has there 
been a decrease in the amount in the Heritage Fund. The first year 
that you were set up it was 5 million and then you went down to 
4.5 and then you went down to 4 million. I appreciate that you 
didn't spend it all the first year and you didn't spend it all the 
second year. Presumably the only thin is how accurate is the 
budget, is really what I'm asking. I mean, you were putting in 5 
million two years ago and you only spent 1.4 million. And last 
year you put in 4.5 million and you spent a little over 3 million. 
this year, looking at the projections on here, it's 4 million. What 
I'm asking is: how accurate are your projections this year if they 
were so far off in the previous year? 
 
And the other question I ask is: why has there been a general 
decrease in the amount of funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would remind 
the member opposite that we are discussing estimates, and that is 
exactly what we're dealing with. As you indicated, in the past two 
years we did not expend the  

total amount of dollars that were budgeted in those areas. It's not 
our practice to spend the money simply because it's budgeted. it 
depends on companies applying and meeting the criteria that are 
set up in the various programs in that sector. 
 
So this year we have made another educated guess. We believe 
that the 4 million is close to what we anticipate for demand. If 
there is more, we will consider it, and if there is less, we won't 
spend what is there. But we believe that the 4 million is very 
reasonable and representative of the demand we anticipate, and we 
think that is what the companies will be requesting in this fiscal 
year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to personnel that you have with the 
department, I want to ask the minister: are all the positions filled 
as set out in the number of person-years? You have 19.3. I'm 
wondering whether all those positions are indeed filled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, those positions are 
filled either by permanent or temporary people. The activities that 
are taking place at the present time surrounding the move of a 
significant portion of this department to Saskatoon probably 
necessitates a few more temporaries than we would like, but the 
positions are filled at this time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Let me ask you this: the position establishments 
as of April 1, 1986, do you have in fact any positions that are 
vacant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as of April 1, all the 
positions were filled with either permanent, temporary, or 
contractual people. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the director of communications, this, 
I take it, was covered by a contract. I ask you: can you indicate 
what amount was paid, and to what person under contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, under the contract, the 
young lady's name is Edith Wieler, and she's paid $3,000 a month. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And in respect to your science co-ordinator for 
communications, is that position also filled by — covered by a 
contract — or is it filled by regular appointment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — That was filled by contract. At the time 
that we're discussing, the young lady's name here was Miss 
Gerard. She's making $2,000 a month. Those positions are both, I 
believe, advertised, and we hope to fill them with permanent 
people in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In terms of the contract with Gerard, what was the 
amount that was being paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — 2,000 a month, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to other members of the staff, you have 
a number of science co-ordinators, and I want to ask you: are all 
the science co-ordinator positions at the present time filled? 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1860 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated those 
positions are filled. In some cases though they are filled by acting 
or temporary people. And I would emphasize again that the move 
of a significant portion of this department to Saskatoon is 
facilitating, shall we say, some indecision at this time, and some of 
them are not filled by total — having the term "acting" in front of 
them. but all the positions are in fact filled. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can you give me the names of the individuals that 
are filling the Science Co-ordinator IV positions as of April 1, 
1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, there are four people in 
those positions. The names of the people are: Miss 
Reenstra-Bryant in one of them; Dimitrijevic in the other; and Mr. 
Jones is the third; the fourth one is currently covered by — 
because Mr. Mills who I introduced to you has moved into 
Executive Director position — that position is covered by Mr. 
Butler at this time. And as of April 1st — I'm not sure whether 
we're on present or April 1st — I have a gentleman in that role is 
Harris. But the four present names are Reenstra-Bryant, 
Dimitrijevic, Butler and Jones. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And that is as of April 1, 1986? And I guess the 
question I ask is: are all still presently filling those particular 
positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The answer is yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to a Mr. Jones, I want to ask you 
whether or not he has been assigned to conduct any particular 
tasks beyond what he was doing previously. Let me put it in this 
form. Is he in fact assigned to conduct sort of external assignment 
reporting to the particular deputy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, at the present time Mr. 
Jones is on a home assignment, a specific task, which he is 
reporting to the deputy under. That will carry through until 
September 30, as of which time Mr. Jones has resigned. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And the special assignment, or the home 
assignment as you indicated, to conduct an external assignment 
that ends on September 1st, I take it, or September 30th — is this 
in effect a termination of duties by mutual arrangement? And can 
you indicate whether a resignation was requested in this instance 
in respect to Mr. Jones? Did he submit the resignation to the 
department subject to a special assignment, and can you indicate 
whether there was any need for investigation in respect to any 
conduct? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, it's my indication that 
Mr. Jones indicated that he was interested in pursuing employment 
in other parts of the country. In order to assist with his relocation, 
we arrived at this arrangement. Mr. Jones has tendered a 
resignation as of September 30th and, as I indicated, is on this 
assignment reporting to the deputy in the interim. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Well it seems like rather odd arrangement if he is 
planning on taking on other jobs or a different job. What I ask is 
. . .I ask specifically: in respect to the arrangement and obtaining 
the arrangement, was there, in fact, a submission of a resignation 
requested by the department in order to give him the special 
assignment or the home assignment until September the 30th? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the term "request" is a 
little strong. The deputy and Mr. Jones sat down and arrived at a 
time frame that was satisfactory to both parties, and consequently, 
as I have indicated, the assignment was set out and the time frame 
established and the resignation submitted. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to refer to and obtain some information 
about some contracts that were entered into with the department in 
'84-85. And is the particular agreement that is covered by the order 
in council for '84-85 . . . the Department of Science and 
Technology . . . And it is authorizing the Minister of Science and 
Technology, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, to 
enter into an agreement with PGE Technology Canada Inc. of 
Saskatoon, and to make a payment of 41,000, and it goes on. 
 
What I ask you in respect to this: has the payment in respect to that 
OC been made to PGE Technology Canada, Inc., and was any 
subsequent contract approved in respect to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — No, Mr. Chairman. That specific OC, 
we entered into a contract, as was indicated on the OC, with PGE 
Technology of Canada. To date — and I'm not sure if this is . . . 
(inaudible) . . . to date, but the work has not been carried out, 
hence no claim has been submitted, hence no money has been paid 
under that contract. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can you indicate whether any steps were taken by 
the department to extend the term of the agreement with this 
particular company for another year? It is my understanding that 
some steps, in fact, were taken to extend that contract. And I'm 
wondering whether, in fact, it was indeed extended — and if so, 
why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that contract 
ran out as of March 31, 1986. We have had what I would classify 
as informal discussions with the company, but I don't think it's 
correct to say that there have been attempts made to extend the 
contract. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. I want to refer to another conference in 
1986. The International Conference on Plasma Science was held 
in Saskatoon, and it's my understanding that it was held — I don't 
know if I have the exact date here for it or not — I believe 
Monday, May 19th, 1986. Can the minister indicate the nature of 
that conference and the subject matter which it discussed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, 
that specific conference, the only involvement we had was a 
personal invitation to myself to bring greetings on behalf of the 
government. I was unable to attend and I believe one of my 
colleagues, I'm not sure  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1861 
 

whether it was the member from North Battleford or the member 
from Saskatoon Mayfair, spoke on my behalf to ask me for a 
definition of plasma science. I may be going to the wrong source, 
but my information is that it is a learned society that sponsored it; 
it involves the chemical activities that take place in space. Now I 
may have learned people chastise me for that definition, but for 
these purposes maybe that'll do. That's the best I can do, at any 
rate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wonder if the minister is aware whether there 
was any government funding for the sponsorship of the 
conference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not aware of the 
government overall. There was no funding from this department 
for that conference or any department I'm responsible for. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I'd like to advise the minister, in case he 
doesn't know — and he was invited to attend — that the 
Saskatchewan Energy and Mines has budgeted some $4,000 to 
cover the contribution of the costs and the keynote speakers and 
travel costs. 
 
I'm interested in the areas of discussion in respect to this 
conference, and I would like to . . . since the government did in 
fact help sponsor in a significant way, some $4,000 it obviously 
was of concern to the high-tech industry in Saskatoon, I suppose, 
and I'm concerned with . . . from what I learn is that the basic 
discussion covered nuclear fusion, high power technology, the 
microwave technology, as well as plasma physics, and microwave 
generation over very high power and very short wave lengths. 
 
I understand that two areas of discussion were, in fact, areas of 
focus as related to the SDI Star Wars research as is implemented 
by the United States government. And I'm just wondering whether 
there was any interest, and whether there is any promotion being 
made by the Government of Saskatchewan, in so far as becoming 
involved in a more direct way in the technology related to Star 
Wars. I know the official position taken by the federal government 
is that they did not, in fact, agree, or would not endorse the Star 
Wars development as initiated by the President of the United 
States, but they also indicated that they would not oppose private 
companies and their involvement. 
 
And what we have here is the Government of Saskatchewan 
certainly sponsoring; and it must be of interest to someone to have 
brought it to Saskatchewan, and since that area of discussion was 
indeed a part of the conference, I'm wondering whether there's any 
position being taken by the minister or, to his knowledge, the 
government in advancing or having any association of the 
high-tech industry for the development and participation in the 
Star Wars development as proposed by the President of the United 
States. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, just to clarify, as I 
indicated earlier, this department was not involved in any funding 
of that particular conference. yes, I was invited to speak. As I 
indicated earlier, I was not able to attend and one of my colleagues 
substituted for me. The  

Department of Energy and Mines may in fact have had a interest 
in some of the discussions and may in fact have been involved in 
the funding. I think more appropriately that could be asked to my 
colleague, the Minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
The Canadian position is no participation in Star Wars. As a 
government we are honouring that position. That is certainly the 
position that we take. However we do have, and the Canadian 
position does have, involvement in the space laboratory. And since 
Saskatchewan is the third largest player of the provinces in the 
space activities, we see some significant possibilities, some 
significant potential. And some of our companies, I'm sure, will be 
involved in the peaceful conquest of space in the space laboratory 
program. We think there is a tremendous amount of potential for 
some of our companies. so in that respect we certainly have an 
interest, MSAT (Mobile communication satellite) and 
RADARSAT, which are other programs that we could see 
potential in. 
 
So there may have been some components of this conference that 
Saskatchewan companies may have had an interest in. But as a 
government we are certainly not involved in any way in the Star 
Wars program that is under way. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay, Mr. Minister, I take a look at the first item 
in respect to administration, and I note that the amount there 
remains the same. However, in other items you have governmental 
research; there's a cut in staff, and also a decrease in the amount of 
funding. And similarly with industrial development. And I'm a 
little concerned here with the amount of the total budget of the 
department hat represents administration. It's about 30 per cent of 
the total budget that represents administration. 
 
But leave that aside; I want just to close here by first of all asking 
you whether you have any personal staff attached with this 
portfolio, and if so, if you would provide me with the names and 
any salary related to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Just a very quick comment on the 
administrative costs. Our department is a relatively small one, and 
the administrative costs include the secretaries which are in the 
deputy and the other offices, and they provide the services to the 
entire department, so it may not be totally represented, but I don't 
think it's that far out of line. 
 
The answer to your second question; no, I have no personal staff 
assigned to this department. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can you provide me with the total cost of travel 
as associated with this department during the past year? 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Out-of-province? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, since I have become 
minister of this department, I have not travelled outside the 
province in the capacity of Minister of Science  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1862 
 
 

and Technology. As far as the department is concerned, we don't 
have a global number; we can put that together very quickly and 
we'll send it to you, certainly this week at the very latest. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the advertising budget, I note that in 
1984-85 there was a significant amount — some $56,000. I 
believe, in public accounts for advertising. Could you indicate 
what was the total amount for advertising last year, and what is the 
budget for this year for advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, in 1985-86 the total for 
advertising expenditures, the entire area is $95,774.07. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And will you provide me with the details of any 
consulting work or contracts that you had during the course of the 
year? You don't have to provide that now. Last year you gave me a 
list of the contracts that you had, and if you could provide that, 
that would be satisfactory. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — We have no problem. We have that 
prepared, and we'll send it right over. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One further question. you were indicating in the 
budget that the department would be moving to Saskatoon. I 
notice your comment tonight that a portion would be moving. 
could you indicate what progress has been made in respect to that, 
and the extent of the move? Are you leaving apart of an office 
here in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as of September . . . 
First of all, in answer to the question, we're making very good 
progress. I think that the people in the department understand that 
Saskatoon possibly had a head start, that there are now in excess 
of half of the activity takes places in Saskatoon. It seems like the 
logical place for the major part of the department to be located. 
There are, however, 30 high-tech companies now in Regina, the 
rest spread around the province. And so we are maintaining a 
presence here in Regina. 
 
As of September 2nd, in Regina we will maintain two industrial 
development officers, one consultant, and one secretary. The rest 
of the department will be housed in Saskatoon. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 15 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Research and Development Division 

Science and Technology 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 56 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 56 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, just before we conclude 
this section, I would like to thank the member from Quill Lakes 
for his very concise and to-the-point  

questions. I hope he found the answers the same. 
 
I would also like to thank my department for the work they put in 
to preparing these estimates and the work that they have done over 
the last couple of years with the science and high-tech sector of the 
province. I think that their work is being rewarded with some very 
positive results. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, want to thank 
the members of the staff of the department for their efforts. As I 
say that some steps have been made and some progress has been 
made on building on the base that we had established in 
Saskatchewan, and certainly to that extent I congratulate the 
minister in carrying on the direction, and thank him for providing 
us the information. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Employment Development Agency 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 49 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I would like to introduce to you the 
officials who are with us from the Employment development 
Agency. Immediately to my right is Dr. John Siu, the chief 
executive officer; directly behind me is Mr. Art Battiste, the chief 
operating officer; to my left is Kevin Costante, the managing 
director; behind Dr. Siu is Larry Spannier, the manager of 
economic analysis; and to Mr. Battiste's left is Rick Pawliw, the 
acting director of youth services. 
 
I think at this late hour, Mr. Chairman, we'll forego an 
introductory address and invite the opposition to carry on with the 
questioning. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to start off by 
asking the minister responsible for the Employment and 
Development Agency, seeing as how there's such high 
unemployment in the North, it has been mentioned time and time 
again that there's a high welfare dependency rate in northern 
Saskatchewan. As well, there is high unemployment rates that 
exceed those in the southern part of our province and elsewhere in 
Canada — figures that are simply outrageous, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to ask you, with regards to the employment and 
development agency program, just how much emphasis and 
success that program has been to the more remote isolated areas in 
the top half of our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I will attempt to give 
the member some detail in terms of job creation and moneys 
expended. I can review with him 1985-86 in some detail, and I can 
give him up-to-date numbers as of this point in this fiscal year, 
which of course is only nicely under way. 
 
First of all, in terms of the native career development program, I'll 
split it by constituencies, which may make it easier for the two 
northern members to keep track of what has happened. In 
Athabasca, under the native career development program there 
were 24 jobs; the funds amounted to $44,283. In Cumberland 
constituency, there were 214 jobs and $109,831. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1863 
 

From the Special ARDA (Agriculture and Rural Development 
Act) program, in Athabasca there were 200 jobs, and expenditure 
of $40,000. In Cumberland, there was an expenditure of $68,119. 
 
In the Access youth employment program, in Athabasca there was 
only one job created, an expenditure of $2,780. In Cumberland 
constituency under the Access youth, there were 12 jobs; the total 
expenditure there was $16,055. 
 
In the winter works program, which probably has more impact in 
the North: in Athabasca, 286 jobs; an expenditure of $712,759 that 
was committed in that fiscal year. The commitment in 
Cumberland was $1,056,915 and there were 433 jobs in that 
program — the winter works. 
 
In the Canada-Saskatchewan Opportunities '85 which, of course, 
was last year' summer employment program: in Athabasca, 111 
jobs, $120,540; and in Cumberland, 322 jobs, $339,533. That's the 
total programming in '85-86 of the responsibilities of the 
department. 
 
So far in this fiscal year, the Access youth employment program in 
Athabasca has 17 jobs and $30,500; in Cumberland House, six 
jobs, $10,800. and the Opportunities '86, our summer student 
program this year: 72 jobs in Athabasca, a commitment of 
$55,724; and in Cumberland, 216 jobs, a commitment of 
$201,933. So I trust those figures provide the response the 
member was looking for. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Before I pursue my next 
question to you, could I have the figures that you just outlined for 
my preference and for future reference when I get back to my 
constituency. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: in terms of the funding allotments 
and the numbers of jobs created — how many of those jobs, Mr. 
Minister, are temporary and how temporary are they? and how 
many — more specifically and more importantly — how many of 
those are long-term jobs or permanent jobs? 
 
(2245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, in terms of accessing 
the information that I've given you, I took a fair amount of the 
committee's time just in the last answer because I wanted it in 
Hansard, and you'll be able to access that certainly early tomorrow 
morning. So hopefully that will do. 
 
In terms of the types of jobs that are created — the native career 
development program, those jobs are permanent. All right, the 
Special ARDA, our training spaces, the Access youth employment 
program has a minimum of 24 weeks that is required in order to 
access the government portion. We have found in our studies, 
though, that 70 per cent of those youth employment program jobs 
in fact end up being permanent. 
 
And of course the last 2 programs — the winter works program 
and the Canada-Saskatchewan Opportunities  

'85, the summer student program — those are both obviously 
temporary and obviously targeted at other specific problems or 
specific opportunities for young people. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Can I ask you, Mr. Minister, in terms of the 
estimates in question here, what we have under subvote number 
10 — or is it number 9? — item number 12 anyway, you have a n 
allotment there for $3 million, Mr. Minister. 
 
Is that funding allotment under your department to be 
administered by your department, or is that going to be transferred 
to third party organizations such as local bands throughout the 
province, or is that specifically aimed at one particular group. I'm 
not quite certain about that allotment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the program that we're 
discussing is the Indian economic development program. It's 
administered by the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. The 
levels of funding go to a number of groups: band and band 
development corporations, district provincial economic 
development institutions, and to various individuals. 
 
So it's administered by the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. It 
goes to various groups. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, in terms of any one ethnic group in 
this province that live below the poverty line, in terms of one 
ethnic group — and I'm referring to people of native ancestry — 
that is one group of people that have a very difficult time making 
ends meet. And I'm referring to the people in the North. 
 
We have a tremendous abundance of resources in the North when 
it comes down to renewable and non-renewable resources. The 
biggest complaint, and the biggest issue with regards to elected 
officials at the local level, whether it be LACs (local advisory 
councils), whether it be various other interest groups, or even 
members of the northern development advisory council or a 
committee, you go to any one particular group or any ordinary 
person in the North, their biggest beef or issue is the fact that there 
are no jobs — permanent jobs — in the North. We have heard 
figures ranging from 70 per cent, as high up as 95 per cent 
unemployment in the northern administration district. 
 
And we have had elected officials come to me, or come to 
government or various bureaucrats in the government, explaining 
or trying to impress upon governments and upon the powers that 
be that something has to be done to build an economic base for 
many of those remote northern areas. 
 
As I said earlier in one debate or another, tremendous amount of 
resources come from the North. Just how much of those resources 
are going back, not only to replenish the existing resources that we 
have, but to provide for meaningful job involvement. The people 
that are actually making . . . a hard time making ends meet under 
this administration as people in the northern administration 
district. Your philosophy of open-for-government simply has not 
worked. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1864 
 
 

There is talk about selling shares regarding SMDC. A while back 
there was talk — a policy by your government to sell Saskoil 
shares. Now there is talk about selling shares re SMDC. But how 
many people in the northern administration district who are having 
a hard time making ends meet will be able to afford those shares? 
I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, very, very, very few. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister. There was talk in 1983 and '84 
by the minister of northern affairs of the day that you and your 
government would implement a self-sufficient economic strategy 
for those people in northern Saskatchewan. But you are now on 
your fifth year in government — going into your fifth year in 
government. We have yet to see a self-sufficient economic 
strategy adopted and promoted in conjunction with local officials 
in the top half of our province. Many, many people are frustrated, 
Mr. Minister, with regards to the performance of your 
government. 
 
And I want to ask you, what is the alternative? You have here, in 
discussion under estimates, the Employment Development 
Agency; and, Mr. Minister, I fail to see a plan that would help 
alleviate the high welfare dependency rates in the North and the 
high unemployment rates in the North. 
 
We have many projects going in the North. We've got the Nipawin 
hydro project. We've got major plans and announcements 
regarding SPC. We've got Key Lake and Cluff Lake and major 
forestry programs, forestry resources that have been sold to a firm 
from Washington. But, Mr. Minister, where is that consultation 
process that ought to be there; that involvement, that participation, 
that local decision-making by Northerners in conjunction with 
your various departments that relate to employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me make a 
couple of comments. We just completed Science and Technology 
estimates, and the member from Quill Lakes, I think for the most 
part in jest, suggested that the successes of that department were 
based on the foundation that had been laid by the NDP 
administration. I will resist the opportunity to go into depth on 
how the basis of the problems in northern Saskatchewan were in 
fact laid by the NDP administration. But I will point out some of 
the things that have been taking place — and the member named a 
couple of them — to try to improve the situation and in fact 
develop some realistic economic activity in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we had this exact same discussion when we discussed Small 
Business and Tourism. And we discussed the wild rice industry; 
we discussed the things happening in the gold industry, where 
there's a tremendous amount of activity and I think a tremendous 
amount of opportunity. 
 
The member opposite mentioned the power line that is being built 
across northern Saskatchewan and the fact that a good deal of the 
work, certainly in the early stages of that, would be in fact 
designated as opportunities for northern people. 
 
He mentioned, what is the alternative? Possibly we  

should talk about what the alternative is not. The NDP have 
clearly stated that they do not agree with the Weyerhaeuser 
project. I think that one has tremendous opportunities in the forest 
industry for benefits for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
He mentioned the selling of shares in SMDC. I'm not sure where 
he got that information. If there is talk of it, I don't think it is 
official talk, certainly at this time. I would suggest to him that 
selling shares in SMDC is a whole lot better for northern 
Saskatchewan that is closing the uranium mines, which is the 
policy that has been clearly enunciated by the NDP. And so, I 
suppose, when you look at the alternatives, you could do any 
number of things. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Chairman, it's obvious that none of those 
topics have anything to do with the Employment Development 
Agency. And I'll just take a moment and go through for the 
member the programs that we do have in place that are in some 
ways specific to native or northern job creation. 
 
The objective here, of course, is long-term employability. And the 
native career development program, a $610,000 program to train 
500 native people toward permanent jobs — and I discussed that a 
moment ago. Obviously, the training component becomes very 
important when we discuss the potential for productive jobs, not 
only for young people across the province but most importantly, I 
think, in northern Saskatchewan. I think the member will agree 
that one of the great lacks in northern Saskatchewan is formal 
training. 
 
The second program, the native and non-status Indian and Metis 
program, is a program administered by Advanced Education, my 
colleague from Meadow Lake, to provide financial assistance to 
native people going on to higher education — and again, an 
attempt to improve people so they can in fact look forward to 
productive employability. 
 
And then the Special ARDA agreement, which is a joint 
federal/provincial program that is designed to provide financial 
assistance towards training, employment projects, and native 
business development. And I think all those are obviously, without 
saying very much, things that are very important in northern 
Saskatchewan. And finally, the Indian economic development 
program, which is a $3 million program to assist status Indians in 
the development of new businesses. 
 
And having said all that about programs in northern 
Saskatchewan, I would hasten to add that, in addition to these — 
these are programs specifically for northern and native people — 
native people are eligible for all the other employment programs 
that are offered by this government, including winter works, 
opportunities programs, our summer employment, and the Access 
. . . youth employment program. 
 
So we can certainly discuss the root cause of unemployment in the 
North. Whether it is a result of our administration or yours, I'm not 
sure that that would accomplish much. I think we have to put our 
minds to the solutions. I think I presented some of the things that 
we  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1865 
 

see as steps in the right direction. Hopefully they will have 
positive results. We're certainly working toward that end and I 
hope that in the future those statistics, which you indicate are 
anything but acceptable, can be vastly improved on and we can 
improve the way of life in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just a moment ago, Mr. Minister, for your 
information, I was making reference to the headline here dated 
March 20, 1986, whereby the Deputy Premier went into the North 
regarding special announcements, special projects re northern 
power lines, and I refer specifically to my area around Jan Lake, 
Pelican Narrows, Deschambault, and that corner of the province. 
 
It's my understanding, Mr. Minister, and I've been approached a 
good number of times by local, ordinary residents of La Ronge or 
Sandy Bay or Beaver Lake, Sturgeon Landing, or Cumberland 
House — ordinary young people that want to get to work and that 
can't get basic information as to how to go about getting 
employment opportunities or make an application for a specific 
project in the northern administration district. 
 
What I'm suggesting to you, Mr. Minister, is that your department, 
and various other related departments, ought to coincide an 
umbrella strategy. The big point of contention I have, and those I 
express on behalf of my constituents, is that there are so many 
ministers and so many civil servants, or senior civil servants with 
various roles and responsibilities, that it becomes very confusing 
for those remote areas to know whom to go to. 
 
We have here your department, Employment Development 
Agency, then we have Indian and Native Affairs, and then we 
have Northern Affairs, and we have various other . . . (inaudible 
interruption) . . . We have a Northern Affairs under estimates, 
haven't we? 
 
(2300) 
 
And then we have various other departments: Highways, for 
example; SMDC; various other departments responsible for 
various types of development and construction. But on the overall, 
Mr. Minister, the point I'm trying to make here is that you have to 
come with a strategy whereby people know where they ought to 
make an application with regards to various projects. 
 
I know that the minister for P.A.-Duck Lake has announced major 
initiatives at Cigar Lake and Star Lake and various other places. 
And then Berntson comes in with his SPC plans for new 
power-line projects, and various other people or officials in 
government have different ideas and strategies. But the people at 
the local level don't know, you know, where . . . where do you go 
to get the specific information, Mr. Minister? That's what I'm 
trying to say. 
 
There ought to be a coalition of your government's efforts re job 
training and employment, rather than confusing matters. You've 
got 19 cabinet minister with various responsibilities and duties at 
the present time as it is. It's very confusing. As isolated as the 
North is, you know, how can you expect the people in the top half 
of this province to know what the policies and the  

responsibilities are of each individual minister and various 
officials under your portfolios? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly am not going 
to stand here and tell you that the programs and the administrative 
structures that are offered by government are simple; they're not. 
There is any number of them. There are those that would argue 
that government may be in a whole lot of things that government 
doesn't belong in. 
 
However, I think that the structure that you are advocating was 
one that was tried previously. I think we could debate at long 
lengths the successes or failures of that structure. I don't believe it 
worked. I think we have tried to get some co-ordination. You 
mention the Northern Affairs Secretariat, or the Native Affairs 
Secretariat. I think those concepts are to try to provide 
co-ordination and initial inquiry positions, places where those 
particular constituents can come and bring their concerns to 
government. 
 
I'm sure that there would be people in the south-west corner of the 
province, for instance, that would like to have a program 
co-ordinated for them. There are probably people in the city of 
Regina who would like to have a Regina minister responsible for 
their things. I don't think that that is realistic. I think we live in a 
province that what we have tired to do is make all the programs 
that are available in any part of the province available in others. 
 
In my previous answer I went through the specific programs that 
are related to this department — the employment side of things 
that apply specifically to northern and native people — and then I 
indicated that, as well as these, all of the programs that we provide 
anywhere else in the province are also available. It could be 
argued that, in terms of government involvement, northern 
Saskatchewan possibly has advantages. 
 
But I think that's simply a response to an obvious need that is there 
and we have to continue to do that. If in fact having a minister of 
Sask Power come and make an announcement one day, and the 
minister for the SMDC another day creates problems, we certainly 
don't intend to do that. I think that there are so many things that are 
going on that we are attempting to keep happening in northern 
Saskatchewan, that it may in fact be a little confusing at times. But 
hopefully by dealing with my colleague from P.A.-Duck Lake 
through the Northern and Native Affairs Secretariat, some of that 
co-ordination that you seek can in fact take place. I don't think 
there's a better administrative structure than the one that's in place 
now. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I wonder about that, Mr. Minister. I've stated before, 
in some debates and estimates and what have you, that your 
government has some misplaced priorities. And I look at your 
estimates, Mr. Minister, and I find that there is quite a reduction. 
 
If jobs and employment are of high priority, then those ought to be 
reflected under Employment Development Agency estimates. Last 
year you had $121.59 million allotted, earmarked under your 
department, and that is down drastically, Mr. Minister, down to 
$98,883,450. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1866 
 
 

And I don't know, Mr. Minister, I feel that people in this province 
. . . the number one issue is employment. And I think through 
public pressures you reacted accordingly and enacted an 
employment development agency. But now I see in front of us that 
that agency has been cut back quite drastically. And I want to ask 
you, Mr. Minister, why is that? Isn't that supposed to be one of our 
mandates — is to create jobs, help alleviate the high 
unemployment rates in this province, try to alleviate the high 
welfare dependency rates throughout the province, help get rid of 
the food banks and the soup kitchens, and what have you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, for the hon. member, 
the short answer is that this year . . . Well as he indicated, there 
was $121 million allocated last year. This year there are $98 
million directly in the fund, which he has indicated. There is also 
27 million capital dollars that show up in the blue book in the 
property development corporation, and those apply from last year 
for a total of 125. So when you compare apples with apples and 
oranges with oranges, you get an increase, in fact, of $4 million 
this year — from 121 last year to 125 this year. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, with the statements made by elected 
officials at the local level — officials I've mentioned, you know, 
elected at the civic level, at the municipal level, at the native 
organizational level — the statistics coming out from the 
communities themselves, statistics that tell us, tell this province 
and this government and members on this side of the House, that 
there are high unemployment rates in the North, as high as 95 per 
cent, and high welfare dependency rates, Mr. Minister, I want to 
ask you: do you dispute those figures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the statistics that we 
deal with in this department are province-wide statistics. We don't 
have the capacity to regionalize the department, maintain our own 
statistics, so we depend on StatsCanada numbers. And I would 
indicate that, as of May 1986, Saskatchewan had the second 
lowest unemployment rate in Canada; that the unadjusted 
unemployment rate of 7.6 per cent was down from 8.2 in April 
and from 7.9 a year ago; that the seasonally adjusted rate of 7.9 
was below the April rate; that employment has increased by 
12,000 in the last month. 
 
I can go through those stats; however, I accept that there are 
significant problems in northern Saskatchewan. I think we've had 
this discussion in other departments. There's no question about 
that. We don't have specific numbers, specific statistics. We 
simply don't have that capacity. I'm certainly not in a position to 
challenge the numbers that the native elected leaders in northern 
Saskatchewan bring forward. 
 
I think it's safe to say that there is a problem; I think it's safe to say 
that we are attempting to deal with that problem. We have 
discussed some of the ways. If there are other ways, other specific 
directions that we could or should be taking, we're certainly 
prepared to sit down with native leaders, with northern leaders, at 
any time and discuss those, and I think that is going on on a 
continual basis. 
 
I think as well that some of the policies — both in terms of  

major projects, in terms of small business, things that we've 
discussed already — some of the specific programs in this 
department are moving in that direction, to try to add some 
additional input, some additional impetus, to improvements in 
northern Saskatchewan. And I suppose all I can do at this time is 
commit to continue that — to work, hopefully, with those elected 
people, with the two northern members, in any way we can to try 
to improve that situation. But the simple answer to the question: 
we don't have the capacity to do statistical analysis in the North. I 
can't either confirm or deny the numbers that people from the 
North may present. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if we could have the 
names, salaries, and the job descriptions of your personal staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'm at a disadvantage. I 
believe in earlier estimates I sent my total staff complement to the 
opposition. Have you got what I sent in Tourism and Small 
Business? Because I obviously, with the three departments and the 
two agencies, I sent a package that indicated all of it. Now if that's 
not . . . I don't have it with me, I guess, is the point. I think you 
have it. You may have to co-ordinate with your colleagues to get 
that information. If you don't, I'll commit to provide it tomorrow 
morning. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, I think we do have it, now that I am 
reminded of the events of about three weeks ago. Mr. Minister, I 
wonder if you would give me — you can give me it in writing, if 
you like - the salary of your senior executive officers; the pay 
increase, if any, of him or her. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — yes, Mr. Chairman, we have that 
information. we'll send it across in written form. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Have there been many increases in salary in 
the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I'm not sure the definition of "many." 
I'll let you look at it and make the decision. I don't believe that 
there's been anybody in excess of 3 per cent. You can check those 
figures. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us the 
amount spent by your department on advertising in the last fiscal 
year ending March 31, 1986. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, for the members 
opposite, last year we spent a total of $212,300. I could break that 
down: advertising the winter works program, which includes 
folders, application kits, radio and TV ads, $113,800; consultation 
materials, 57,800; and special projects such as newsletter, human 
resource development agreement, materials, program booklets, 
etc., 40,007. 
 
Now that was what the department spent last year. But in order to 
give you a full picture, I should indicate that this year two other 
areas, native services and youth services, are now under our 
jurisdiction. Last year they were under Advanced Education and 
Manpower. There were expenditures there of 110,680. So in order 
to get the full picture of what was spent on advertising by the areas 
that we are now responsible for, the global number is  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1867 
 

322,980. I don't want to mislead you by saying what we spent last 
year is X, when that other could slip through the crack. We want 
to give you a complete picture of our expenditures. 
 
(2315) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to make a general 
comment with respect to employment development. The vast 
majority of the two and a half pages, three full pages, are pure 
cosmetics. The vast majority of these are simply items that I 
would venture to say you will be hard put to give me much 
information on. I wonder, for instance, what kind of information 
you might give me with respect to the trade opportunities program, 
for instance. 
 
The vast majority of these things are simply lifted out of other 
departments and put in this department purely for cosmetics. And 
that, Mr. Minister, is symbolic of your approach to the creation of 
jobs. You are far more concerned about cosmetics than you are 
about the actual creation of jobs. That's true both with respect to 
the way you approach it . . . You take old programs that have been 
in existence for a very long period of time, many of them, and you 
call them job creation programs. There have always been such 
things as grants for the upgrading of heavy-haul roads. That's not a 
new program, Mr. Minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You know that it was smart to do that, 
though, right? You've got to admit it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well the member from Meadow Lake 
believes it's smart to produce results. I happen to believe in politics 
you're judged not by what you say, but by what you do. 
 
I believe this government is going to be judged by its record on 
unemployment, and the bald truth is that your performance with 
respect to jobs has been unsatisfactory — to be very, very kind. 
You may say, Mr. Minister, that . . . you can cite all the statistics 
you want. The fact is, from one end of this province to the other, 
unemployment is the overarching issue. 
 
I recall, Mr. Minister, in the federal election of 1984 doing a small, 
very unscientific poll in which we asked people to mail back some 
cards saying, what do you think the major issue was? Half of the 
ones that came back said unemployment. A year later we did a 
rather sophisticated poll and got almost the same results. Over half 
the people in Saskatchewan, if asked to name the major issue, 
name unemployment. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you are judged not by what you say, because the 
endless volley of statistics that you ream off are simply 
meaningless to people; they judge you by the performance. Your 
performance has been inadequate, to put it mildly. That really is 
pulling my punch when I call it inadequate; it's a great deal worse 
than that. 
 
The reason why it has been inadequate, Mr. Minister, is because 
you haven't approached it as a serious responsibility. You have 
approached unemployment as something that needs to be 
cosmeticized — I think, because the Conservative members 
opposite do not  

believe that unemployment is a great social evil. I think they 
believe it is a part and parcel of a capitalist economy. It comes and 
it goes, and you put up with it when it comes and you're thankful 
when it's not around, and you hope when you're in office you're 
lucky. And I honestly believe that is the approach of members 
opposite. 
 
They believe, Mr. Minister, that . . . members opposite believe 
there's not much you can do about it except to try and avoid 
responsibility. Well that isn't satisfactory to the public of 
Saskatchewan and any polling of public opinion, no matter how 
rudimentary or how sophisticated — as I've said I've had access to 
both — it produced the same results. Your performance isn't 
satisfactory. A good deal of the reason can be seen in this 
nonsensical three-page listing of your estimates, and they all come 
from other departments. So I suggest, Mr. Minister, that the way 
you have set up the estimates symbolizes the problem which you 
have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'll try to be brief in 
response to that. I think to suggest that attempts to deal with 
something as important as unemployment, and to call it cosmetic, 
is simply not becoming of even the member from Regina Centre. 
This department was put in place to bring some focus to our 
attempts at job creation, and dealing with the problem to 
co-ordinate the programs. 
 
He asked what the details of the trade opportunities program are. I 
could go through those, but I don't think he was too serious or was 
too interested. I would point out that to suggest that it is somehow 
trivial to put in place an economic or an employment development 
fund of $600 million over the next five years — I don't think that's 
trivial. I think that's a significant attempt to deal with a problem. 
 
When that was identified last year as one of the four pillars on 
which we're going to operate, I think that was clearly a step in the 
right direction. To suggest that something was inadequate when 
we have budgeted $12,186,512 and approved 11,706 jobs in this 
year's summer student program — I think that that's exceptional. 
 
But probably more importantly, some very, very brief statistics — 
and I don't want to suggest for one minute that unemployment is 
not a problem. It is. This department is looking at some additional 
programming measures, some program development as well as 
some program delivery that will clearly indicate in the ensuing 
months what our approach will be. But I will give you some 
simple statistics. 
 
We have had in this province the lowest unemployment rate in 
19822, '83, and '84. We were tied for the second lowest in '85, and 
have been second lowest as of May 1986. In 1978, '79, '80, and '81 
— I believe you know who was in government in those days — 
Saskatchewan was only the second lowest in unemployment in the 
province. 
 
The labour force has grown from 446,000 in '81, to 491,000 in '85, 
to 503,000 in '86. And probably most important to summarize that, 
when we took office in April  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1868 
 
 

of 1982, there were 420,000 people working in the province. And 
as of May 1986 there are 464,000 people who are working in 
Saskatchewan. That is 42,000 more people working today than in 
April of 1982 — so 42,000 more jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
To suggest that somehow the efforts of this particular department 
or the efforts of the government as a whole are somehow cosmetic 
or trivial is not borne out by that 42,000 additional jobs, Mr. 
Chairman — not to suggest that the problem has been solved. 
There's a lot of work to do by a lot of people in this province to 
solve it, and we would suggest that this department can play a 
significant role in continuing to do that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister said that this department 
represented a real and significant attempt to do something about 
unemployment. This, Mr. Minister, which I saw Conservative 
members walking around with, this represents a real and 
significant effort to do something about unemployment. 
 
I notice members opposite carrying it around, reading it, passing it 
around. All I can say is, you're in good company. The vast 
majority of people in Saskatchewan are reading and passing 
around this little booklet. So don't feel ashamed of yourself. It's a 
good booklet. It is a good . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The hon. member knows why I'm 
calling him to order, and therefore I'll just ask him to carry on, and 
. . . (inaudible) . . . the booklet which he well knows has nothing to 
do with the estimates under discussion. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me tie it in quickly. It says, "Let's get 
Saskatchewan working again." 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I rule that the hon. member's 
quoting is out of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A real program, Mr. Minister, to create jobs 
would look something like the following: providing direct 
assistance of $7,000 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . providing 
direct assistance to people for purchase of a home of $7,000. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm not going to go through the details of the 
housing program. They too well know it. They are too well-known 
in Saskatchewan. Suffice it to say that I don't think there's been an 
election promise in recent years that has created as much interest 
as that one. That, Mr. Minister, is a real program to create jobs. 
 
A real program to create jobs does not consist of lifting out of 
Rural Development a program such as upgrading heavy-haul 
roads and putting it in your department. I'm fairly certain there's 
been a program to upgrade heavy-haul roads for some years. 
Probably the program existed during the years of high 
employment and low unemployment. That's before you people 
took office, if you're interested in the date. 
 
Mr. Minister, the programs which you have in your department 
have been by and large lifted out of other departments. They add 
nothing, Mr. Minister, to the  

efforts that you ought to be making to create jobs. What you have 
done is cosmeticized the problem, and Mr. Minister, that's why 
you're in the sort of trouble you are. 
 
I often think that the public who follow our debates in question 
periods on the third Friday of every month, when there's minor 
gyrations up or down — and if the unemployment rate goes up by 
one-half of 1 per cent, one side claims total victory; and if the 
unemployment rate goes down by one-half of 1 per cent, the other 
side is ecstatic and claims total victory — I often think people 
must think that's foolish, because it is foolish. 
 
These monthly gladiatorial contests over minute changes in the 
unemployment rate is silly. What is meaningful is what people feel 
and think. And what people feel and think, Mr. Minister, is that 
your efforts to solve the unemployment program have been really 
quite inadequate. 
 
Mr. Minister, I said earlier that I honestly think that Conservatives 
do not believe that there's any meaningful thing they can do about 
unemployment. They believe, Mr. Minister, that unemployment is 
a part of a capitalist economy and it's going to be here whatever 
you do, and the best you can do is hope they don't blame it on you. 
 
I would like, Mr. Minister, to read a couple of paragraphs from 
what is probably the most significant statement made on social 
and economic policy in decades. That's the bishops' statement on 
unemployment. I want to just read a bit for your edification. And I 
would hope, Mr. Minister, that you'll take it as a real responsibility 
to do something about unemployment: 
 

Human work is not only a duty, it is also a fundamental human 
right. 

 
And then it goes on: 
 

The core of the agenda is a renewed vision of a market society 
where human beings and social relations are defined in terms of 
demand and supply forces of the market. The dominant 
tendency is to subordinate human dignity and human needs to 
the abstract rhetoric of the market. 

 
Mr. Minister, that is a significant statement on unemployment — 
significant because it called to the attention of thoughtful people 
everywhere, whether they be Catholics or non-Catholic, the real 
social harm and the immorality of unemployment. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think we ought to contrast that significant and 
thoughtful statement with this sham which appears in your 
estimates, of including in your estimates a whole lot of programs 
which have been in existence for a very long period of time and 
calling that a job-creation effort. It is obvious, Mr. Minister, you 
don't take it to be a serious responsibility because, Mr. Minister, 
you haven't done anything meaningful about it. Your view of 
unemployment is: you cosmeticize it, you hope to avoid 
responsibility, and sooner and later the market will take care of it. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1869 
 

Well it will, perhaps. But in the meantime there's an enormous 
amount of suffering, that should be viewed by governments as 
immoral if you honestly viewed unemployment in the manner in 
which the Catholic bishops have viewed unemployment. While I 
say this is the most significant social statement, I think, in decades, 
I say that as someone who is not a Catholic. But I can readily see 
the timeless wisdom which shines through that statement. If you 
believe that, Mr. Minister, you wouldn't include three pages in 
your estimates of programs lifted by the departments. 
 
These estimates, Mr. Minister, have got to be a real mess. It is 
difficult for experienced legislators to figure out where a certain 
subvote is. The major reason for that is because of your gyrations 
with this department, your attempt to appear that a program called 
heavy-haul road upgrading some something about unemployment. 
It's supposed to do something about roads in northern 
Saskatchewan to haul logs on. It does nothing with respect to 
unemployment in a direct sense that hasn't been done. 
 
(2330) 
 
So I say, Mr. Minster, that the bishops' thoughtful statement on 
employment and the sham which we see in these estimates stand 
as stark contrasts in terms of compassion and in terms of an 
understanding of the responsibility of western societies to tackle 
unemployment in a meaningful fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think that the member 
and I will have to agree to disagree. I think the most significant 
thing about that whole session was that, in discussing the 7 per 
cent solution, he couldn't even do it with a straight face. I would 
suggest that everybody in Saskatchewan is laughing at that as an 
employment program. 
 
Very quickly, to call a program that has put $600 million into a 
five-year program to deal with employment development a sham, 
as I indicated earlier, does some discredit to the member who just 
spoke. 
 
To very quickly summarize what we are doing in the department 
and where all those programs that you see in front of you fit in, 
there are a number of things that are short-term and seasonal that 
are directed at specific groups. Obviously the summer and winter 
seasonal programs fit into that area. 
 
We have a significant component that is directed at training and 
opportunity development, because if we are going to somehow 
meet the expectations of the bishops and provide meaningful 
opportunities for people to find real work, the group that have the 
biggest problem are going to have to upgrade themselves, get 
some training improvements, and we are working to put that in 
place. 
 
And the last component, of course, is economic development, 
long-term projects. We have seen many of those talked about in 
the last four years. We are seeing many of them take place. We 
have clear indications that the members opposite are against those, 
that that is not the direction they would choose to take. So I 
suppose the  

bottom line is that, when we look at the 42,000 new jobs that have 
been created in the last four years, we are obviously doing some 
things right. 
 
Again, despite the fact we have the second lowest unemployment, 
we accept that there are problems. We will continue to work with 
them. Obviously you have the methods that you would advocate; 
we have the ones we would advocate; and I think we will have to 
agree that there are some deep philosophical differences. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The hour is somewhat late to get into a 
philosophical discussion about the wisdom of the Gainers bacon 
plant, Weyerhaeuser mill, and so on. Suffice it to say — without 
getting into a specific discussion of those — suffice it to say that 
it's not the approach of this party to give away our resources and 
hope that by giving them away to outsiders we will make 
ourselves rich. We entirely miss the logic of that approach. The 
former premier of B.C., Dave Barrett, used to call it the 
trickle-down theory — pour enormous wealth on those at top and 
some of it might trickle down. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, we think there's a better approach, and I think 
the public have come to the conclusion there's a better approach, 
and that's why we haven't had an election. Because you know 
they're looking for a better approach and they're going to take that 
better approach whenever you people have the nerve to call an 
election. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to know if you have in your department two 
employees, Brenda Barootes and Trevor Roadhouse? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure how the 
member opposite can call the construction of a bacon plant the 
giving away of our resources, but somehow in that twisted 
mentality of his he has. I would suggest that when the member 
from Cumberland stood and talked about the problems in the 
North and your party determines that you're going to close the 
uranium mines, then you have some problems with employment in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The answer to your question about the two people is, yes, they are 
in our employ. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What are their duties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, they are assigned to my 
office staff and are seconded to Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well would you explain that arrangement for 
me? If they are seconded to Executive Council, why aren't they in 
Executive Council? Why are they in your staff and seconded to 
Executive Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the two individuals that 
the member mentions are assigned in my office from the 
department, and they have been seconded to Executive Council. 
The specific duties that they are involved in there, I don't have that 
type of detail. There are several people in government who are 
assigned in one department and seconded to others working in 
different jobs. The Department of Justice would be a good  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1870 
 
 

example. I don't think that the arrangement is uncommon. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, is it accurate that Brenda 
Barootes is, in fact, a temporary employee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Yes, Miss Barootes is, in fact, in 
temporary employment, or a temporary employee. I suppose I 
should add that she is the daughter of Senator Barootes, and that is 
probably for people's information more the reason for the 
questioning. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And Trevor Roadhouse, is he also a 
temporary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — No, he is a permanent employee. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Will the minister explain to me the logic of 
seconding a temporary employee? Well if she's temporary, why 
doesn't she just move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, Miss Barootes was an 
inquiries officer with EDA. She is on a temporary position, but she 
has been with us since March of 1985. I'm not sure what the 
rationale of a question on the secondment of a temporary versus a 
permanent is. It was deemed that the young lady could benefit the 
government working in Executive Council, that there would be 
benefits for her as well, and the secondment was put in place. 
Whether she's temporary or permanent I don't think has a whole 
lot of bearing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How long has she been seconded to 
Executive Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Miss Barootes has been in that position 
since late March. My learned colleague from Rosthern informs me 
that there have been any number of people under your 
administration; the previous minister of Agriculture had a 
secondment from Education, a Miss Benson, I believe, who 
worked in his office. I mean, the arrangement is not something 
new or dramatic or Draconian in any way. It's been going on for 
some time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What are her duties with Executive Council? 
She's being paid for by your department, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — As I indicated, Mr. Chairman, the 
arrangement is in place. I have too much to do to be worrying 
about what people are specifically doing in other departments. 
They are seconded to that department, their duties are assigned in 
that department, and we are busy here in this department trying to 
deal with the unemployment problem. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, when will you undertake to 
give me the travel expenses of these two employees for the period 
since March '85, just to pick a date? Would you give us their travel 
expenses from March '85 to present? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, we'll provide the 
information on the travel of the department as we have with all our 
other departments. We will attempt to break it  

down for those two specific individuals. I don't think that will be 
difficult. I think they've been on one trip in the time. But we'll get 
that information. If it's not adequate, I will commit to update it in a 
form that you find suitable. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Will you, Mr. Minister, give us the number of 
out-of-province trips; the destination of each, the amount spent on 
air travel, lodging, food, and miscellaneous, with respect to both of 
these employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, we will commit to give 
the number of people on the trip; the destination; and the amount 
spent. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I take it you are going to give 
us the . . . I'm sorry, I actually didn't hear you. Mr. Minister, do I 
take it you're going to give us the number of trips, the destination 
of each, and the number who accompanied him or her, as the case 
may be, the air travel, the meals, and the miscellaneous? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — If you can keep your colleagues quiet, 
I'll say it once more. We will give you the number of people who 
travel, the destination, and the total cost in a global sense, which is 
in keeping with the long, storied tradition of this establishment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well the reason, Mr. Minister, why I think a 
bit more might be . . . I really wish, Mr. Minister, that you would 
tell me what their duties are. I think you know. I don't think they 
have any duties that pertain to the administration of government. I 
think these two are organizing, attempting to organize your . . . 
They obviously have a difficult task. They are, I think, attempting 
to organize your party, Mr. Minister, for an election. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you give me their wages, their salary that 
these people are paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I did not give the 
responsibilities because I don't know all the responsibilities. One 
of their responsibilities that Mr. Roadhouse is involved in — and, 
I believe, Miss Barootes — is in arranging cabinet tours, trips, 
within the province. 
 
We have heard a great deal of talk in this Assembly about 
consultation and lack thereof. I think in Tourism and Small 
Business estimates we went into some detail though the simple 
fact that in the first six weeks that I was Minister of Small 
Business, I met with more business groups than the previous 
administration did in their 11-year history. And we are doing that 
with all interest groups. There are many of those types of things, 
and they work closely in Executive Council arranging ministers' 
travel around the province. I'm sure that's not all, but that's the 
only part I'm aware of. 
 
In terms of the salaries of the two people under discussion. Mr. 
Roadhouse's salary is 5529, and Miss Barootes is 2553. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, just one further question before 
I leave this. Is there any family relationship between Brenda 
Barootes and Senator Barootes? 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1871 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I indicated in my 
earlier response, when the member from Quill Lakes was 
obviously drowning me out, that Miss Barootes is Senator 
Barootes' daughter. And I also indicated that that probably created 
as much of a reason for the question as anything else that we could 
discuss here. 
 
(2345) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there's a couple of other 
questions. I would appreciate the response to these questions as 
soon as possible, incidentally. A couple of years from now is not 
quite what I had in mind when I asked for your undertaking. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would tell me if you have any 
statistics on the number of people who are employed part-time. Do 
you have the figures for the number of people who have part-time 
employment in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have that with 
us. We will provide it. We don't do any statistical . . . or conduct 
statistical research ourselves. We depend on StatsCanada 
numbers. We don't have that capacity. We can search up 
StatsCanada numbers and respond to that. I'm sure your research 
department could do the same thing, but we will commit to get the 
best numbers we have on part-time employment in Saskatchewan 
and send it to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I will take the minister's undertaking 
and leave it with the following comment. The information we 
have is that there's 112,000 people have part-time employment. 
The vast majority of them are young people who want full-time 
employment. 
 
Mr. Minister, the youth unemployment — I'm going to raise this 
subject and then I want to leave it — the youth unemployment 
should be regarded by this government as a very serious problem. 
The number of youth who are employed is actually lower than it 
was in 1982, and the number of unemployed is up by about 60 per 
cent. That may be a bit high — maybe about 40 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, of the various classes of unemployed people, surely 
the young people are the ones who should concern us most. 
Young people who go for several years without a job — and some 
of these people have been unable to find jobs for several years — I 
think develop, or may well develop, a rather unhealthy approach 
to life. 
 
Of all the statistics which we trade back and forth, the ones that 
should concern us the most is youth unemployment. They are the 
ones, I think, Mr. Minister, that this government has done the least 
for. The various heavy-haul road upgrading programs and the 
trade opportunities programs, by and large, I think, do not provide 
jobs for these young people who must compete with older and 
more experienced workers. So I suggest, Mr. Minister, that among 
your failings, perhaps the most tragic is youth unemployment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think it's important 
that we recognize youth unemployment as a significant problem. 
We would be . . . (inaudible  

interjection) . . . That's obvious, true. I think it's important, as well, 
that we recognize that there have been some improvements. 
 
In the number of unemployed young people in the 15 to 25 bracket 
in 1985, we had 18,000; in 1986 — this is May numbers — we 
have 15,000, a decrease of 3,000 people. I think that's moving in 
the right direction. Obviously the problem's not solved. The 
unemployment rate last year, May of '85, was 14.3 per cent; this 
year it's 12.6 — granted, too high, but still a further movement in 
the right direction. 
 
I think that youth unemployment in that group can be categorized 
as poorly trained, as lacking skills. I think the role that we have to 
take is basically two things — encourage those young people, first 
of all, to stay in school. Members of the opposition took great 
exception to the advertising campaign that we undertook, using a 
well-known Saskatchewan high school athlete, and now a college 
and possibly an NFL athlete, to encourage young people to stay in 
school. I think that that is an important approach. 
 
I think we have to provide training opportunities for those people. 
And I think, lastly, we have to provide them with that . . . help 
them get that first job because statistics will show that once people 
are in the labour force, they tend to have a much better chance of 
maintaining a position in the labour force. 
 
So we accept that it's a serious problem, that there's a great deal 
more to be done. We have done some things; we are moving in the 
right direction; and I think we'll have some very exciting 
announcements to make in the short-term to attack this very 
serious problem. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 49 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Employment Development Agency 

Employment Development Fund — Vote 65 
 
Items 1 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Employment Development Agency — Supply and Services 
Employment Development Fund — Vote 65 

Northern Institute of Technology 
Young Offenders Facilities 

Government Facilities 
Capital Expenditure — Nil Vote 

 
Vote 65 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Employment Development Agency 
Employment Development Fund — Vote 65 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1872 
 
 

Vote 65 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Employment Development Agency 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 49 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 49 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to take this 
opportunity at this late hour to thank the members of the 
department for all their time and effort in preparing these 
estimates, and for providing me with the information that we 
presented tonight — an outstanding group who have waited a long 
time to get at this. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, the officials do deserve a special note of 
thanks for having sat here until — having begun about 10:30 and 
finishing about 12; that is a special ordeal, and I join in thanking 
them. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:57 p.m. 
 
 
 


