


















































December 11, 1986 Hansard


 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 11, 1986 
 

145 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Proposed Fertilizer Plant 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is directed today to the minister in charge of Economic 
Development and Trade, and it has to do with an announcement 
in the Leader-Post this morning about the proposed fertilizer 
plant for Regina. Mr. Speaker, you will recall that back in April 
the Premier of this government, this province’s government, 
made a big announcement, together with others, that there was 
to be a fertilizer plant, and in doing so said the following, quote: 
 

It’s a win-win situation. It’s very good. It’s a win-win 
situation, 

 
referring to the fertilizer. 
 
Today’s Leader-Post, however, quotes one of the partners to the 
proposal, Mr. Leland of FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.), as 
saying that: 
 

Federated has decided it is “not interested in participating at 
this time.” 

 
My question to the Minister of Economic Trade: in the light of 
this great win situation, what happened? What’s the status of 
this project as of this moment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The present status of the ammonia plant 
proposed in conjunction with the heavy oil upgrader in Regina 
is as follows. When the initial plan was announced, we were 
hoping for an integrated project which would tie on directly to 
the heavy oil upgrader. Over the period of time the Co-op has 
found that the project as large as a heavy oil upgrader, 
involving well over $650 million, is a very large project and a 
project that they don’t want to go too much further beyond. 
Now I think the hon. member should not read the headlines of 
the Leader-Post and come quickly to the decision that an 
ammonia plant or fertilizer plant will not, in fact, be built. 
 
As we explored in the studies over the last six months or so, 
there is two and perhaps three ways that we can go, and each 
one of them involves a greater or lesser degree of integration. 
The most perfect situation would be to totally integrate the new 
ammonia plant right in with the upgrader. The problem, as I 
said, Co-op has some problems with that. 
 
The second option would be to sell the hydrogen, the waste or 
excess hydrogen from the upgrader, to a consortium that would 
build the ammonia plant. In that type of situation the economics 
are still very good. The return on capital is still very good, and 
it’s a project that is very much alive in the study going on 
today. 
 
So I think the hon. member should be cautious not to simply 
interpret the headline of the Leader-Post as if  

fertilizer will not in fact be produced in Saskatchewan. The 
mandate our department has received, and I have received from 
the Premier, is that he puts a very high priority on diversifying 
our economy, and particularly to diversify our economy to 
provide in puts to agriculture. That, we take very seriously. 
That, we are convinced will go forward in the next short while. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Is it not 
correct to say, Mr. Minister, that your Premier, in making this 
announcement in April of this year — I might add just a few 
months before what then was thought to be a provincial general 
election — and in suing the words win, win, win, told the 
people of this province, and particularly the jobless people, the 
thousands of jobless people, that there would be 200 jobs — 
200 jobs permanently; 1,200 in construction — and told the 
people of this province that this project was a go? That was the 
message given to us in April. Would you not admit that the 
Premier misled the people of Regina and Saskatchewan in 
making the announcement as he did at that time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan did not mislead the people of Regina and 
Saskatchewan in April, he did not mislead them in October, and 
he doesn’t mislead them at any time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The Premier of our province has made it 
a fundamental principle that we must diversify our economy to 
build projects that can help our farmers and at the same time 
create jobs and make Saskatchewan a stronger economic place. 
 
That particular approach was endorsed by Vern Leland of the 
Co-op. That particular approach was endorsed by Ted Turner of 
the Wheat Pool. They are still very, very favourable to that 
project going ahead for the betterment of our province. We still 
believe that a project tied very closely to the Co-op upgrader 
will see the light of day, benefiting both the city of Regina, but 
more particularly, benefit the input costs of the farmers of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary, 
if I may, to the Minister of Economic Development. He just 
finished telling us in the second question that Mr. Leland and 
the other partners are still very much interested in having this 
project go ahead. He says so in the face of today’s Leader-Post 
which quotes Mr. Leland as saying that: 
 

Federated has decided it is “not interested in participating at 
this time.” 

 
And the minister also implies that there are some future 
interests, and I want to ask the minister this supplementary 
question to clarify the Leader-Post story. The Leader-Post 
story, asked about what future prospects of this project going 
ahead, said the following: 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

146 
 

. . . declined to say when there will be an announcement 
about whether the project will proceed. 
 
“Oh, I don’t know, (the minister is quoted as saying) I 
never get tied into numbers and times and that type of 
thing.” 

 
I think we would know that from the minister’s previous 
budgets. My question to the minister is therefore this: can you 
give this House some specific timetable as to when this project 
is going to get going, and more specifically, who are the 
partners that are involved? Because unless you can do that to 
this House today, we can say you have misled the people of 
Saskatchewan for purely political reasons if you can’t do it 
otherwise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises a 
question with regards to a quote, as interpreted by a reporter 
from the Leader-Post who posed the question to me, will you 
be announcing next week what this project is going to be? 
 
I responded to him and I will respond to you in exactly the same 
way. We are committed to this particular project. We are 
moving forward with the studies and the research on this 
particular project, as I indicated in my initial answer, in three 
potential ways: one, the fully integrated system is not going to 
go for the primary reason is that the Co-op do not believe they 
can handle a project that would throw their project well over a 
billion dollars, and there’s a lot of work involved and a lot of 
engineering, etc., tied into that. We are, and have been for some 
time, pursuing the whole approach of doing a stand-alone 
project, fed hydrogen from the Co-op upgrader. That is very, 
very much alive; that is still being pursued. 
 
As to when the final decision of go or no go will be taken on 
that, I’m not going to stand here and say it’s going to be 
tomorrow or three weeks from today or three months from 
today. You should know better than to ask a question that gives 
a finite time as to when that would be. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that 
the Minister of Economic Development and Trade obviously 
cannot or will not give an answer on this important question, I 
direct my question to the Minister of Co-operation and Co-op 
Development. 
 
Originally there were four groups associated with this fertilizer 
project. There was the government, there was Federated Co-op, 
there was Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and the French firm. My 
question to the hon. minister is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Easy on the honourable. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Easy on the honourable. My question is simply: 
who is involved at this stage? Who is still interested in seeing 
this important project go ahead, or is there anyone who is still 
interested? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I could answer the member by saying 
that Economic Development and Trade has been 

the lead agency on the total project and I will refer the question 
to my hon. colleague. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, in response to the question which 
is very much like the question from the member from 
Riversdale, you correctly identified the two co-ops in 
Saskatchewan, the Wheat Pool and Federated Co-op as 
originally part of the group that studied whether the project 
could be built as an integrated project. 
 
The other partner was CdF Chimie, a French company. That 
French company is still very, very interested in the project and 
to say that Federated Co-op, I think would be to put the words 
in the mouth of Federated Co-op that’s not true that they’re not 
still interested in this project — interested from the point of 
view of being able to have a project that they can sell excess 
hydrogen to, other than just venting it up into air. And that 
makes the upgrader a more economically viable project, and 
money is made both for the Co-op and for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So they’re involved in it from that point of view, and I think if 
you read further into the statements made by Mr. Empey, 
indicates that at this point in time they’re not prepared to 
proceed on a 25 per cent share basis fully integrating that 
project. They’re certainly interested in exploring. I think if you 
look at the — further read that article — the head of the Co-op 
refinery indicates that we are negotiating, or working towards, 
an agreement by which you could sell that particular hydrogen, 
that excess hydrogen, to this particular project. 
 
And both the Pool and the co-op certainly would be involved, 
or be interested, at such time that this project was built as being 
part of — part of a marketing arm that would sell cheaper 
fertilizer to the farmers of Saskatchewan. And I would certainly 
hope that they would. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, my question I 
guess I have to direct to the Minister of Economic Development 
and Trade: when will this paper project get ahead and finally 
occur? 
 
The members opposite, the government, seems determined to 
have nothing but paper projects. I have here a statement that the 
studies must begin right away because of the decision on 
whether to proceed with the plant must be made by the end of 
May. And then, later on we have all of a sudden, May becomes 
October. My question is: is this project destined to always be a 
paper project as most of the other projects that the government 
has proposed, or will it, in fact, ever get past the study stage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I make two comments. When you refer 
to paper projects — we’re also doing paper projects in the city 
of Prince Albert. We’re very proud of that paper project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And that paper project is going to be 
one of the best projects ever done in this province by  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

147 
 

any government working in conjunction with the private sector. 
 
The members opposite talk about paper projects. Members 
opposite talk about paper projects and upgraders. They had one 
in Lloydminster; they had one in Archydal. Remember that? 
You guys didn’t want to deal with the Co-op; you wanted to 
deal with Gulf and Imperial Oil and some of those. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is what I call paper oil projects. The ones that we do 
are real projects, and at one point in the future of this province 
we’re going to have a fertilizer plant, and we’re going to have 
chemical plants because that’s what the people want, and that’s 
the type of diversification this province needs, and that’s what 
they voted for on October 20th. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Implementation of Announced Projects 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question 
to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. Mr. 
Minister, it has become very clear that many of the 
announcements which have been made by the Premier and 
ministers of this government have been announcements which 
were not based on any facts whatsoever, like the hiring of staff 
at Nardei Industries for several weeks so that the Premier could 
have an official opening, and then laying them off several days 
later; like the paper-mill, Mr. Minister, which appears not now 
going to be built according to the agreement which your 
colleague and your seat mate tabled the other day; and like the 
Husky oil upgrader which seems to have disappeared from the 
horizon in recent months. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in light of that, and in light of the collapse 
of the Regina project which my colleague, the member from 
Riversdale asked about a few moments ago, another question I 
think needs to be asked and that is, Mr. Minister: how many 
more of the projects which you and your colleagues and the 
Premier announced are going to projects which are going to be 
nothing more than press release projects? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Regina North East indicates to the House — I think it’s wishful 
thinking on his part — that the paper project in Prince Albert is 
not going forward. I simply have this advice for the member 
from Regina North East: just hold your breath, my friend. That 
project is going forward, and that is going to be a good project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe importantly that major projects, that 
diversification of our economy, is the way that we must go. We 
have a project in Prince Albert going forward. We have two 
projects in North Battleford going forward. We have a plant in 
Saskatoon — which the hon. member from Riversdale might be 
interested in — where some Japanese are coming in to 
manufacture turbines for a new power project. That is going 
forward. We are building in this province, Mr. Speaker. We will 
continue to build in this province. If members opposite want to 
show doom and gloom then nothing will work. I can assure the 
members opposite these projects are going  

forward and they’re going to be for the betterment of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Feasibility Study of Toll Highways 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. My question is to the 
Minister of Highways and it deals with the disclosure that your 
government has studied the feasibility of charging tolls on some 
Saskatchewan highways as a new source of provincial revenue. 
And I believe that the minister has already denied that this 
feasibility study was done by his officials, and I’m wondering if 
the minister will now give this Assembly his guarantee that no 
one in the Department of Highways was involved in this study 
whatsoever, and can he now tell us who actually authorized and 
paid for this report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had this 
matter brought to my attention just the other day by an 
investigative journalist, and he handed me a single piece of 
paper, page 42, from some project — some study that was done, 
and for the life of me I do not know who did the study. I did 
check with the senior departmental officials in the Department 
of Highways. We had a meeting just the other day. There was 
35 of the top people in our department and I queried every one 
of them on it, and they totally had had no knowledge 
whatsoever of any study being done by the Department of 
Highways with respect to toll roads or toll bridges whatsoever, 
so I don’t know. 
 
We have an awful lot of documents that come before this 
government; we have an awful lot of people who do studies and 
different things, but I have to say, to the best of my knowledge, 
to the best of the knowledge of all the people in my department, 
this study was not done by the Department of Highways. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Would you believe it if we said we put a 
troll under the bridge? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, one of the members opposite 
asked about the troll under the bridge. There have been several 
trolls under the bridge in the past four and a half years in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, the supplementary to the 
Minister of Highways. He’s quoted in a news article that he 
knows nothing about this, but the he also says that it would be 
only under very special circumstances. So it seems to me the 
minister has given some consideration at least to charging tolls 
on Saskatchewan’s highway systems — to our motorists and the 
carriers that use that system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we want to know is under what special 
circumstances, under what special conditions, would your 
government or your department, Mr. Minister, consider 
charging tolls to the people of Saskatchewan to use our road 
system? 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

148 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, the whole subject of toll 
roads and toll bridges, I think, has perhaps come to the forefront 
in recent months, primarily because of wonderful, masterful 
piece of engineering out in the province of British Columbia, 
and that is called the Coquihalla Highways, I believe. 
 
I have not had the pleasure of viewing the highway, but a lot of 
the people from Saskatchewan who attended Expo this summer 
did have the pleasure of going and viewing that, what I would 
term a magnificent piece of engineering. 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, would say that that would be a very, very 
special purpose, a consideration, and I would ask the member, if 
he can come up with something that would be similar to the 
Coquihalla in nature, in the geography, in the topography of this 
province, well we may just consider it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that, as in the British 
Columbia situation, Mr. Minister, you’d be interested in 
charging people an $8 toll to go across a section of 
Saskatchewan’s highways. And maybe it’s because in the 
Weyerhaeuser report that you’re going to have to spend about 9 
per cent of your Highway’s budget to pay for roads for 
Weyerhaeuser corporation to reap Saskatchewan’s resources out 
of the province. And what we want to know from you, Mr. 
Minister, is if you give us your assurance that you will never 
put in highway toll systems in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Will you give us your assurance on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I only became aware of 
this so-called study, and I’m not even sure that it was done by 
anybody within government, just a few days ago. I have not had 
enough time to really seriously consider this particular subject. I 
and my colleagues have spent a considerable amount of time in 
the last few weeks, and number of months prior to this, in 
looking at the overall future of our province; looking at the 
diversification of our economy; looking at the protection of 
individuals; looking at how we can provide jobs and 
opportunities for all those residents in this great province of 
ours. 
 
I have not given this particular subject hardly a fleeting thought, 
so it would be very difficult . . . very difficult for me to make a 
. . . it would be extremely difficult for me to stand here today 
and give you my assurance, for as long as infinity is, that there 
will never be toll roads or toll bridges or anything else. I am 
frankly very, very surprised that given the special circumstances 
that we are under in this province of ours, that the NDP, all they 
can find to debate about, the most topical issue of debate, is 
some study that was done by some person, some place, and we 
have not given it consideration whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada’s Patent Drug Legislation 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Minister of Health 

and it has to do with the remarkable announcement a few days 
ago by the Premier of Saskatchewan that your government fully 
supports Ottawa’s plans to amend patent legislation, 
amendments that will drive up the cost of prescription drugs for 
Saskatchewan people. The Premier says higher drug costs for 
consumers will be offset by new drug company investment in 
our province. For the Premier to say that means that he must be 
aware of the cost to consumers. Can the minister table, later 
today, all cost impact studies completed by his department or 
the federal government on how much the Patent Act changes 
will cost Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s answer to 
the question . . . to a similar question earlier in this session was 
that yes, we do support the idea of more research and 
development in Canada. We do support the idea of more of that 
type of work being done in this country, and not only in this 
country, but for the potential for that kind of work to be done in 
our province as we attempt to diversify the economy here. And 
this type of very technical research, and so on, is just the kind of 
thing that we would like to see happen in our province. 
 
So I want to emphasize one thing for the member opposite, is 
that the prices of drugs which are now in existence — the prices 
of drugs which are now in existence — the prices of drugs 
which are now in existence — are not going to rise, will not 
rise. And in the future, how can anyone determine just what the 
prices of drugs will be in the future? How can you determine 
what the prices will be? 
 
What I have done in recent days for the member’s edification 
and for all the members of the House, I’ve written a letter to 
minister of Consumer Affairs in Ottawa, with a copy to his 
colleague, the Minister of Health, and I have asked him to do 
three things as it relates to this, and I notice that some of those 
things are in place now. 
 
The letter stresses the three main areas: the workings of the 
drug prices review board that is proposed. In controlling 
potential drug cost increases I want to be sure that those 
workings are . . . that the way in which that drug prices review 
board will work is in place and that it can be effective. And we 
know the history of price review boards in the past in this 
country, and we’re not sure of just how well they can work. So 
that is one concern that I have expressed. 
 
The allotment to this province and on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, so the allotment to our province of the research 
and development initiatives, we are very concerned about that, 
and we are very, very . . . You can be sure, Mr. Speaker, and all 
members can be sure, that we will be fighting for every bit of 
that research and development to go on in our province that is 
possible to go on here. 
 
And also the distribution of the $100 million compensation 
funding arrangements going to the prices of future drugs, we 
have asked to have a very careful look at the distribution of the 
$100 million compensation fund which is proposed. 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

149 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have said we are concerned about these 
things on one side but, on the other hand, we are very much in 
support of the diversification of the economy of Canada, and 
certainly of our province in terms of research and development 
being done here in this country. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. How can the 
minister opposite say that drugs will not increase in price when 
he refers to the $100 million that the federal government is 
going to contribute to the provinces across the land in the next 
four years? How can you say that drugs will not increase in 
price and in the same breath talk about the $100 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I said very clearly, Mr. Speaker, 
that the cost of drugs which are now in existence, present day 
drugs, will not rise. I did not say that the cost of drugs which 
are to be developed in the future will not rise. I did not say that. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Hon. member know that 
when the Speaker is on his feet there should be no talking in the 
House. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that items 
numbers 1 through 158, inclusive, be converted to Motions for 
Returns (Debatable). 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Converted to debatable. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau and the amendment 
thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I left off on the issue of 
housing. Today I would give a little bit of a clarification in 
regards to the language of presentation yesterday. 
 
When I talked in Cree, I mentioned that I would be presenting 
the translation in English. So the presentation that I am making 
right now is the translation of yesterday’s talk in Cree. 
 
I guess in regards to housing, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the 
tough time that people had in the North in regards to housing. 
As I come down to Regina, the situation is much the same. I 
only have to read the papers and the Leader-Post this past week 
in regards to housing in the city of Regina. In the paper there 
was an issue related to Gabriel Housing. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
here is an example of a situation where a Métis housing group 
who is trying hard to make good business decisions in the city 
of Regina can be put down in many different ways here in 
Regina. 

People are trying hard to make a living, given the restrictions on 
limitations of the amount of dollars that we do have. When they 
use these dollars to the best of their ability, Mr. Speaker, they 
are put down. And when I saw a letter written by a business 
person in this city, it stated that it was only sound business 
management by Gabriel Housing, and that the type of 
restrictions that they are given is the same type of restrictions 
that I mentioned yesterday. 
 
I would like, Mr. Speaker, today to start off on the possibilities 
of potential in this province, and I will raise the issue of tourism 
that has been talked about. As I attended the meeting last night 
over at the Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations, 
some of the people that I talked to in there asked me about the 
potential in regards to the hospitality institute, and also the 
tourist dollars that are supposed to be released through this 
government. When they asked me in relation to the North, I had 
to say: nothing is specifically directed to the North. So when we 
talked a little more, we knew that there was basically three areas 
of tourism in this province: the North, the rural areas, and the 
urban areas. We are afraid by the lack of mention on northern 
development that, again, nothing will go to the North, and 
further questions will be raised in that regard. 
 
Might I add that one of the key concepts in regards to sound 
business practice in the area of tourism is the inclusion of 
culture and social development along with that. When people 
come here from different places or when people from southern 
Saskatchewan visit the North, they want to know about the 
cultural traditions of the people as well. They want to know the 
knowledge the people have about the ways of life in northern 
Saskatchewan, and they want to be able to combine business 
with sound knowledge of the cultural background of the people 
as well. And I do not see any proposal here, but I hope that part 
of the dollars that are going to be generated through the 
provincial coffers will be provided for aboriginal economic 
development institutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — As I look at the issue of drugs and alcohol and 
the tremendous damage that it does to a lot of people . . .  I 
looked at the policy of this government and I am, again, very 
amazed that in the North we continue to subsidize liquor. And it 
continues. But this government has taken the subsidy away in 
regards to food on the table for the women, children, and the 
older people of northern Saskatchewan. They would rather 
subsidize liquor, but not food on the table for the people. 
 
In regards to another issue, Mr. Speaker. A lot of people in 
Cumberland House, Southend, and Sandy Bay have for many 
years raised the issue of compensation in regards to 
hydroelectric power development. Not only have they raised the 
issue of compensation, but also their experiences in regards to 
their input in the development of hydro. Before I would get into 
the compensation question, I would like to relate to the people 
in this Chamber some of the words of a person who had worked 
in the hydro development projects for over 40 years in regards 
to the relationships that we talk about amongst 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

150 
 

people. 
 
So I would like to read the words of the late Moise Bear of 
Sandy Bay in regards to the input in the area of work. This is 
what the late Moise Bear had to say in regards to the input on 
work, and this was in the early 1930s onward. 
 

When we began working with the Euro-Canadian, some 
did not like the idea of working alongside us. They felt 
that we were ignorant about work and that we weren’t 
good workers. 
 
It’s not that we were lazy, we were rather inexperienced 
on particular jobs. All the aboriginal workers that I worked 
with were extremely hard workers. The work was tough 
and strenuous; there was no room for people that were 
lazy. 
 
I didn’t let the expressed displeasure and disapproval of 
the Euro-Canadian bother me too much. I knew within 
myself that I was working hard and that is what I kept in 
mind. The Euro-Canadians, themselves, were also very 
hard workers. 
 
Once I knew what was required of me on the job, I didn’t 
like the idea of having someone tell me what to do. By 
then I knew what was expected of me and I also knew that 
I was a good worker. The Euro-Canadian isn’t the only 
one who is a good worker. That’s all. 
 

And what the person was basically saying is that the people 
from the North and the indigenous people in the North have 
been builders in regards to the development of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — One of the things that a lot of people told me in 
Sandy Bay is that although they were builders of this province, 
they were not able to benefit from the development of this 
province. For example, it took 30 years for the people of Sandy 
Bay to finally get hydro development inside their community 
from the Island Falls dam which was only two miles away. It 
took them 30 years before they finally got power, and they were 
the ones who built the dam. 
 
When I mentioned the fact of compensation, there was a lot of 
feeling about compensation and the fact that nothing had still 
come out. So I would like to read a bit on what Angus Bear has 
to say in regards to the issue of the compensation question and 
what he feels about the government in that regard. Angus Bear 
states: 
 

Maybe the government is afraid to pay because he is 
penny pinching. With all the money he makes in one year, 
the power house has paid itself a long time ago. I know 
this because it cost him 6 to 7 million. Today if he builds 
another damn, it will cost him over 100 million dollars. 

 
He states that the government has a very good memory when it 
comes to providing benefits and profits for big  

corporations, but when it came down to the people whose 
equipment was drowned in the water, the government seemed 
to forget. They did not seem to remember. 
 
His own feeling overall in regards to the compensation issue is 
this, Mr. Speaker, and he can quote it, and it stuck with me. He 
said: 
 

In my own thoughts, I have often wondered when the 
damaging effects of the damn would cease, if nothing was 
done. We have not been able to make a decent living since 
the devastation. A sturgeon was made extinct and the 
fishing never really regenerated at all. Trapping was also 
never really restored at previous levels. The damaging 
effects still confront us on a yearly basis. Nobody could be 
pleased with this. If only we could rectify it, but I just 
don’t know. 

 
And even in his last statement in regards to “I just don’t know”, 
the person has not given up hope. He still feels that something 
can be done, and I’m hoping that this government will be able 
to do something in regards to the compensation issue of the 
communities of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many other specific issues I would like to raise in 
regards to northern Saskatchewan. I would list, therefore — just 
make a summary statement and say that the economic 
development goals of the North have to be combined with 
social and cultural development, and that is what a lot of people 
have mentioned to me as I travelled along. 
 
So combining social and cultural development with economic 
development is the way to go in the future. 
 
In a summary statement in regards to the North, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like this to say. A lot of members across will talk about 
optimism, will talk about protection, will talk about freedom. 
But when I look at the record, Mr. Speaker, I see these being 
practised only in regards to the big corporations. When it comes 
down to the protection of freedom of the people in northern 
Saskatchewan, what they get in return other than this is more 
restrictions and more regulations on their lives. 
 
Whether it’s workers or small-business people or aboriginal or 
non-aboriginal people in northern Saskatchewan, the same is 
true. What people are saying in the North is very clearly this: 
 

We want to be involved from the initial to the final stages 
of development. We want to be involved in the processes 
of change. We want to be involved because it is our 
children, it is our families, it is our communities that have 
to pay for the development costs of the government. 

 
And this is the basic point that people are saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, as I arrived at the legislature I  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

151 
 

found it a little bit ironic, I guess, when I walked into my office, 
and being a Cree-Métis, I was at my phone and I looked up the 
numbers on my phone and it said, 787-1885. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I certainly hope, Mr. Speaker, that what 
happened in 1885 does not take place again in 1986 and ’87. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The other thing, Mr. Speaker, as a critic for 
Indian and Métis issues, I would like to switch my talk now to 
the Indian and Métis issues. 
 
So first I would like to relate back to the throne speech. As I 
read the throne speech, it said that the province’s aboriginal 
people will be encouraged to become involved in main-line 
economic developments in business, manufacturing, and 
processing through an enhanced Indian economic development 
program. 
 
My reaction to this statement, Mr. Speaker, is this. I first of all 
am a little bit worried about the word “enhanced.” I look at the 
record of this government, Mr. Speaker, and in 1984-85 they 
spent 3.2 million on Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat for 
grants. Then I looked at 1986 and ’87, where they were talking 
again about enhancement, and I noticed it was 1.2 million. It 
had dropped by 2 million. 
 
When there are hundreds of millions of dollars talked about for 
the rest of the province, Mr. Speaker, and we are talking about 
enhancing $1 million, I find that a little bit strange. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — It strikes me that they might have to start 
looking at developing new definitions for enhancement. 
 
When I looked up another word that was used in this statement, 
Mr. Speaker, it said main line. And the word main line, or main 
lining, has a lot of connotations. Some may feel that we are 
questioning the reality of the situation, but when I looked up 
main lining, Mr. Speaker, in historical terms, I wonder if the 
same thing happened with the North four years ago. They 
wanted to mainstream us to the province; they wanted to 
mainstream us to main line departments down south. 
 
The record shows in the mainstreaming process, in the main 
lining process, of the North four years ago, is that we have less 
jobs for the people of the North. We have less contracts for the 
people of the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the government has thought that they 
did such a good job to the North that they now want to do it to 
aboriginal people in this province. And that is what I am scared 
of, Mr. Speaker, when I see the word main line, because what it 
really states is this: that we will only support economic 
development that we consider as  

defined under main line. The innovative ideas of aboriginal 
people in regards to economic development will be on the 
wayside. 
 
The other thing that I read in regards to that same statement is 
this: it says, encourage. I see this same word in Weyerhaeuser, 
which I will talk about at a later date. But the same word is 
utilized — encourage. Well, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people do not 
need . . . aboriginal people do not need encouragement. They 
want finance capital like anybody else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And they also, Mr. Speaker, want to be able to 
work with this government in being able to carry out their 
plans. The central message that I hear from aboriginal people is 
this: we have made business plans which are new, in effect very 
effective and innovative, and we feel that they will contribute to 
the economic development of this province. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech itself mentioned 
economic development on a very small scale. Some aboriginal 
people may feel that it is a ploy on the government’s part to 
concentrate less on a most important issue of aboriginal people, 
which is aboriginal rights. 
 
The throne speech does not mention anything about aboriginal 
rights although, Mr. Speaker, 1987 is the fifth year since the 
introduction of the aboriginal rights statements in the 
constitution of Canada for Indian, Métis, and Inuit; 1987 will be 
a very important year. It will set the stage as to how the 
governments, the Government of Canada and the provinces, are 
going to be able to deal with the aboriginal rights questions. 
 
And it is very important, Mr. Speaker, for this government to be 
able to change from what they have shown last year and the 
year before in regards to the constitutional talks. In a 
straightforward summation of that experience, the Government 
of Saskatchewan when it come down to the constitutional talks 
last year, there was five provinces that were ready to go ahead 
with taking the second step in the process. There was two 
provinces — one was wavering — on the east side of Canada. 
There was one province that was key in making the second step 
go ahead. That was the province of Saskatchewan. The province 
of Saskatchewan played a key role in stopping the aboriginal 
process in taking an important second step last year. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, is significant because Saskatchewan has 
the largest aboriginal population in the whole province. 
One-tenth, at least one-tenth of the province, Mr. Speaker are 
aboriginal people in this province. Yet we can stand and talk 
about individual rights and protection, yet we cannot even 
honour the treaty rights and the obligations and the land claims 
of aboriginal people in this province. We can only make 
promises and continue on a snail’s pace in regards to aboriginal 
development. 
 
When I look back as to what was the excuse in regards to why 
the province said no to aboriginal rights, they said it 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

152 
 

was a matter of definition. They could not find a definition, they 
said. Then I looked around and I thought, well that’s the first 
time I heard of that excuse. And as I checked around some 
more, and I come here in the legislature, you know for the first 
time on day two . . . the processes of negotiation on aboriginal 
people have taken over 100 years and so on, and are reaffirming 
those things. 
 
And when I looked at the Weyerhaeuser agreement, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s taken only a couple of years to come out with over 
300 definitions. It’s only taken two years to come out with over 
300 definitions. When we deal with aboriginal people, we can’t 
come out with even a general definition. And I find that hard to 
believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to the aboriginal rights issues, one band 
has proceeded with litigation . . . with the litigation process. But 
they don’t really want to go through a costly litigation process. 
They want this government to deal with them fairly and justly. 
They want to see the settlement of the land entitlement and land 
claims issue as a central priority in the government’s practice. I 
guess what aboriginal people are saying is this: we do not want 
people to feel sorry for us, we want people to deal with us fairly 
and justly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — As an overall summation, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to state that I hope that we give a different meaning to the 
words of openness, optimism, and protection. I hope that the 
meanings to these words are not only in direct practice with the 
big corporations of this province. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that 
these words will have meaning to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan and to aboriginal people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like also to add, Mr. Speaker, that we must combine 
openness, optimism, protection with constructive criticism and 
action. As I look to the future, we have a chance in the province 
of Saskatchewan to develop a system that has great compassion 
and respect for all nations and nationalities, including aboriginal 
people in this province. 
 
We also have to give new meaning to the word “individual” and 
to sincerely state that it means all individuals in this province, 
and also individuals and especially the individuals in the North. 
The sign of a compassionate society is one that deals fairly with 
the people who are in the greatest need in that society. And we 
want to make sure that Saskatchewan takes a leadership role in 
that direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge the government to take action on the 
issues I have presented. I look forward to the debates, questions, 
and the consensual processes of this 21st Legislature. Mr. 
Speaker, I am proud and honoured to represent the issues of 
aboriginal people and the people of Cumberland constituency. I 
stand to support the amendment. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with 
other members of the Assembly in extending my 
congratulations to you on your appointment to the Chair of Mr. 
Speaker. And I look forward — I think as all members of the 
Assembly look forward — to dealing with you in a very 
forthright and forward-looking manner in the next four or five 
years. 
 
If I can make the following observation is that the decorum in 
the House so far in this session, I think, is substantially 
improved from what I have experienced over the last eight years 
of which I have been a member in this Assembly. I think that’s 
positive, and I hope that we continue making decorum in the 
House important to all of us. I look forward to you showing 
some leadership in that regard. The one thing that I have heard 
over the last four years, I think, is that very often when people 
come to the Assembly, and this is not to be critical of one side 
of the House or the other, when they come to the Assembly 
often they see members delivering or carrying on in a way that 
they, and perhaps they will admit in their naïve way, they did 
not expect to hear the robustness that we know has been a 
tradition in this House for very, very many years — they have a 
hard time believing that. 
 
I think society also wants members to work together more than 
perhaps they do. They sometimes challenge maybe the 
adversarial role of politics that one side is always on one side of 
the fence, and the other side on the other side of the fence, and 
why can’t sometimes the two cross over in particular areas and 
be able to collectively deal with things. And I think that is an 
issue that people are saying of all politicians, and I simply say I 
think that’s something that we, as politicians, should perhaps 
give the people a little bit more credit and deal with . . . again 
not being critical to one side or the other. 
 
I would also like to welcome the new members of the Assembly 
from both sides of the House. I think, as many members before 
me have indicated, that the ability, the honour of being able to 
take a seat in this Assembly is indeed an honour, and a honour 
that is bestowed on very few people in our society over a long 
period of time. We have seen over the last couple, three 
elections that the turnover of members in this House is, in fact, 
fairly high, and I think that is a case, not only here, but a case 
throughout much of our country where you see a fairly large 
turnover of members after each general election. 
 
My advice of having been here for two terms is as follows: that 
if you want to make your mark here — nobody will make but a 
small mark when you look at it from a historical point of view 
— watch other people and learn some of their techniques, but 
always get your own technique, don’t try to copy one or 
another. But do what you feel comfortable with and learn the 
process, and I say that as advice to both members on my side 
and members on the other side of the House. And listen to your 
riding; that sometimes can become a very difficult thing to do 
for all of us, and advice that’s well taken by many. 
 
I’d also like to acknowledge the support of the people of 
Kindersley to me in this election. We had a good vote from the 
people in Kindersley, even though the bulk of  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

153 
 

that riding is either involved in the farming industry or in the oil 
patch, both of which are on fairly hard times and both, when 
they are on hard times, tend to get irate or irritated with the 
government. They did stick with me, and they did stick with the 
Premier, and for that I’m very grateful. 
 
I would like to also extend my congratulations to the Premier. 
And I say that I think he ran a good campaign. I think the 
difficult nature of our economy made it a very difficult 
campaign to run. 
 
I also would like to indicate that I’ve had the opportunity to 
attend with the Premier at many federal-provincial conferences, 
and I think a trend line is starting to develop at those particular 
conferences where you see two of the younger premiers of this 
country starting to get more and more to the forefront in 
federal-provincial relations and in leadership roles in our 
country. And those two people are the Premier of Ontario, 
David Peterson, and our Premier here. 
 
And I think one of the reasons for that is they’re not contented 
simply to go to a conference and rattle off the doctrine of their 
particular party, whether it’s left, right, or centre, but are 
prepared to look at new ideas; to look at changes, how we might 
do things differently; to face up to some of the realities that e 
face, whether it’s the native people or the farmers of our 
country or the business community or questions of international 
trade; to deal with questions of substance. Not to go there and 
spout the political line, or not to go there with their hand out, 
saying: give me more money; if only I had more money. And 
that’s very often the case of many provinces at those 
conferences. 
 
So I think from that point of view we are certainly, on this side 
of the House, very encouraged by the leadership of our Premier, 
both in the province and at the national stage. What makes us 
even more encouraged, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that our Premier 
is but 42 years of age, and he’s just beginning. And so we look 
very forward to the leadership role that he will be playing over 
the period of time. 
 
If I could, I’d like to speak just briefly on some of the areas that 
I have been asked to be responsible for in our government, and I 
will deal with them in a very brief way, not in a great deal of 
detail. 
 
The throne speech, the primary focus of that throne speech was 
that we must diversify our economy, and how do we diversify 
our economy, and where we seek to diversify our economy; to 
go back and ask that question of ourselves: why do we need to 
diversify our economy? Over the years — that question is not 
new to our province — basically what we said is, well, in past 
years when farm prices were good and resource prices were 
good, we still must diversify our economy because that’s the 
way you grow. 
 
I think today when we say we must diversify our economy, we 
look at it for far different reasons. And we look at it for reasons 
that if we’re not prepared to face up to the fact that the world is 
diversifying and we don’t attempt to diversify, we’re going to 
be left behind. 

Now let me go back and try to deal with that in this way. 
Saskatchewan relies on the ability to trade our product, more 
than does any province in this country. And Canada requires 
international trade for its wealth, perhaps more than any nation 
in the world. We, in Saskatchewan, trade roughly half of what 
we trade in the world to the Americans, and the other half to the 
rest of the world. By and large the biggest part of our exports is 
related to our biggest industry, and that is agriculture. And the 
problem we face in agriculture today is really a trade question. 
And what that trade question is as follows: for a long time we 
felt that we could comfortably sit there because of our 
comparative advantage producing our grains, producing our 
cattle, and find a market for the world because we were more 
effective than were others. And that was true. 
 
But what has happened in the short term, and developing over 
perhaps the last half decade, has been two fundamental things: 
one, and the one that we hear about so much, is the trade war 
between the United States and the EEC (European Economic 
Community). And that’s real. That’s damaging us as a province 
and as a country and certainly to the person out on the farms. 
It’s damaging him a great deal. And one would hope that 
perhaps that trade war will pass through the GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiation. One would hope 
that would be sooner rather than later. 
 
But that is not the only problem that is faced with agriculture on 
the trade front today. Because, while it is front and centre in the 
news, there is another fundamental thing happening, and that is 
a lot of the traditional markets of the world are also becoming 
smaller and more difficult for us to access. And you ask 
yourself why and what they are. 
 
The great market we used to have was the People’s Republic of 
China or India or much of south-east Asia. Now, that market is 
leaving us, for a reason. That is that those people today are not 
buying as much or any grain from us because they are 
producing much more of their own. They are producing much 
more of their own because (a) there has been a transfer of 
knowledge or a transfer of technology, and that’s good. That’s 
what we have been able to give to much of the world so they 
could feed their hungry people. 
 
But another important thing that has happened is they have been 
able to apply research and knowledge to their industry. And 
what you see today in India, in post-Mao china, and much of 
south-east Asia is a country that can now produce virtually 
enough food to feed their own people and have some left over 
to export to the rest of the world. 
 
(1515) 
 
So we are not only competing against the Americans and the 
Europeans, but we are also competing against the very people 
that we used to have as customers, and so the market becomes 
finer and finer and finer to deliver. 
 
Some have said, and we all read in the papers, that the great 
problem that faces agriculture and trade is subsidies. That is 
true for a goodly part of it. But equally as  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

154 
 

much has been created by the growth of science and, of course, 
no society can stop the growth of science. 
 
In India alone they have been able to produce and save more 
food by a simple process that they are able to put their grain in 
bins as opposing to leaving it outside. Twenty years ago in 
India the rats ate more of the food that they produced than did 
human beings. Today that is not the case. 
 
And that’s the reality of the trade dimensions that agriculture 
faces today and the diversification that is needed in order for 
them to address those type of questions. These type of problems 
will not easily go away. These type of problems will not easily 
be solved by a government program or a government hand-out. 
The reality that the farmer is facing more and more today is the 
reality that the economics of the world economy is far more 
dominant on us than is the macro-economics of the provincial 
economy or the nation’s state. The international economy is 
having a big bearing on the way agriculture deals. 
 
That is also having a bearing on our second largest source of 
our economy and that is the whole area of resource production. 
Obviously if you go to potash, potash is used, primarily, half in 
the United States and half in the rest of the world, of our 
market. Again that is tied very, very closely to agriculture. Of 
course as agriculture prices go down, so does the price of 
potash go down. So the problem that the potash producer faces 
is really no different than the problem that the farmer faces 
today and that commodity price again going down and down. 
Again, the solutions to that must come under the GATT type of 
system if we are going to get a grip and to solve that particular 
problem. 
 
In the field of oil production, which is again a resource that can 
be a floating up and down, oil is under similar pressures to all 
other commodities but perhaps for different reasons, and I think 
will probably come back sooner. The reality in this country is 
we’re running out of light oil. If we’re going to be 
self-sufficient in oil as a national, which is a fundamental 
question that this nation must address and deal with, then we 
must develop our other sources than light conventional crude. 
And that means, do we develop in the Beaufort, do we develop 
in Hibernia, do we develop in the tar sands, or do we develop 
our heavy oil? And those decisions clearly have to be economic 
in nature in the sense that which is the best chance, which has 
the best economics. And the best economics of those four is 
heavy oil. And heavy oil, clearly, as a nation and as a province, 
is the way that we must proceed. 
 
The other thing then is this, is that for the first time in a very, 
very long period of time we have the commodities of all the 
major resources — agriculture, oil, potash, uranium, and timber 
— moving downward at the same time. That’s true here; it’s 
true throughout the rest of the world. And it’s a fact, and it’s 
what’s happened. 
 
Today the only solid industry in this country is manufacturing 
and that, for the most part, is being done in central Canada 
where their economies are very robust and very strong, driven 
primarily by the automobile industry. So we sit and ask 
ourselves, as a province, how  

do we diversify? Because, surely, I think, we must come to the 
conclusion that we have no other option but to try to diversify 
and to build other industries and other economies. 
 
We start as our premise with the view that you must build upon 
your strengths. We are not going to manufacture television sets 
or build automobiles or manufacture and process textiles — that 
type of thing — in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve flirted 
with it over the years. The reality is the economies don’t work 
here. 
 
What we must do is two things, it seems to me. One is to try to 
further refine upon the natural resources that we do. One is take 
heavy oil which we are now captive for the most part to the 
U.S. market. We export, and have exported for the last 15 years 
in this province, almost 70 per cent of our oil to the United 
States. And the main reason is because only the United States 
can process our heavy oil or medium oils that we produce in 
this province. So without upgrading capacity in our province, or 
certainly in eastern refineries, we will not be able to (a) develop 
the oil fields that exist in our province, or the potential for the 
oil fields that exist in our province. 
 
If you look at the whole area of the forest industry, what we 
found was that the soft wood lumber clearly is under 
tremendous pressure and likely will be under some fairly heavy 
pressure for some period of time. With the project put together 
where we now can manufacture not only pulp but paper, and 
paper that the world wants, we have a potential to further refine 
upon the wood products that we produce. And we must move in 
those directions. So you can do some of those. 
 
It’s difficult to do a lot more processing with potash, although 
we are exploring some areas that we might deal with there. 
 
You can do some manufacturing, and we’ve tried to do some of 
that — much of it because of perhaps the ability to source 
Saskatchewan, whether it’s the Marubeni plant in Saskatoon 
that will manufacture or at least assemble much of the turbines 
that will be used in the new Shand power project or, because a 
family in North Battleford has a 50 to 60 per cent market share 
of the western Canadian recreation vehicles market, they can 
look at developing a recreation vehicle market in the city of 
North Battleford. But only for that reason, and that’s a very 
isolated type of situation. 
 
We can further develop in agriculture by, instead of growing 
wheat, to diversify our crops, but more importantly, to be able 
to convert into a stronger red meat industry, which certainly the 
Minister of Agriculture is doing, and the minister of Agriculture 
before him put a lot of effort into. 
 
Each of those diversifies your economy. Each of those creates 
more jobs. Each of those takes you further down the road. The 
other industries you’re left with then, and which most of the 
world is left with, is two types of industries. 
 
One, our industries that require a fair degree of materials,  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

155 
 

and the other that requires a fair degree of knowledge. The 
material-driven industries, whether it’s automobiles or 
television sets or that type of thing, are experiencing the 
following problem: the amount of resources going into those 
factories is becoming less and less and less. 
 
Those industries are having a difficult time to grow and to 
expand. And if you look at the industries that are expanding 
throughout much of the western world today, they are what are 
called the service industry or the knowledge industries. And 
those are the industries, whether it’s pharmaceuticals, whether 
it’s telecommunications, whether it’s a variety of things, the 
computer world. Those are the areas that are growing, and those 
are the areas that I believe our province has a chance to cut an 
etch, not to control the market like we perhaps could with 50 
per cent of the potash or 50 per cent or uranium, but could cut 
an etch in being able to do some things, whether it’s in health 
care, whether it’s in telecommunications, whatever it might be 
in. And that’s where we must, I think, put some thought into 
how we proceed in the future down that road. 
 
Those are difficult questions as to how we explore, how we 
move to develop our economy, to diversify our economy, and 
nobody has a monopoly on knowledge in this particular field. 
But I think some of the fundamental rules could be agreed 
upon. Now, we will commit what we can as a province to try to 
deal with some fundamental questions facing us in being able to 
preserve the export markets we have today. 
 
As I indicated, 50 per cent of our product that we produce and 
export from this province goes to the United States. And we 
must explore with the Americans how we might be able to 
better provide a working arrangement by which we can ensure 
that we don’t, on a monthly basis or a yearly basis, have the 
Americans moved by politics to provide a countervail, whether 
it’s against our hogs, or a countervail, whether it’s against our 
softwood lumber, or against next our potash, or maybe our 
uranium. But we must move in that direction and that’s going to 
be difficult. But it’s not something that we should walk away 
from. 
 
The next dimension is that we must play our part as the key 
agriculture province in this country; play our part, both in 
providing the information and being part of the negotiations, to 
try to bring some order into a world that has lost its order in the 
area of the GATT round. Unless GATT can come to grips with 
agriculture, you’re going to find the following happening, and I 
refer this to the member from Cumberland. 
 
There are three types of producers of raw materials or food 
products in the world. There is the countries that have a large 
other industrial structure behind them, that'’ primarily the 
Americans and the Europeans. And they can be in a trade war 
for some time, and it’s small change for the size of their 
economy to deal with that. Whether it’s $25 billion, it’s still 
small change. 
 
You then have a second layer of countries that are the 
Canadians, the Australians, the New Zealands, and those 
people. They cannot compete with that kind of budget and 
they’re going to have trouble with that. The third  

group is the LDCs (lesser developed countries) or some of the 
Third World countries who rely on agriculture as their main 
source of income — Argentina, Philippines, Brazil, many of 
these countries — who, with their foreign debt and with their 
agriculture crisis that they face, are notable in the near future to 
be able to pay the debt that they owe to many of the banks of 
the world. And you could see a financial crisis coming upon us, 
driven by agriculture. 
 
So the stakes in this one are very, very high, and it’s something 
I believe that this Assembly should, for the most part, be able to 
come to agreement on in a general way. 
 
Let me briefly, Mr. Speaker, deal with the other field that I am 
responsible for, and that’s the field of justice. And while I 
suppose there’s many areas that one can deal with here, it 
strikes me that there’s two main areas that I think deserve 
attention, and areas that I believe we should work towards. 
 
One is the sense that the legal system for the most part has and 
is seen by the people as something aloof from them or not 
accessible to them. There’s a growing view that the only people 
that really have access to the legal process are the wealthy or 
the poor who are subsidized or supported by a legal aid or a 
legal support system. There’s a grand group of people in the 
middle, that we so call the middle class, who quite frankly find 
certainly the civil court is not accessible to them any more 
because of the cost and this type of thing. 
 
And I think you’re starting to see some processes, whether it’s 
here or whether it’s across the country, dealing with the whole 
concept of more arbitration, more mediation, where people have 
access. 
 
I have farmers in my area who have a complaint, let’s say, 
against a chemical company, or something like that. They have 
a water rights question, and they find that they have to go to a 
lawyer; they have to dole out the money, and it takes two and 
three and four years for them to ultimately get a resolve of their 
dispute, and they find themselves frustrated by a court system. I 
think we must try to come to recognitions with that and try to 
see what we can do in that particular area. 
 
The other area of law seems to me that is growing, and it’s 
something that we should all be very cognizant of, is the whole 
question of law and order. And that law and order again is not 
an easy quest. But if you go to your constituents and talk to 
them, as I do, you will find people becoming more and more 
concerned that the break-and-enters are happening to their 
house, that people are breaking into people’s houses on a more 
and more and more basis. And how do we deal with that 
question? 
 
(1530) 
 
You also see the situation, whether it’s in Quebec or whether 
it’s in Alberta, where you start to see store owners taking up 
guns and also getting into the vigilante whole area. And that is a 
serious problem that is going to be faced, and I think it’s a trend 
that we, as legislators, should be cognizant as of to how we 
come to deal with  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

156 
 

that. And there’s no simple answer. Some will say on the one 
hand that if you just give them all money it would be all okay; 
some on the other hand say well if you just brought out the 
noose and I’ll kick the box out from underneath and we’ll solve 
it all that way. 
 
But the reality is that the world, Mr. Speaker, faces more and 
more complex questions. The world is going to need people 
prepared to deal with those complex questions, and I believe the 
constituents of all of us expect us to deal with those in a rational 
way. I believe the constituents of this province and the people 
of this province expect this Assembly to sit here and to debate 
in substantive ways those particular questions, not as I said 
before to shout at each other, not to simply plod out the party 
line from one side or the other, but to deal with them in a 
substantive and meaningful way. And I dare say that on many 
of those issues there’s some common ground, and perhaps we 
should explore that common ground within this Assembly, just 
as we should explore that common ground across this country. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we live in a fine province and we 
live in a fine country. I believe that people of this country 
expect their politicians to deliver to them, whether they’re 
government or whether they’re opposition, to be co-operative, 
to be consultative, to do the changes that they know have to 
happen, but to move forward. That’s the commitment that this 
government gives; that’s the commitment our Premier gives. 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will support this throne speech. I 
think it is the most imaginative, forward-looking throne speech 
that this province has seen in many, many years. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a point of 
order that I would like to raise, not in connection with anything 
that the past speaker said, but it has to do with an answer that 
the hon. House Leader of the government side gave during 
question period. And I’ll make my point of order very briefly 
thus: as I understand the rules, albeit I’m the first to 
acknowledge that I’m rusty on them now, that when a member 
refers to a document in the course of an answer, and the Hon. 
Minister of Health referred to a letter which he said he had 
caused to be forwarded to the federal Minister of Health, that it 
is then obligatory upon that member to table that letter. And I 
cite 327 (1) of Beauchesne’s at page 115, and would therefore 
ask the Hon. Minister of Health to table a copy of that letter that 
he referred to in giving his answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could speak 
to the point of order. And the point of order I would just point 
out to the point of order as follows: Number one, that in the 
rules it is impossible to table a document during question 
period, and the member knows that. Number two, I think it has 
been a long-standing tradition, and you will find rulings in the 
past in this House, where points of order relative to question 
period are raised before orders of the day and dealt with at that 
time — not before orders of the day, but at the earliest 
opportunity following question period. 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, if I could just clarify the 
point, I think I could clear it up. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Okay. Clear it up if you can. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the rule to which the 
opposition House Leader refers, I believe he said 327, page 115 
of Beauchesne’s. If I can quote that it says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

A Minister of the Crown is not at liberty to read or quote 
from a dispatch or other state paper not before the House, 
unless he be prepared to lay it upon the Table. 

 
I believe that’s what the member was referring to. 
 
In my answer as I recall it, Mr. Speaker, I alluded to the fact 
that I had sent a letter to the minister in Ottawa. I said I had sent 
a letter. I did not say I was quoting from that letter. I was 
referring to some of the points that I made in that letter, but I 
was not quoting form the direct letter, nor did I have that letter 
before me today, nor do I have it here. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think I’ve gotten a pretty 
good view of the issue, but I will have to defer any judgement 
on this matter until I have an opportunity to peruse the official 
records and I will have an answer for you hopefully by 
tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate this 
opportunity to address this Assembly today in response to the 
speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. I welcome all 
members, and especially new members on both sides of the 
House. I’m sure we’ll be over a rough and rocky road the next 
four or five years, head to head — a learning process, a building 
process, hopefully with the intention of creating a better 
Saskatchewan in the foremost. 
 
I would like to thank the people of Humboldt constituency. I am 
very proud to be your representative. This constituency is a very 
widely diversified area. We have large farms, small farms, 
hogs, poultry, beef, of all sizes — very diversified. And I am 
very pleased that these people chose to raise their concern of 
this government by electing me, a New Democrat. 
 
A constituency with honest, hard-working people, many with 
proud ethnic backgrounds, they have seen tough times, worked 
hard, overcome them, and they wont’ stop now. The age 
groups, of course, like every place else go from seniors who 
have vast experience; their children who carried on these values 
in small towns from their parents; their grandchildren, many of 
them now making a living in the area, and even their great great 
grandchildren. 
 
We must combine the knowledge, the experience, the values, 
the frustrations, and the aspirations to build a better province. 
 
We have many walks of life — family farms, small business, 
families, working people — all these people have a sense of 
small-town Saskatchewan. They pull together, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to get the job done. They  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

157 
 

know their neighbours, they help their neighbours, they share 
and they care. 
 
These people rely on agriculture, potash, small business and so 
on, and they believe in the survival of the family farm, survival 
of small towns. They want to be self-sufficient in their business. 
They want to be self-sufficient in their towns, Mr. Speaker, I 
am very proud to represent these people because I, too, believe 
in that — family farms and small-town Saskatchewan. I believe 
in a strong bond between rural and urban people, and I’m very 
glad to see the references in the throne speech to the rural-urban 
bond. 
 
However, in the light of this government’s past activities I must 
look at these words with some scepticism. It was very evident 
in the recent past that there has been a thrust by this 
government, a publicized thrust, to be the saviour of the 
agricultural community while, at the same time, creating 
situations whereby people are being put in a very, very bad 
way. I find this a bit hypocritical. 
 
A good example of this is the disaster at PCS, Lanigan. The 
government, it appears, is trying to use this strike as some sort 
of an example—a precedent, if you wish — to follow for 
further negotiations with other government-operated facilities. 
The result is that the government has victimized these workers 
at Lanigan, these people of Saskatchewan who have elected a 
government to run their public affairs in the interest of the 
whole province. Now it’s even gone further. The people in 
Lanigan, Humboldt, Guernsey, Watrous, Burr — the whole area 
around the Lanigan mine — are crying out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This dispute has pitted families against each other, 
families against families, friends against friends. The businesses 
of the communities are feeling a drastic effect form the 
reduction of cash flow. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, page 2 of the throne speech says in part, 
and I quote: 
 

My government intends to implement its programme in a 
spirit of co-operation and participation. 

 
I send a please to this government opposite to wipe the slate 
clean. Summon your courage, your compassion, your common 
sense. Show the true spirit of co-operation and participation by 
taking immediate action to end this bitter dispute in a fair 
manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to turn to 
some other concerns in my constituency, and I would like to 
commend the government for finally getting the hospital project 
in Watrous under way. It was a long time coming and I can 
assure you that the people of Watrous were very, very happy to 
see the equipment arrive on the hospital grounds the morning of 
October 20th. The problem is that the facility does not meet all 
the needs of the area in health care. 
 
The throne speech refers to the change in requirements. It 
sounds good, but the reality is the lack of dollars. The lack of 
funds in health care has placed the hospital in Watrous,  

that is not a complete facility, with a complete level 4 joining. 
It’s not a facility that fits the needs of that area. It is not big 
enough. 
 
The whole health care system I just want to touch on briefly. 
It’s in bad shape; we know that. We have to go for hands-on 
nursing care. We’ve created a false economy in health care. The 
government opposite can sit, stand up and quote all the figures 
— fine. I and many other have had personal experiences in 
hospitals, and I’m not afraid to say that if it wasn’t for the 
people, the families and friends of people in hospitals, the care 
would be much, much worse than it is. The hands-on care is not 
adequate. 
 
The people are running off their feet. We must de-centralize to 
reduce waiting lists; utilize small hospitals; have a renewed 
sensitivity for staff, and emergency units in small town 
hospitals should not just be stabilization and transfer units. 
Level 4 facilities are needed right across the province because 
small hospitals are being denied acute care because of the 
number of level 4 patients in those hospitals. 
 
Other things specific to the Humboldt constituency, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that I ask the government opposite, Mr. Premier 
especially, for increased funding for the Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute (PAMI) in Humboldt. This is a very 
necessary operation. It tests machines for farmers and gives 
results of tests so that farmers can identify better what machine 
they need for their operation. 
 
I would also hope that the committed projects of this 
government, like the 40 heavy-care beds for Humboldt and the 
seniors housing plan for Bruno, go ahead in all possible 
quickness, and I will be closely monitoring this. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to see that in the last 
election our support in rural Saskatchewan rose substantially. It 
is a clear indication that despite the government opposite’s 
attempt to sweetheart the farmers of Saskatchewan with 
short-term ad hoc programs, a significant number — a 
significant number — said they would prefer long-term stability 
and proven programs of our party like crop insurance, 
stabilization boards and staunch support for the Canadian 
Wheat Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The citizens of Humboldt constituency were 
asking me, when the Nielsen task force report came out, where 
was the Premier? He was silent. His silence on these issues 
leads me to believe that he concurred with the report, and this 
report recommends an overhauling of the Canadian Wheat 
Board, whatever that means; paying the Crow benefit to the 
producers rather than the railroads; branch line abandonment; 
variable rates; shifting the majority of crop insurance costs to 
producers and cancelling the cash advance program, and it goes 
on and on. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, by their silence this government concurs 
with this program that basically knocks down the majority of 
our long-term stability in agriculture. The  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

158 
 

Premier’s acceptance of this report clearly shows this 
government’s direction — forget about long term; concentrate 
on short-term ad hoc programs — and the end result is disaster 
for family farms in small-town Saskatchewan. And in the 
interim the Premier hopes to find cheap political gain. 
 
There is another side to this and many other responses from the 
Premier on any issue which originates from Big Brother in 
Ottawa. Whether it be concerning the Nielsen report, free trade, 
deficiency payments, deregulation or whatever, it is clear that 
the Premier is unwilling or unable or both to stand up for the 
best interests of the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like now to turn to some of these 
issues. Free trade has been burning for the last year, and if 
accepted it would completely devastate the agricultural industry 
in Saskatchewan. The acceptance of free trade with the U.S. 
would force Saskatchewan into greater trade dependency with 
the Americans. 
 
Saskatchewan producers cannot afford all their eggs in one 
basket. We must promote global trade. Free trade would wipe 
out virtually all the long-term stability that we have worked so 
hard to establish and that we need so badly. The Canadian 
Wheat Board and all the marketing boards would be put in 
jeopardy, to conform with a lesser system — and I think we can 
agree on that, members opposite — the deregulated system of 
the Americans. 
 
It is obvious, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we must maintain trade 
with our American counterparts. But we must not do it at the 
expense of the family farms of this province. An interesting 
footnote I’d like to add right now regarding free trade. The 
adviser for negotiations on specific agricultural commodities for 
the United States is one Daniel Amstats. Mr. Amstats is the past 
president of Cargill Grain, Chicago. The Canadian adviser is 
Mr. David Gilmour, who is on loan right now for one year, I 
believe, or two, from none other than Cargill Grain, Winnipeg, 
negotiating agriculture in the best interests of the family farms 
of Saskatchewan. I ask you to draw your own conclusions on 
that one. And where does the government stand on this? I’ll 
quote a news release — November 1985: 
 

“Free trade is good for all the farmers,” Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Minister, Lorne Hepworth, told North Dakota 
farmers today. 

 
Another one — Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of August 21: 
 

The question of free trade with the United States is 
expected to dominate the premiers’ conference for the next 
two days, with retiring Premier Peter Lougheed leading 
the charge, and Grant Devine, one of his strongest 
supporters. 

 
It goes on. 
 
I have a couple more I’d like to read, just to drive my point 
home. Again from the Star-Phoenix, September 30, 1985: 
 

Devine, who with Alberta Premier Peter Lougheed is one 
of Canada’s staunchest proponents of free  

trade with the U.S., said American leaders must be made 
to realize Canada is a vital trading partner. 

 
And again, talking about free trade, and I quote: 
 

Devine also warned that the investors will decide not to 
invest in Canada if they see the province does not have 
access to the American market. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reality is that investors will be 
cautious in Canada, and Saskatchewan in particular, due to a 
sinking credit rating, the result of poor government in 
Saskatchewan since 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the subject of deficiency 
payments is foremost in the minds of agriculture producers, as it 
should be. For months now Saskatchewan farmers and farm 
organizations have been calling for a grain price deficiency 
payment to bring the price up to roughly $6 a bushel, which is 
equivalent to what the Americans are getting. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers have become frustrated and angry — 
frustrated and angry at the government’s slow reaction. Our 
Premier started out by saying he was going for $5 billion. I 
applauded him. Then it slipped to 2 billion. Now it appears 
$415 million is Saskatchewan’s share — 48 cents a bushel, I 
believe, the number the Premier quoted yesterday, for wheat. 
 
And I did some quick calculations on a Saskatchewan cultivated 
acreage basis. That amounts to somewhat under $10 a bushel — 
$10 a bushel . . . an acre, sorry. When my input costs for one 
chemical is $18 and roughly 57 cents an acre, when input costs 
for stubbling-in stubble crop is $22, roughly, per acre — $40 an 
acre in two input costs; not to mention machinery, fuel, loans, 
on and on, all the other input costs, and we’re getting under $10 
a bushel . . . or an acre. 
 
The Premier was unable or unwilling to represent the best 
interests of Saskatchewan farmers. The buddy system doesn’t 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, while $415 million is 
certainly welcome by all, but it’s not going to fix the problem. 
We need a much larger deficiency payment. We need long-term 
security. Just yesterday the Premier said it was for the 1986 
production; 1986 production, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is basically 
harvested in September, October of this last year. The farmers 
of this province were expecting a deficiency payment for the 
1985-86 crop year, which was last year. There is really, 
technically, no deficiency until you sell your product. The 
deficiency was made last year. We’re getting paid — what? — 
$50 million for what is called a deficiency for this year, and 
they’re saying, forget about last year. That’s old business. A 
one-shot payment. 
 
What about next year? I would urge the members opposite to 
encourage their federal counterparts to trigger long-term 
deficiency payments so that the farmers of this  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

159 
 

province know what they are going . . . what they look forward 
to in the next three or four years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to the economic review of 
1985, net income from farming operations went from $1.5 
billion down to about $274 million. One and a half billion to 
274 million. The value of farm capital has showed steady 
declines from 1982, while farming operation costs have 
increased. Outstanding farm debt has sky-rocketed. 
 
Simply put, Mr. Speaker, this government has not done the job. 
As of November 30, 1986, the Farm Land Security Board has 
received 840 notices of lenders’ intentions to foreclose. Four 
hundred ninety-seven cases are completed, and in 279 of those 
cases there was reports prepared for court. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Farm land Security Act must be 
extended to not only cover land, but also to cover machinery, 
livestock, and any other asset that is necessary to maintain the 
viability of that farm, and I’ll tell you why. The board that is set 
up to monitor this makes a report recommending a viable or 
non-viable operation. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I maintain it’s 
very hard to have a board report a viable operation when a week 
previous another institution, or maybe the same one, has moved 
in and taken the machinery or the livestock. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Input costs are steadily rising, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and the price of grain has dropped. Chemicals and 
fertilizers are two input costs that this government said it’s 
going to reduce the price of by encouraging their manufacture 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
One question that comes to mind, especially in light of what’s 
happened today: are they now going to go into competition with 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the co-op system? The 
second question is: how is the government going to encourage 
production? 
 
In the past we’ve seen this government encourage the 
production of bacon, much to the happiness and delight of Mr. 
Pocklington, and much to the chagrin of the people of this 
province. I ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker: where is the logic? This 
government assumes that the price of producing chemicals in 
Saskatchewan would automatically reduce the cost. Yes, a 
minute saving should be incurred as a result of less 
transportation costs. 
 
But I must refer to the style of this government. Did selling 
Coronach give us cheaper power? Did selling the road 
equipment and encouraging private sectors give us better roads? 
While encouraging production of pork, or production of bacon, 
did we get cheaper bacon, or will we? With encouraging 
Weyerhaeuser to build a paper-mill, will we get cheaper paper? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I suggest not, too. If this government thinks 
that by simply encouraging the production of chemicals in 
Saskatchewan the price will automatically drop, they are in 
fantasy land. If they really want to reduce  

the price of chemicals, and reduce it on a long-term basis, they 
will stand up to Mulroney in Ottawa and demand generic 
labelling of chemicals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — This would reduce the price of chemicals 20 to 
30 per cent. I would like to now give you an example. Roundup, 
common herbicide used, raw materials cost about 90 cents per 
pound to produce. The herbicide sells in Canada for $31 a 
pound per active ingredient. 
 
Another fact, Roundup sells in Australia for roughly half the 
cost of Canadian, of Canada. Even though Australia is 9,000 
miles, 9,000 miles further, it sells for half the price. That’s 
supply and demand? They still make a tidy profit on that. 
 
And here’s the clincher, Mr. Speaker, Monsanto corporation, by 
its own records, the maker of Roundup, estimates that the cost 
of developing the herbicide was roughly $40 million for 
research and development. That $40 million, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is returned to Monsanto every 24 days. This 
government is afraid to touch it. 
 
There is a further step. I can talk about patents in a general 
sense now. We have the patents on drugs, which this 
government is not standing up to. We’re concurring with them 
that the multinational drug companies should be making these 
exorbitant profits, taking more money out of the pockets of the 
people. They have failed us. They have failed us on generic 
chemicals, and they will fail us, I predict, on the whole area of 
plant breeders’ rights, which is probably the next thing on 
patents which will be coming up in the near year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Taking the breeding of plants from the public 
sector to the private sector is not what we need. Mr. Speaker, 
the family farms of this province are under extreme pressure. 
The social well-being of rural areas is being ignored, and where 
will we be now when the Social Services is stacked up with 
portfolios as long as your arm? 
 
We must monitor the quality of life in rural Saskatchewan. And 
if you don’t think so, just ask some rural doctors. I think, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the stress on the family farm is at an 
all-time high, and it is especially hard, I say, on the women. The 
women are not only the bookkeeper and the psychiatrists and 
the referees, but they also drive the tractors, drive their kids to 
school, and do a million other things that have to be done. Farm 
women must be given more recognition and respect by this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest the government 
can make good by starting immediately and offering help to the 
Third National Farm Women’s  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

160 
 

Conference to be held in Saskatchewan in November of 1987. 
 
They need substantial financial support, but they also need 
moral support, moral support from this government. They need 
clerical staff, they need research staff, all extension staff. They 
need this because they know what they want, but it’s hard 
without the co-operation from the government to make a 
conference like this work — a national conference in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I challenge this government to meet their needs in order . . . so 
that Saskatchewan may stand up proud and say it had the best 
farm women’s conference to date. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The last point I would like to make, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that of the venture capital program with 
respect to livestock production. 
 
Under the program an investor buys a share in a venture capital 
corporation for $10,500 and receives about half of that back in 
the first 13 months in tax credits. The investor is then obligated 
to feed at least ten animals per year for the first five years. The 
feedlot owner manages the cattle, supplies the equipment, but 
does not own the cattle. 
 
Because of the tax credit, the investor can lose money on every 
head and still come out ahead, whereas the family farmer, on a 
smaller scale, if he loses money on every head, he is eventually 
wiped out. I’m suggesting that this capital investment program 
is going to eventually wipe out the small beef farmer in 
Saskatchewan. He has an unnatural disadvantage. 
 
And the other thing I would like to say about this is I am very, 
very, very adamant on the fact that any production coming off 
the farms of this province — any primary production including 
feedlots — every dollar made on that has to go to the farm 
family that is producing it and no one else. 
 
This carries over into the land. If we get into the same business 
in a venture capital and assets in land, we are stepping into the 
wrong direction. That direction is that it’s an opening for 
multinationals to come in and grab up much of the farm land. 
The time is right too, because so many people out there are 
suffering and they may not have nay other option. I encourage 
this government to ensure that this does not happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — In the near future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be 
meeting with and listening to farmers and farm organizations; 
I’ll be listening and learning and hearing their ideas for the best 
way to get around this hardship we have right now. 
 
We not only need short-term, well-planned relief, but we also 
need long-term agricultural programs, programs like those that 
were implemented between 1971 and 1982. I’d just like to 
mention some of those: The Natural Products Marketing Act; 
The Veterinary Services Act was amended to authorize 
increased grants to veterinary  

service districts; The Milk Control Act was amended to 
authorize entry into the National Milk Marketing Board; 
farmstart; Agricultural Implements Board; crop insurance; 
provincial lands; the farm ownership Act was implemented, 
which stopped the drift of agricultural land to foreign hands; the 
Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission was set up, and the 
SHARP program began; the Saskatchewan Sheep and Wool 
Marketing Commission; the Saskatchewan Vegetable 
Marketing Commission; the beef stabilization plan, and on and 
on — long-term solutions that created tremendous stability in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And I’m sure the members opposite are 
sincere and are telling the truth when they say they know the 
problems of the farmers, and on this side we do too. But 
knowing the problem simply is not enough. We have to attack 
them in the proper manner. 
 
I somehow get the feeling that the members opposite say the 
problem is coming from over there somewhere; it’s not our 
fault. To some degree they’re right. But they are, instead of 
alleviating the problem, in certain instances by give-aways to 
multinationals, by cutting back on services, they are adding to 
that problem. And I would say to you, on behalf of the people 
of this province, please turn around. 
 
I would like to say one more thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I came 
into this Assembly as green as the grass — I still am — the only 
farmer on our side of the House. That was the catchword. And I 
must admit that while searching through my mind I was 
wondering what it would be like, and I’m very, very pleased 
and proud to tell this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 
that each and every member on this side of the House, my 
colleagues, know the problems of agriculture, are extremely 
concerned about the problems of agriculture, and if we can, at 
some point in the future, do something about it; and until then 
we will push this government because we know we are a unit 
here, concerned about not one sector but every sector. And I 
thank my colleagues for that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, today is a real honour for 
me to rise in this House as a Progressive conservative MLA for 
the constituency of Shaunavon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — First of all, congratulations, Mr. Speaker, which 
he’s not here right now, on being elected to the Chair. It’s an 
honour to be there and I know you will be fair to both sides. As 
well, congratulations to all the new members of this House. 
 
A few weeks ago, October 20th, the people of Shaunavon 
constituency elected me as their MLA. The constituents of 
Shaunavon put their trust in me as their MLA, and I am grateful 
to them for their confidence in our Premier and government, of 
course myself too. 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

161 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are many good reasons why the people of 
Saskatchewan decided to give this government a second term. 
The Speech from the Throne contains many excellent policies 
put forward to the people of Saskatchewan during the recent 
provincial election. 
 
I would like to share with this legislature why I believe 
Saskatchewan elected this government for another four-year 
term. Mr. Speaker, the major reason the voters put their 
confidence in this government is because of leadership of this 
Premier. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Right on. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — We, in the province of Saskatchewan, are 
indeed fortunate to have a Premier who is a model of excellent 
leadership. He is a leader . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Mr. Speaker, he is a leader you can have faith 
in. In four years the Premier of this province has always had an 
open door for people for all walks of life. He has a real close 
relationship with the people of Saskatchewan. His courage, his 
vision, his ideas, and his leadership make him by far the best 
Premier in Canada. 
 
In my constituency, many people have told me that they trust 
the Premier and this PC government. Why do they trust this 
government? Because of his reputation, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
government that, when giving you a promise, it stays true to its 
word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Allow me to give this legislature some 
examples. When grasshoppers and drought and outside forces 
hit our farmers, the PC government said to the Saskatchewan 
farmers, we will help you; we will defend the family farm. And 
sure enough, Mr. Speaker, this government did everything 
possible over the past four years to protect the family farm. 
Farmers don’t forget that support they received form this PC 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said he will remain as our 
agricultural minister, and that ensures that agriculture will stay 
and remain the top priority in this provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so far I have given this House two key reasons 
why on October 20th this government was given another 
mandate, and that is leadership and trust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few things about my riding 
— what has been accomplished in the last four years. This 
government came to the people and asked: what should we be 
doing to help you when the drought hit our part of the province? 
They said they would listen and they brought in programs such 
as cash advance on livestock, freight assistance on feed, the 
production loan program. With all the other programs they put 
in over $72 million into my constituency during the 1985-86 
year, and that, Mr. Speaker, showed the agricultural people that 
this government listened and it delivered. 

On that reason, may I congratulate the Premier again. He is the 
man responsible for getting Saskatchewan a $415 million 
deficiency payment, and he is the man that sat at the same table 
with the Prime Minister and expressed how serious the farming 
problems are. I would say congratulations again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention some other programs this 
government has brought into my constituency — the natural gas 
program to farms and towns, and along with individual 
telephone line service which shows us this government does 
care about rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say a few things about education in my 
constituency. In four years this government has spent over $27 
million in operating grants to schools alone, plus capital grants 
to build new schools. We just opened up a new six-room school 
in climax this fall, which is a real big asset to that rural 
community, and that shows this government cares about 
education. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, has spent $12 million in 
operating grants for health care, along with a 12-bed nursing 
home in Nakota that will be opened in February and along with 
a six-bed, level 4 care in Eastend. We have proposals to build 
and renovate in other areas such as Shaunavon, Climax, and 
Kincaid, so that there is a place for our elderly people and that 
they can be close to their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about building and 
diversifying. The Shaunavon riding is a big riding. It’s 190 
miles long, 60 miles wide. It consists of ranching, grain 
farming, small businesses, manufacturing, and irrigation, with a 
potential for expanding irrigation on the Frenchman River, 
Battle Creek, and Lodge Creek to help the needs in agriculture 
in the south-west. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last four years we have people that have 
invested and built new feeding facilities and a brand-new $2 
million feed-mill, and with the poor quality of grain this fall, 
that feed-mill is running 24 hours a day since September. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Gleim: — That feed-mill alone employs 12 people and, 
Mr. Speaker, with that kind of building, it shows people have 
faith in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to mention the oil and gas industry in our 
area, which has probably developed more producing wells in 
the last four years, even though there was the odd dry one. It 
created a lot of employment for the people in my riding, Mr. 
Speaker. On e trucking firm alone in the town of Dollard 
employed 25 people, and 18 of those are young farmers. And 
that shows that the oil industry and agriculture can work hand in 
hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last four years this government has spent 
over $21 million on highway construction in my riding along 
with a gravelling program that paid for 50 per cent of all gravel 
on farm access roads. And that, Mr.  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

162 
 

Speaker, alone reduced the mill rate in the R. M. to about five 
to six mills, and that is a great saving to the people in my riding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about the home renovations 
program. This program created many new jobs in my riding, 
and it gives the people of my riding a chance to the things they 
couldn’t do before in their home and outside their home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is the whole matter of protection for the 
people in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan’s present government 
has an excellent record for protecting people against factors 
they cannot protect themselves from their own, such as home 
owners who cannot control mortgage rates. Saskatchewan is the 
only place in the world where a government had the courage to 
put a cap on mortgage rates. 
 
The PC government said, look, we want Saskatchewan families 
to be protected from the possibilities of ever again being hit by 
double-digit interest rates. We want Saskatchewan home 
owners to be protected. And that is why in the Speech from the 
Throne there is an announcement that in this session there will 
be legislation to bring in 10-year and nine and three-quarter 
mortgage for home owners on their principal resident. That is 
the action of progressive and protecting government. 
 
This government said to home owners and many people with no 
pension plan: we want to be protected in our retirement years. 
So this government did another first in North America. It 
introduced the Saskatchewan Pension Plan — the first. No other 
government in Canada or U.S. had the courage to do it. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan recognizes the contribution of 
home-makers and acknowledges their rights to a pension plan 
of their own. It helps small businesses establish pension plans 
for their employees. It assists self-employed persons establish 
their own pension plan. And yes, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of 
this protection policy of this government. 
 
When it comes to protection, this PC government has brought in 
programs to protect the elderly, the family, small business, the 
farm, health care, and many other social and economic 
institutions. To protect the economic future of Saskatchewan, 
the PC government has made job creation a priority. To protect 
the farm, we introduced The Farm (family) Land Security Act. 
And again, the first government in Canada with a vision to 
bring in such legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other programs that this 
government brought in to protect the family farm. We protected 
the small businesses through small business interest loans — 
that’s 8 per cent money. And in this session, as announced in 
the Speech from the Throne, there will be more to protect the 
small business from high interest rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to protect the individual, we have a government 
that removed extra-billing by Saskatchewan doctors. We 
removed taxes on clothing and gas and brought in mortgage 
protection. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the 

 people of Saskatchewan can expect this government to bring 
forward creative measures to protect the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have cited leadership, trust, and protection as 
reasons why the PC government was returned to this office on 
October 20th. There is another reason — opportunities for 
people. Our Premier and this PC government believe that 
bringing unique and exciting opportunities to Saskatchewan 
citizens will bring continued prosperity to this province. The 
government has created a good investment climate in this 
province. We have created thousands of new employment 
opportunities for the people here. And, Mr. Speaker, we have 
and will continue to work at breaking welfare cycle by 
providing opportunities for those who in the past have survived 
on collecting government payments. 
 
The employment development fund created many new 
opportunities and I am pleased to note in the Speech from the 
Throne the creation of a major government department aimed at 
creating opportunities of the people. I congratulate the 
government for having the vision to create these major new 
government departments aimed at better helping the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a government creates over 64,000 new jobs 
in four years, and when a government brings forward such an 
exciting program as Saskatchewan Builds to build our economy 
in future years, I say that is a government with leadership and 
vision of the future. The Speech from the Throne says there will 
be major initiatives in Saskatchewan business communities. A 
$50 million, five-year plan to create over 6,000 new jobs — 
building our province with a future and providing opportunity. 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this building is the key reason 
the voters put their trust in a re-elected government. Building 
our province means attracting new industry, revitalizing 
existing industry, strengthening our agricultural sector, 
developing tourism; yes, building Saskatchewan to make it the 
strongest provincial economy in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, allow me to cite one more time all the reasons I 
have put before this House, why I believe our PC government is 
here for another four years. The first, leadership — the 
leadership of the Premier and the government. Trust — the trust 
the people have in this government. Protection — protecting the 
people of Saskatchewan. Opportunities — providing good 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people. Building — building 
Saskatchewan for the future. The Speech from the Throne 
contains programs that have all of those important points and I 
look forward to the next four years with optimism and pride. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an individual MLA, I am honoured to support 
the Speech from the Throne. I do so because of my belief in our 
Premier and his government. I do so because of my belief in the 
policies of the Progressive Conservative government. I do so 
because of my faith in the people of Saskatchewan. And I do so 
because of the trust of the people in my constituency that put 
me in as their MLA. 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

163 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is worthy of our 
support, and with a government MLA, the Shaunavon 
constituency can be sure that during the next four years there 
will be continued commitment to the riding by this government. 
As your MLA for Shaunavon, I shall work in close co-operation 
with the government to give my people effective representation 
in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I wish to put on record my 
appreciation to the people of my riding for electing me as their 
MLA, and I shall work with them in every way possible to 
represent my constituents to their best interests. I would like, 
Mr. Speaker, to thank all the people who voted for me and the 
rest of the voters in my riding, and I will work with you no 
matter what political belief you believe in. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
know in the next four years I shall have many other 
opportunities to speak before this legislature. But today I would 
like to express to this legislature my confidence in the PC 
government by asking every member in this House to support 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak on 
behalf of the people of Saskatoon Sutherland and to reflect 
some of their concerns this afternoon, in my response to the 
Speech from the Throne — both to commend the government 
on certain points of action and also to question it on certain 
points of action. 
 
I would like to begin my remarks this afternoon by a 
commentary on some of the concluding words of the Speech 
from the Throne: 
 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 
guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 
Being a Lutheran clergyman I have some acquaintance — not a 
little acquaintance either — the workings of divine providence. 
And enough acquaintance, in fact, to know that divine 
providence does not bless this province or the legislature or the 
government of this province unless and until there is justice 
done. According to the great religious traditions of the world, 
and particularly the Judaeo-Christian tradition, divine 
providence does not in fact operate independently of justice. In 
a word, divine providence is justice in the public arena — in the 
private area, love; in the public arena, justice. 
 
And so what I am doing then, in reviewing the government’s 
agenda in the Speech from the Throne, is to ask myself: is 
divine providence going to bless our province? Is there justice 
on the agenda? And I ask this question because I know that’s 
the question for the people of Saskatoon Sutherland. Not simply 
some vague blessing of divine providence. That’s not what 
they’re interested in. They are interested in justice — real 
justice in palpable terms. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I think for example of a  

young single-parent mother whose home I visited about a year 
ago in the Sutherland constituency — in the College Park 
portion of the constituency which is rather affluent. It was in the 
summer and as I approached the front steps of the home there 
were two young boys out in the front yard dressed in — the one 
brother in a T-shirt, the other in cut-off shorts. And I asked 
them if their mother was at home. They disappeared into the 
house to call her. 
 
And as I stood there on the front porch and looked into the 
interior of the home — the screen was ripped out of the screen 
door so it wasn’t very difficult to see inside — there I saw a 
living-room devoid of any furniture, not an article of furniture. 
There was a picture on the wall and a few toys on the floor, but 
nothing else. And I said to myself, here is hard-core poverty. 
 
It wasn’t long before the mother came to the door and 
confirmed my observations about the situation. She told me 
about life as a single parent on welfare and how difficult it was 
to manage, or not to mange, on her welfare allowance; the 
impossibility of getting $43 from Social Services to repair her 
washing machine, and the difficulty of therefore washing 
clothes in the bathtub for the last nine months. 
 
That’s not divine providence blessing our province in my 
estimation. It’s not the workings of justice. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when I hear in the Speech from the 
Throne about the workings of divine providence, I think of this 
woman in the Sutherland constituency and her asking, where is 
justice? And accordingly, when I hear in the Speech from the 
Throne reference to the fact that during the life of this 
legislature: 
 

. . . my Government will continue to review its social 
assistance and income support programmes to determine 
how they can most effectively combat poverty. 

 
I applaud the government for this sort of initiative, provided it 
issues in assistance for those who are, in fact, impoverished and 
not a tax on the impoverished — the victims of poverty. But 
will this be the emphasis? Will justice be done, or will it merely 
be done in rhetorical terms? Will poverty be attacked, or will 
the victims of poverty be assaulted? 
 
(1630) 
 
Based on the record of the government opposite, I think we 
know the answer to this question. Their performance indicates 
their priorities. And so when I read again that special attention 
will be given to methods of delivery and ways of encouraging 
transition to the work place, I not only wonder, but I have to 
begin to suspect that injustice is in the offing. 
 
Injustice offered in the name of welfare reform; injustice 
excused out of professed concern for those who are the very 
weakest, the very poorest, and the least privileged in our 
society. And yes, that’s exactly what the people of Saskatoon 
Sutherland have experienced these last four years at the hands 
of the present government. 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

164 
 

I think of a second single parent who was forced to jump 
through the hoops of the Minister of Social Services to receive 
her welfare payments last winter, traipsing down to the 
Sturdy-Stone Centre in Saskatoon to sign a slip — with a sick 
child, in the middle of winter, on the bus, giving up a half a 
days’ wages. Some justice. Rough justice. 
 
Or another single parent — still another single parent — mother 
in the Sutherland constituency who contacted me three weeks 
ago because she had been denied assistance that she was 
entitled to simply because the social workers in the system were 
not able to deal adequately with her problems in terms of 
assessment and the time that they gave her. Such a treadmill of 
running people in and out. And when I spoke to the supervisor, 
he admitted that in fact a mistake had been made simply by 
virtue of the pressure on the system. Some justice. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the people on welfare in Saskatoon 
Sutherland are hoping indeed that special attention is given to 
the methods of delivery of social services and that any changes 
will benefit and not penalize them. They need this government 
to provide special assistance to social services, but they don’t 
need inconsiderate, insulting attention, assaults — the kinds of 
which they’ve been subject to the last four years. What they 
need is special attention to justice and its delivery. 
 
And this leads me, Mr. Speaker, then to talk about jobs, because 
without the opportunity to work, those who are on welfare will 
never get off of it. Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne 
mentions the transition to the work place as an area of special 
concern to this government, and that is good. Good if there is, 
in fact, a plan to provide jobs to effect this transition to the 
work place. 
 
But there does have to be work if a transition is to take place. 
And indeed, there is apparently in this very speech no plan, 
particularly with respect to the development of jobs in the 
technological sector. And I’d like to comment on this for a 
moment. 
 
Certainly the Speech from the Throne speaks loquaciously and 
eloquently about the need for diversification of the economy, 
about the importance of research and development, the ability 
of science to provide us with a future and technology to solve 
some of our unemployment problems. And I and the people of 
Sutherland appreciate the role of science and technology, the 
role they have to play in creating jobs and diversifying the 
economy. 
 
Indeed, Sutherland itself is bordered by the University of 
Saskatchewan campus, Innovation Place, the Kernen 
agricultural research station on another side of the constituency. 
Sutherland people are employed directly and indirectly by these 
research activities, and many of Sutherland’s people are 
students at the university and at Kelsey Institute who are 
dealing with technology. And so they’re concerned with the 
vital role that technology plays in terms of diversifying the 
economy and providing jobs. It’s for precisely this reason, then, 
that people in Sutherland want to see what this government’s 
plan is, in fact, for the development of jobs in the technological 
sector. They want to know what jobs will issue from the  

technological hype that is purveyed in the speech. 
 
In particular, many of the people in Sutherland involved in high 
tech want to know precisely what the government’s plans are 
for the $50 million that was announced during the election 
campaign as seed money for high-tech firms and now suddenly 
has shifted into money — $50 million — for Saskatchewan 
small businesses to equip themselves with technology, with 
computers and such materials. A far cry from the Premier’s 
election pledge of seed money for high-tech firms. 
 
And so what we have here appears to be a major shift in 
priorities for the Department of Science and Technology, a 
major change in policy with respect to its program, a change 
which will see small businesses offered money to buy 
technology or computers from Japan but will see Saskatoon and 
Regina’s provincial high-tech firms go starved for cash. 
 
In this context I’d like to say that it’s been just a day short of 
three years that the Department of Science and Technology has 
been in existence. During this time, the department and its 
programs have been aimed consistently, as I understand it, not 
at equipping small business with technology, but consistently 
— even exclusively — at helping Saskatchewan-based 
companies to produce and develop technology. 
 
Until now the programs of this department were meant to 
provide assistance to Saskatchewan’s high-tech firms, 
fundamentally to encourage research and development of 
projects, to support research programs and products in areas of 
mutual concern to government and the industry, to offset part of 
the costs in preparing proposals on high-tech projects outside 
the province, to help small companies conduct technical and 
feasibility studies, to provide capital equipment to the two 
universities and so forth. In a word, underlying this agenda of 
the department in the past has been that all programs would 
promote technological development through research and 
through marketing. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, my concern with the technological agenda 
put out in the Speech from the Throne is that it appears not only 
to betray the original mandate of the department, but that it also 
appears to betray Saskatoon and Saskatchewan high-tech firms 
who are looking for government assistance in developing 
technology. And thirdly, that it also betrays the province’s 
jobless who are looking for work in this sector and won’t find it 
when small business firms are given money to purchase 
equipment from offshore or across the border. 
 
I therefore hope that the announcement in the throne speech of 
the $50 million a year over the next five years to equip 
Saskatchewan firms with technology does not indicate a 
movement away from the original mandate of the department 
— the mandate to do research and to do development work and 
to provide a firm foundation for future jobs in the province. 
 
In addition, I would like to say that I look forward to 
announcements in the future from the department as to how the 
Department of Science and Technology will be  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

165 
 

assisting in minimizing the impact of technological change in 
the Saskatchewan work place, how it will mitigate the 
displacement of Saskatchewan people affected by technological 
change. And finally, I look forward to working with the 
minister and the universities in the province, the research 
councils, and the industry itself, in the establishment of new 
research institutes as announced for Saskatchewan grain, 
biotechnology, and potash. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment finally on 
questions of security and protection. The previous speaker 
commented quite extensively on the measures the government 
has taken to protect Saskatchewan people. 
 
In the pages of the Speech from the Throne we read: 
 

(This) government is firmly committed to the protection of 
its citizens from forces beyond their control and intends to 
continue to back them in difficult economic 
circumstances. 

 
That is, to my way of thinking, a good agenda for any 
government to lay before its people. And I particularly 
appreciate the measures take to establish a drug and alcohol 
centre in Yorkton for young people. They need that sort of 
protection. 
 
But there is also other forms of protection that Saskatchewan 
young people need. And in this respect there is a glaring 
omission in the Speech from the Throne, namely in the 
provision for security for our population — for our young 
people in particular — to protect them from the threat of war. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an usually large percentage of the people of 
Saskatoon Sutherland constituency are young people — 
university students who come from across the province from all 
constituencies. I’ve worked with these young people on the 
university campus for some five years, and I know that their 
concern is that we build a better world, one where there is real 
security and real peace that matches the sort of proclamation 
heralded some 2000 years ago this Christmas season. Peace that 
sees a world with individuals secure and nations secure. Peace, 
where we see an absence of preparation for war. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, nowhere in this speech do we hear a peep 
from this government about any commitment to peace or 
disarmament in the world community. Nor do we hear a 
whisper about the things that make for peace in the global 
village. Not a word about the commitment for increased 
funding to the Saskatchewan council for International 
Co-operation, to match the generosity of Saskatchewan people 
in contributing to the voluntary sector to help some of the very 
poorest of the poor. Not a word about a commitment by this 
government to deal with the questions and issues of 
disarmament. Not a word on Saskatchewan’s complicity in 
cruise missile testing. 
 
And on the contrary, low and behold, we find a commitment to 
the nuclear industry here in the province. We find a 
commitment to reduced taxation on the uranium industry and to 
establish a resource institute for the industry — the very 
industry that ships five out of  

every six pounds of Saskatchewan uranium into the United 
States to wind up as part of the U.S. military stockpile. 
 
All this from the Premier, who came to the University of 
Saskatchewan campus some two years ago to announce that 
Saskatchewan was open for business for companies wanting to 
do contracting for Star Wars research — some commitment to 
security; some commitment to the protection of Saskatchewan 
people. The same Premier who welcomes in Saskatoon the 
Pentagon war-lords when they came to market their death, and 
to seek contracts for instruments of death. 
 
(1645) 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I think I must say that this 
Speech from the Throne is, in fact, very appropriate for the 
season. It has all the promise and appearance of a gift to the 
people of Saskatchewan. It’s wrapped in the paper of an 
attractive and important agenda for our province. It’s tied with 
the rhetoric of past accomplishment. And in fact, it even has a 
beautiful bow attached to it in the form of the invocation of the 
blessing of divine providence. But it is a disappointment, a big 
disappointment. 
 
The Speech from the Throne is a disappointment for the poor of 
the province who are looking for justice; it’s a disappointment 
to the jobless who are looking for work; it’s a disappointment to 
men and women looking for peace; it’s a disappointment to 
myself. I believe it’s a disappointment to the people I represent 
in Saskatoon Sutherland and I, therefore, will be voting in 
support of the amendment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me too, to speak today in response to the Speech from the 
Throne. But first I would like to congratulate you on your 
appointment, or election, as Speaker of the House. I know that 
you will give great thought, and fair thought, and impartial 
thought to the decisions you have to make from time to time, 
and I wish you the best in the coming session and the coming 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been an honour for me to be able to have 
represented the constituency of Maple Creek for the last eight 
years. The people of my riding are what I would consider 
people who are simply the salt of the earth. They are 
hard-working people, fair people, people who are very 
interested in what is going on not only in Saskatchewan and 
Canada, but indeed throughout the world. 
 
These people have become very, very good friends of mien, and 
I often seek their guidance and their words. And I would like to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that I look forward with great anticipation to 
being able to represent them in this Assembly over the course of 
the next four or five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people of Saskatchewan  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

166 
 

are now embarking on a second phase of an important journey, 
a journey of building this province with a government that 
supports and protects the people and responds to our citizens’ 
needs, rather than a government in which it, itself, becomes a 
dominant factor, dominating the people and doing the major 
activities by itself. 
 
Last fall our government was pleased with the opportunity to 
present our record to the voters of Saskatchewan, and of course, 
Mr. Speaker, these people on this side of the House were very 
grateful that the people of Saskatchewan gave us a resounding 
vote of confidence and gave us another mandate. 
 
Our first term in government was carried out through perhaps 
what could be described as some of the most difficult times this 
province has undergone since the 1930s. But despite those 
difficulties, Mr. Speaker, we were able to keep our promises 
and deliver to the people of Saskatchewan an improved quality 
of life. 
 
Our programs succeeded in giving this province the lowest 
unemployment rate overall in Canada for the four years and, 
Mr. Speaker, we also had the best employment, job-creation 
rate in Canada. I believe that we did strengthen the province’s 
health care system, and we provided a record increase in the 
financial benefits to our senior citizens. 
 
In spite of what members opposite say, Mr. Speaker, our 
taxation policies gave us record tax reductions, and today 
Saskatchewan is known in the country as Canada’s leader in tax 
reform, and we are known as a low-tax province. 
 
Our actions recognize that Saskatchewan’s strength begins in 
the farming and rural areas, and because of this, Mr. Speaker, 
we embarked upon a massive project of providing natural gas to 
a record number of farms, and as you know, this program will 
continue until rural Saskatchewan have the option of using 
natural gas. 
 
And earlier this year we embarked upon another important 
amenity for our farming community, and that is bringing private 
lines to farms so that they may have access to the high 
technology that is available and really needed and used by our 
new generation of farmers. 
 
We protected farmers against high interest rates. We saw record 
numbers of young farmers buying land as a result of the 8 per 
cent interest rate program brought in by this government, and 
this enables us to keep Saskatchewan’s main industry, fresh and 
alive. All those young farmers bring new technologies and new 
ideas and just keep on improving the province. 
 
The energy programs with the programs that we brought in in 
the last four years have led to record oil production in the 
province, record drilling, and they also led to record land sales, 
revenues and jobs. 
 
Until the recent slump of world energy prices, Mr. Speaker, 
everyone knows that our energy industry was the main 
contributor to the province’s treasury. These and other 
accomplishments from our first term in office reflect one 
overriding fact: when Premier Devine and our  

government faced the difficulty of drought and declining 
commodity prices, we had the courage to move ahead 
decisively. And, Mr. Speaker, it is very obvious that our 
programs paid off. They moved this province ahead. But those 
first four and one half years, Mr. Speaker, are only a start, and 
the people of Saskatchewan recognized that in the recent 
October election, and they have given us a mandate to proceed 
with our program of building, of diversifying our province and 
to move our province ahead. 
 
Let me say I’m particularly pleased to participate in this debate 
because the throne speech leaves no doubt — it leaves no doubt 
in the minds of the members on this side of the House and no 
doubt in the minds of the majority of our electorate — that our 
government is holding its course. And the people of 
Saskatchewan left no doubt also; they do want this province to 
build, and our Premier has the vision and the courage to 
respond. The Speech from the Throne is but a blueprint for a 
prosperous and fulfilling future for the people of our province. 
 
In line with the reality of our province, the base of our program 
is agriculture and it is an economic diversification and there can 
be no doubt, Mr. Speaker, our program is generating solid 
economic growth within the boundaries of our province. Our 
intention to dramatically increase the production of farm 
chemicals in Saskatchewan and to encourage further 
development in our industrial base is exactly what the people, 
our citizens, want. We will use whatever mix of public and 
private investment that is necessary to accomplish this goal, and 
this one step, Mr. Speaker, will give us further control over our 
own destiny. 
 
Our initiatives to encourage the establishment of community 
corporations so that people can identify diversification 
opportunities and convert those opportunities into reality will be 
welcomed across the province. It is in line with the PC way of 
supporting people to help themselves to build this province. 
 
I particularly like our proposed five-year program to stimulate 
the tourism industry. It will be the most significant tourism 
initiative ever undertaken in Saskatchewan, aiming to increase 
employment in the tourism hospitality industry by 25 per cent 
or 7,500 jobs, Mr. Speaker, over the next five years. 
 
And let me note that there can be no room for sceptics on this 
initiative. It is simply building on the spirit of Expo ’86, where 
the young people from across the province worked at the 
Saskatchewan pavilion in British Columbia and demonstrated 
the tourism appeal of a good facility staffed by trained and 
confident people. 
 
Again, we are rightly directing this tourism program to local 
communities because each community in Saskatchewan 
possesses a unique combination of cultural and recreational and 
natural qualities. And we will help those communities and 
cultural groups to develop their own strengths. 
 
I would like now, Mr. Speaker, to turn to the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. And I would like to say at 
the onset that it has been a pleasure for me to have  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

 

167 
 

had this post for the last four years because this particular 
department has been able to play a very, very strong and 
important role in building Saskatchewan. 
 
The activities of the department are designed to strengthen the 
confidence of the consumer in the market-place. As well all 
know, the alternative to a strong market-place is an 
ever-growing government bureaucracy with the resulting 
limitations of freedom on each and every one of us as 
consumers. 
 
From the very first, I brought to this department a very strong 
conviction that, in the market-place, education is preferable to 
regulation, that the people of Saskatchewan will be far better 
served by a department committed to making the market-place 
work, rather than one committed to putting an army of 
government inspectors and regulators to work policing the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ve implemented this program, Mr. Speaker, and the 
people of the department have resounded very enthusiastically. 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, from the comments that we get, 
that this particular program is succeeding very well in the minds 
of many of the consumers out there. 
 
Of course we all recognize that there are times when 
enforcement is necessary — when a few people do try to take 
advantage of the market-place. And the department will 
certainly continue to keep a watchful eye. Where education 
won’t do the job, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that we will 
have the proper regulation and enforcement in place. My 
department will be proceeding over the course of the next year 
or so with a number of initiatives which will improve the 
regulatory environment in several key sectors, raising the level 
of protection offered to consumers and providing businesses 
with a more flexible and responsible system of regulation. 
 
Amendments to The Saskatchewan Insurance Act will be 
brought forward which will allow for greater protection for 
consumers in the event of company failures in the general 
insurance industry, and they will permit Saskatchewan’s 
participation in a national consumer protection plan. 
Saskatchewan will also be supporting the creation of a similar 
plan for the life insurance industry and we will support the 
creation of a Canadian insurance exchange to foster the 
development of the insurance industry in Canada. This should 
contribute greatly to increased competition and service, 
particularly in the area of liability insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will also proceed to develop a self-administration plan in 
the insurance industry — including the establishment of 
insurance councils — in the areas of life, general, and hail 
insurance. Similar developments will be promoted in the real 
estate industry, Mr. Speaker, and legislation will be put before 
this House to create a self-administered body for this industry. 
These initiatives have as their goals, greater government 
responsiveness and better protection for consumers, given the 
changing dynamics out in the industry. 
 
The Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs will also 
be undertaking a number of initiatives designed  

to increase the quality of the services that we offer to the public. 
Information services will be greatly enhanced by extending 
direct on-line access to public information data bases. 
 
The Saskatchewan Gaming Commission will soon become fully 
operational and it will provide a central focus for the regulation 
of gaming activity throughout the province. Particular emphasis 
will also be given to aiding decision making for those wishing 
to take advantage of the government’s home improvement 
program. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, efforts will be made to simplify 
departmental documents and to make them more 
understandable and accessible to the average citizen. I might 
say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m particularly pleased with a few of my 
other new cabinet responsibilities. By bringing Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Corporation and the Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development together with 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, the Premier has united 
under one minister most of the key provincial agencies involved 
in the financial sector in Saskatchewan. I believe that this is an 
eminently sensible move, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to 
the challenge of seeing that these agencies serve the purposes of 
our people of our province. 
 
Before getting into Saskatchewan Government Insurance, Mr. 
Speaker, and some of its accomplishments, and my other 
department, I will be up on my feet a bit longer, so at this time I 
would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Implementation of Announced Projects
	Feasibility Study of Toll Highways
	Canada’s Patent Drug Legislation
	In my own thoughts, I have often wondered when the damaging effects of the damn would cease, if nothing was done. We have not been able to make a decent living since the devastation. A sturgeon was made extinct and the fishing never really regenerated...
	We want to be involved from the initial to the final stages of development. We want to be involved in the processes of change. We want to be involved because it is our children, it is our families, it is our communities that have to pay for the develo...



