


















































March 20, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 20, 1986 
 

61 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Private Members’ Bills 
 

Deputy Clerk: — Ms. Zazelenchuk from the Standing 
Committee on Private Members' Bills presents the reports of the 
said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petition for a private Bill and finds that the provisions of 
rules 56, 47, and 60 have been fully complied with. 
 
Of the Saskatchewan Bible Society, South Saskatchewan 
District, of the city of Regina in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and the Canadian Bible Society, North 
Saskatchewan District, of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Your committee has also examined the petition for a 
private bill of Medical Services Incorporated of the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Your committee finds that rule 60 was not fully complied 
with due to an error in the late date of publishing of the 
notice in the gazette. The error was not the fault of the 
petitioner, and your committee therefore recommends that 
rule 60 be waived and the petition be accepted. 

 
Ms. Zazelenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Cumberland, that the 11th report of the Standing 
Committee on Private Members' Bills be now concurred in. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Hampton: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Monday next move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 
to instruct all petroleum wholesale and retail outlets to stop 
discriminating against their rural customers. Further, to 
advise the same that at no time must retail prices anywhere 
in Saskatchewan vary by more than 2 cents per litre, gas 
wars being the only recognized exception. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly, 
a group of 20 high school students from Carpenter High School 
in Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan, in my constituency. 
 
They're accompanied here today by Keith Flanagan, their bus 
driver, three of their teachers, Leo Josephson, Bert 

Brander, and Ron Dosdall, three former colleagues of mine, and 
who are their teachers and chaperons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these girls are here in Regina for today and 
tomorrow beginning the provincial play-offs for basketball, and 
I think it's important to note to all members of the House some 
of the work that's done by the High School Athletic Association 
and some of the activities that they do. There will be 40 teams 
in the city this weekend representing all divisions, 1A to 5A, 
and I know many of the members of this House will have teams 
from their various constituencies there. 
 
This particular team with Mr. Dosdall, whom I've mentioned, 
since he came to Meadow Lake I believe that high school has 
the honour of having won, I believe, 12 provincial 
championships in various sports since he's been a teacher at that 
school. I think he should be congratulated for that, and I would 
wish them all well in the tournament this weekend. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
today, through you to the Assembly, two classes from 
north-west Regina. I’ll introduce the smaller class first. It’s a 
class from St. Bernadette Elementary School in north-west 
Regina. Their teacher, Don Zaharia, takes a very active interest 
in politics, and so does the social studies class who is here 
today. He’s accompanied by Mrs. Stopanski, Mrs. Probe, and 
Mr. Spilchen, Mrs. Olesen, and Mrs. Glas. I certainly welcome 
the St. Bernadette Elementary School classes to the Assembly, 
and I know you’ll find it very interesting and possibly very 
enlightening. 
 
Also with us today is a class from the Centennial Elementary 
School in north-west Regina, 62 students from grade 8 who are 
accompanied by their teacher, Doug Bolander. Lorie Godwin 
and Harvey Swallow are also here with the class today. So I 
welcome them all to the Assembly, and I ask the Assembly to 
do the same, welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, a group of 
28 students from the West Side Community College who are 
seated in the Speaker's gallery. They are down here, Mr. 
Speaker, on an educational tour, and I might add that the trip 
down here was over 500 miles to get to Regina. They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Linda Cowan, Karen Bradbury, 
Marie Taillon, Louise Pederson, and their bus driver, Ken 
Pederson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to extend a special invitation to 
Brenda Hansen who is in the group, who is a niece of mine. I 
hope that this group will enjoy your tour of Regina. And on 
behalf of all members we wish you well and a safe journey 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

62 
 

Mr. Domotor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce 
to you, and through you to this Assembly, a group of students 
from Cudworth High School numbering 27 grade 8 students 
with their teachers and chaperons. We welcome them here this 
afternoon, and I hope they have an informative and 
informational meeting here and a good visit with the tour that 
they have established in the city. And I wish them a safe 
journey back home. I would like all members of the House to 
welcome them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Expected Drop in Grain Prices 
 

Mr. Engel: — I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. 
Yesterday the Canadian Wheat Board advisory committee 
called upon your counterparts in Ottawa, the federal 
government, to protect the Canadian grain growers from the 
huge subsidies being provided to exporters of grain and 
farmers, both in the United States and in other countries of the 
world. The advisory committee urge Ottawa to make up the 
difference between the expected lower initial price which will 
be announced in a few days and the subsidized price which 
other producers are getting for their grain. 
 
That kind of deficiency payment would bring Canadian wheat 
prices to just over $6 bushel, this along the lines of recent 
resolution from the other groups, SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and wheat pool; we could 
name others. Will the provincial government press your 
counterparts in Ottawa, you friend, Brian Mulroney, to 
introduce this kind of deficiency payments to protect the 
Canadian farmers, the Canadian grain grower, and particularly 
those farmers in Saskatchewan that are going to be impacted so 
adversely by this American announcement in particular. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have encouraged the 
minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board to maintain 
the initial prices where they are, because I believe that if we can 
maintain the initial prices where hey are, particularly for the 
high grades of grain that you will see because there is a 
deficiency or a low amount of those grades in the world market, 
that we can be able to sell them and not have a deficiency in the 
pool. 
 
And the second item: I said, if he can come up with additional 
financial money for grain producers across western Canada, that 
now is the time to do it. And I've talked to him personally about 
it, and I have suggested that he either come up with a 
combination of higher initial prices or maintaining the initial 
prices or some other source of money that can be used directly 
into the farmer. 
 
In talking with American counterparts, I was in Nebraska about 
10 days ago and met with former secretary of agriculture, Bob 
Bergland, under president Carter. And he was impressed with 
the fact that Canadians, and western Canadians particularly, had 
a western grain stabilization package that could send money out 
to farmers to the tune of 4,5, $600 million at a 

crack. American's don't have that. And his advice to me — as 
we were talking there — was saying, I think that you've done 
the right thing by not getting into the world market, but by 
providing a stabilization mechanism that the governments can 
contribute to and farmers can contribute to, and you've put a lot 
of money into western Canada and into the hands of grain 
producers. He is interested in that, and he said that we have, in 
the United States, spent billions and billions of dollars and are 
not curing the problem. And as you and I both know, it's getting 
worse; surpluses are increasing, and the farmer is isolated from 
the price mechanism in the world. 
 
Mr. Bergland said, when he looked at our system, he said, I 
think you've got the right idea because you're sending cash into 
the farmers' pockets on one hand, but you're still competing 
better than we are as Americans down across the line and any 
place else in the world market. 
 
So I would endorse anything along the lines of a stabilization 
mechanism that puts cash into the people's hands, on one hand, 
and two, makes sure that we do have some sense of sensitivity 
with respect to world markets. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, the question I asked is: will you 
support a deficiency payment? You're arguing that the 
stabilization program that's in place is good enough and that the 
last year's price was okay. If you keep that up, you're satisfied. 
Well we're not. The groups right across Saskatchewan are 
saying they need a deficiency payment, a difference to make up 
that amount to $6, not level it out and freeze us in at three. 
 
The question I asked: will you support the Canadian Wheat 
Board advisory who made their proposition yesterday that the 
federal government make up a deficiency payment over and 
above the stabilization plan, which we need, over and above 
holding the floor of the price? Are you prepared to support a 
deficiency payment? is what I asked you. And from your 
answer, it sounds like you weren't. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The American farmer that's competing with us 
— and I wish I were in their place this year — they are 
guaranteed $6 under their farm Bill — $6 compared to our 3.20. 
Are you prepared to support at least a $3 deficiency payment 
for Saskatchewan farmers? That's the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, there are many differences 
between American agriculture and Canadian agriculture. My 
friend opposite half the time doesn't want anything to do with 
the United States. He doesn't want anything to do with them. 
Now he wants to incorporate American farm Bills and put it 
right here in the hands of Saskatchewan. 
 
I'll tell you when I was in Nebraska, there isn't a farmer in 
Nebraska that wouldn't trade places with a farmer in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

63 
 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The programs that we've put together 
here — 6 per cent money for farmers, western grains 
stabilization, and all the other programs — this government has 
initiated things the state of Nebraska hasn't even dreamt of yet. 
And the federal programs coming out of the United States are 
not popular. 
 
We're going to go to the wall for the farmers here. We have 
provided them with a billion dollars in operating money — 
something that your administration never did. And we, Mr. 
Speaker, will encourage the federal government to put as much 
money into agriculture as they can find. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, in about six weeks to eight weeks 
time I'll be prepared to take questions from the Premier. But 
right now the question is back to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — The question today is: what are you going to do 
while you still have a friend in Ottawa? What are you going to 
do to insist that farmers get that $3 deficiency payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when I needed drought 
money in Saskatchewan, I phoned the Prime Minister, and I 
talked to him, and we got drought money in Saskatchewan. 
When I needed flood money for farmers in Saskatchewan, I 
phoned the Prime Minister, and I talked to him, and we got 
flood money. When I wanted the capital gains tax removed off 
farm land in this province, I phoned the Prime Minister, and I 
got it. When we wanted a new western energy accord, I talked 
to the Prime Minister, and by gosh, he delivered it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we need assistance from the federal 
government, we are intelligent enough to know that if there are 
cabinet ministers from Saskatchewan sitting in Ottawa, we are 
going to exploit that connection with Ottawa. And we are going 
to develop all the programs and policies that are good for 
Saskatchewan people that the NDP never, ever could do, and 
never will be able to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, we're not going to get into a debate 
now on what the NDP could or wouldn't do. I'll do that, Mr. 
Speaker, when I make my throne speech debate. 
 
The question now is: when are you going to get on the 
telephone and ask for the deficiency payment? If you can 
deliver, deliver on this one, because that's what the farmers 
need. They need the cash to run their operation. All the 
subsidies around aren't going to cover off the price. 
 
According to the study yesterday by the panel of experts during 
the third annual Saskatchewan grain producers' conference said: 

 
Prices for wheat, Saskatchewan’s largest crop, could drop by 
another 20 to 30 per cent this coming year, the largest single 
drop since the mid-'30s. This will make them (the grain 
prices) in real terms lower than prices were during the '30s. 

 
When your friends were in power in Saskatchewan the last 
time, the last time your friends were sitting on that side of the 
House, 50-some years ago, we had this kind of price for our 
grain, with the input costs they were. Will you get on the phone 
and save the day and get some money for farmers, or won't 
you? That's the basic question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I, during our administration, 
have obviously got more money for Saskatchewan farmers than 
they've ever received in the history of the country from Ottawa. 
More money, more crop insurance, more western grain 
stabilization, more drought payments, more flood payments, 
more protection than they've ever had in the history of our 
country — during the last three years of our administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will continue to put together packages for 
Saskatchewan farmers here to make sure that they are treated as 
well as any farmers in North America, and we will have the best 
packages, we will have more support than they've ever seen in 
the past and the members opposite have ever delivered in the 
history of their administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, would you mind 
answering the question addressed, and the question is simply 
this. Have you called the Prime Minister or the Minister of 
Agriculture and urged them to adopt a policy which would give 
deficiency payments to Saskatchewan farmers along the general 
lines recommended by the wheat board advisory committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t have to call the 
minister because I talked to him face to face in Montreal last 
weekend, with respect to deficiency payments and other forms 
of income that could be directed right out here to Saskatchewan 
farmers. So I talked to him right across the breakfast table and 
said, that's the kind of things that you should do. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Chicago futures, through the Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange, indicate approximately a 26 per cent drop 
in the price of grain between March and July of 1986. Is the 
Prime Minister willing to send a half a billion dollars into 
Saskatchewan to cover that shortfall if, in fact, the July prices 
are 26 per cent lower than those currently being received by the 
farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can't speak for whether the federal 
cabinet is going to spend more money or less money. And the 
member opposite . . . I mean, I can't speak for the Prime 
Minister, or can I speak for any other cabinet minister there. I've 
said to the minister of the Canadian Wheat Board that we would 
like to see additional cash here going to grain farmers, and I 
told him that right across the kitchen table. And I can make it 
no clearer than that. 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

64 
 

Housing Starts in 1985 
 

Mr. Sveinson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Many small 
builders in my constituency have brought to my attention the 
dismal record of this government in housing. Across this 
country in 1985 there was approximately a 22 per cent increase 
in new housing starts. In 1985 in Saskatchewan it was just 
negligible. 
 
I ask the Premier, who conveniently left housing out of his 
throne speech, whether this government has any answers for 
those small contractors and individuals who depend on the 
housing sector for employment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll turn it to the 
Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
directed a question concerning housing, and as minister 
responsible for Sask Housing I'm pleased to take some time to 
respond to his concern. 
 
I think it's interesting to note, for the benefit of the House this 
afternoon, that total urban starts here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, housing urban starts, increased by 19 per cent in 
1985. 
 
The increase . . . There naturally, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
difficult circumstances in rural Saskatchewan, was not a 
commensurate increase in the rural areas of the province, and 
we certainly understand and appreciate that. Over all, units did 
increase in the province of Saskatchewan last year. We 
anticipate that there will be an increase again this year in the 
housing market in the province of Saskatchewan over last year, 
which was an increase over the year previous. 
 
And you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that in the Speech from the 
Throne there was an indication that this government will, in due 
course, be dealing with additional programs that will stimulate 
housing construction in the province of Saskatchewan. I have 
had the opportunity to meet with the housing contractors here in 
the province on various occasions, and they are pleased with the 
prospects that present themselves for Saskatchewan in 1986. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — New question. Just to let the House know, 
Mr. Speaker, how pleased they are, in 1976 in this province 
there were approximately 13,000 housing starts. Over the next 
10 years it's dropped to 52 and 5,300 in '84 and '85 respectively. 
That has cost the province of Saskatchewan approximately 
50,000 real jobs — jobs in the housing sector, a sector which 
employs one out of six people employed in Canada. 
 
I ask the minister what he has in store for those 50,000 people 
who were unemployed, and whether they can expect to get back 
into the housing industry under the policies of this present 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure if the member is 
asking the question relating to housing starts or relating to 
unemployment and to the development of job opportunities here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. If he 

is asking questions about housings starts, then I have just 
indicated, Mr. Speaker, that in fact there has been an increase 
here in housing starts in the province of Saskatchewan, that 
there will be an additional increase again in 1986. 
 
If he's asking a question about employment and employment 
prospects and the creation of jobs here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, he's going to have to look a long ways, Mr. 
Speaker, before he is going to find a better employment record 
and a better record for the creation of jobs than you will find 
anywhere except in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Certainly during periods of high interest rates 
construction does suffer. I ask the minister if he has any answer 
to the present problem of high interest rates and qualification by 
home owners in this province so they can afford to purchase 
existing homes and, in fact, new homes, which employ people 
with real jobs not increase the bureaucracy as your government 
has done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 
members of the Assembly and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan that it was this government, during times of high 
interest rates when home owners were crushed with the burden 
that was difficult to bear, and they were crying out for 
assistance so that they could keep their family home, or so that 
they had the opportunity to in fact build a home, that it was this 
government which responded and responded in spades to help 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — And I would remind the member opposite 
that interest rates in this country, Mr. Speaker, are lower today 
than they have been historically for a long period of time. And 
it's a new government in Ottawa which has helped to create 
that. And they are going down, and they are going to be going 
down further, Mr. Speaker. And those who think that there is 
any other option except a Progressive Conservative government 
that helps people keep their homes and purchase homes, they 
are sadly mistaken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. the member has really risen on 
three new questions rather than supplementaries. I'm going to 
move on to the next questioner. 
 

Tabling of Provincial Auditor's Report 
 

Mr. Lusney: — I have a question for the Minister of Revenue 
and Financial Services. Mr. Minister, this has to deal with the 
Public Accounts for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1985. Mr. 
Minister, has the Provincial Auditor completed his report or 
audit of the government spending for the last year, and will 
those accounts be tabled in this legislature soon, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

65 
 

Yes, the Provincial Auditor has completed his report, and yes, 
the report will be tabled shortly. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
could you be a little more specific of when? We have been 
asking you that question since last fall, the fall session. It hasn't 
come forward. When will this document be tabled in this 
House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you again. The 
document will be tabled in due course, and we expect it will be 
quickly. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, the Public Accounts have been 
tabled in this House, since 1971, no later than March of any 
given year — no later. Most of them have been December, 
January, and February, except for the years when you were in 
power, when they were tabled March 23rd, 82-83; 83-84, April 
12. And this year it looks like again we will not be having these 
documents tabled before the next election. Why, Mr. Minister, 
are you hiding those documents from the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have 
nothing to hide. And it's not uncommon, as the member himself 
has said, that the documents, the Public Accounts, be tabled in 
the spring sitting. We're in the spring sitting. We're in the first 
few days of it, and we will table it. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, we are dealing with over $3 
billion of taxpayers' money. I am sure . . . and my constituents 
keep asking me, when are we going to have the opportunity to 
look at the expenditures of this government? Mr. Minister, will 
you make a commitment? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It's impossible to hear the 
question. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, will you make the commitment 
to this House that those documents will be tabled by tomorrow 
so that the public of Saskatchewan could have a look at the 
expenditures of this government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I'll make the commitment to 
the House that we will table the public accounts' documents as 
soon as possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated 
that the auditor has completed his report. The minister has 
indicated that his government has nothing to hide. Would he 
care to indicate the figure for the deficit, which those 
documents show and the auditor has shown, for the year ended 
March 31, 1985. Will you jest tell us that, to the nearest 10 or 
20 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate that 
the member opposite has difficulty dealing with smaller 
numbers that most of us are accustomed to, but he's well aware 
of the procedure of this House and that the documents will be 
tabled, and when they are tabled, all figures in them will be 
published. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, are you stating that 
there's anything which is preventing you from telling this 

House what your deficit was, other than your desire to hide 
from the people of Saskatchewan just how monumental that 
deficit was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the gentleman 
opposite talks about hiding things from the people of 
Saskatchewan, we could go on at great length here. We could 
talk about deficits hidden in the Crown corporations for 11 
years while they were in government. We could talk about a 
certain heritage fund. We could talk about investments 
allegedly made that would have carried the program for this 
province for years and years had they only been invested wisely 
instead of squandered. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will have the Public Accounts of this 
government tabled in due course, and then they will be 
published, and this government then, as the people of the 
province will know, has nothing to hide. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, will you admit that the real 
reason why you won't give us the Public Accounts and the 
auditor's report, which you admit are ready to be tabled, is 
because you are going to delay the tabling of that document 
until after the call of an election, so that information will not be 
available to embarrass you during an election. Will you admit 
that's what you're really waiting for is the call of the election so 
we won't get it until afterwards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — No, Mr. Speaker. I will not agree with 
that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Will you then give us the date upon which 
you're going to table them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Within days, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Road Access into City of Regina 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I have a question to the Minister of 
Highways and it pertains to access to north-west Regina on 
McCarthy Boulevard off of, I suppose, No. 11 Highway which 
would, in fact, draw traffic through my constituency into two 
malls that do suffer from time to time because of that traffic 
flow going into the downtown core of the city. 
 
I would ask the minister if there's any negotiations with the city 
of Regina to accelerate that access so that traffic moving into 
Regina on No. 11 Highway could, in fact, filter into north-west 
Regina and the two malls that do a great deal of business with 
the city, in this city, and for this city. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm not 
familiar with the exact location of the highway that the member 
opposite is speaking about. But I would say this to the member 
opposite. If indeed you are genuinely concerned about that 
access, about that highway, I invite you, sir, to do your job, 
come to my office. I will be very happy, very happy to meet 
with you at any time and discuss it fully. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — By way of a supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I 
would ask again that the minister undertake to 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

66 
 

draw the attention to the city of Regina that he's willing to 
discuss the problem and that he request the mayor of the city of 
Regina and myself to meet with him in his office and discuss 
this access. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'll be very happy to do that, sir. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the mayor of Regina has 
been heard to complain publicly, and he has said he has 
complained privately to you, that the level of funding provided 
in the last budget isn't going to permit some of these projects to 
go forward. Have you, Mr. Minister, responded to those 
inquiries from the mayor of Regina, and have you assured him 
that in the upcoming budget these badly needed projects will be 
funded properly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I have not had correspondence with the 
mayor of the city of Regina. I do understand that he has made 
certain statements in the newspaper. I do also understand that he 
will be meeting with the Premier in the near future, and perhaps 
he has met with him in the last few days. I would be very 
pleased to meet with the mayor of the city of Regina on that 
matter or any other issue relating to the Department of 
Highways. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Appointment of Art Wakabayashi as Chief Negotiator 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I rise with pleasure this 
afternoon to announce to members of this Assembly the 
appointment of Mr. Art Wakabayashi as our province's chief 
negotiator on trade talks. 
 
Mr. Wakabayashi is currently economic development 
co-ordinator with the federal government in Regina. He will be 
joining us April 14th and will serve as chief provincial 
representative for Saskatchewan on the federal-provincial 
continuing committee on trade negotiation. That committee is 
responsible for both bilateral and multilateral trade negotiations. 
 
Each province, Mr. Speaker, will have a chief provincial 
representative to work with the federal negotiator, Simon 
Reisman. We are the fourth province, thus far, to name our 
representatives to these vital tasks, and I am very pleased to 
have a man of Art Wakabayashi's skill and expertise as our 
chief provincial negotiator. As many of you are aware, Mr. 
Wakabayashi is a Saskatchewan native with extensive 
experience in government policy formulation at both senior 
levels of government. It is essential that we have such strong 
representation on the federal-provincial committee on trade 
negotiations, since this subject and outcome is of tremendous 
importance, Mr. Speaker, to the province of Saskatchewan and 
to our people. 
 
At this time, I would like to emphasize that Saskatchewan has a 
significant interest in both the trade negotiations with the 
United States, as well as the multilateral trade negotiations 
under the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). 
 
In virtually no other province do exports play such an important 
role in the economy as they do in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Our exports of grain, oil, potash, 

uranium, and oil-seeds, as well as manufactured goods and 
services, account for nearly half of the provincial economy and 
almost half of the jobs. 
 
Saskatchewan considers it imperative that Canada achieve 
enhanced access to new and expanded markets, particularly for 
its agricultural products. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Wakabayashi's major task will be to ensure that the federal 
government recognizes Saskatchewan's interests and concerns 
in the development of Canadian objectives and negotiating 
strategies for the upcoming trade negotiations. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the initiation of the trade talks 
will mark an important economic milestone for Saskatchewan 
and for western Canada, regions whose economies have 
traditionally been resource-based and based on trade. This 
government is convinced that the freer exchange of goods and 
services between Canada and the United States will help to 
redress a long-standing imbalance in Canadian economic 
policy, as well as to ensure a continued high standard of living 
for all Canadians, and particularly those in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are also convinced that an important opportunity to expand 
markets for Canadian agricultural products was lost in the last 
round of multilateral trade talks. Accordingly, we have taken 
the initiative to ensure that the trade in agriculture commodities 
will form an important part of the upcoming round of 
multilateral trade negotiations under the GATT. 
 
Mr. Wakabayashi will head up a small secretariat of expert 
provincial officials to oversee the preparation of Saskatchewan's 
input in Canadian preparations for the talks. We look forward, 
Mr. Speaker, to the upcoming federal-provincial talks with 
optimism and with great expectation, and I am delighted that 
Art Wakabayashi has agreed to accept the position as chief 
provincial negotiator. That, in itself, Mr. Speaker, is a good 
start. 
 
Mr. Wakabayashi is in the Speaker's gallery today, and I am 
sure that all members of this Assembly join me in wishing him 
well in his important role as chief provincial negotiator. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, let me add a very brief 
word. We support the appointment of a provincial negotiator to 
deal with the upcoming issues in trade talks, not only with the 
bilateral trade talks between Canada and the United States, but 
also the more general trade talks surrounding the proposed 
revisions to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 
 
We believe that, particularly with respect to GATT, it is 
important that our point of view be put, since a very large 
quantity of our exports enter into world markets, some of it to 
the United States, but a great deal of it to other countries and 
we, accordingly, favour the move which will increase the 
knowledge of Canadian negotiators of our concerns with 
respect to international trade in agricultural products. 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

67 
 

With respect to the person selected, we would support the 
appointment of Mr. Wakabayashi. We believe him to be a 
public servant who served governments of various political 
stripes with distinction, and we have no reason to believe that 
he would not serve the people of Saskatchewan well in the 
position to which you suggest he be appointed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act respecting the Establishment and 
Operation of the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre for the 

Provision of Rehabilitation and Extended Care Services in 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Establishment and Operation of the Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre for the Provision of Rehabilitation and 
Extended Care Services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be a read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I wonder in the interest of expedience 
if we could refer items 1 through 17 inclusive to motions for 
returns debatable. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Items 1 through 17 orders for returns 
debatable. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Klein, seconded by Mr. 
Domotor. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the clock 
ran out on the speech I was making, and I've just been 
reviewing some of the last words I spoke in an attempt to regain 
my train of thought. And the last words I was speaking 
yesterday was that I enjoy working with my constituents. That's 
something that I really need. I won't lie to them. I won't give 
them a snow job, and I won't try to tell them something that is 
unbelievable. 

And in going through my notes from yesterday's speeches, I 
notice that wasn't characteristically true of members of the 
opposition. As a matter of fact one member yesterday, in his 
reply, made some comments about employment in 
Saskatchewan. And the member for Shaunavon indicated firstly 
that when the NDP took over in Manitoba in November, 1981, 
the unemployment rate was 11 per cent, one of the highest in 
the country, and has since dropped to 8 per cent, the lowest in 
the country. He also indicated, Mr. Speaker, that when the PCs 
took over in Saskatchewan in 1982, the unemployment rate was 
5 per cent, the lowest in the country, and now is greatly in 
excess of Manitoba's. Well, Mr. Speaker, to put it mildly, I 
think that's a prevarication upon the truth. 
 
The truth is, in Manitoba, in November of 1981, the actual 
unemployment rate was 5.8 per cent, and in February of 1986 
the actual unemployment rate is 8.9 per cent. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the unemployment rate in May of 
'82, when we took over from the NDP, the actual was 5.6; 
February '86 the actual is 8.7. Mr. Speaker, that's in direct 
contradiction to what the member from Shaunavon said 
yesterday. That member, Mr. Speaker, that member over there 
deliberately, deliberately left out parts of the truth, and I have 
just spoken them. 
 
I'd like to give you some comparative employment figures, Mr. 
Speaker. In the last 12 months of the PC government 17,000 
jobs were created in Saskatchewan, an increase of 15,000 in the 
labour force, including 13,000 increase of women in the labour 
force, Mr. Speaker. The last 12 months of the NDP government 
1,000 jobs were lost, and the labour force only increased by 
7,000. In Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, from November 1981 to 
January 1986, they only created 15,000 jobs, and furthermore, 
over the last 12 months Manitoba only created 14,000 
compared to 17,000 here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I got those figures from the Saskatchewan 
Bureau of Statistics, which in turn are taken from StatsCanada 
labour force statistics. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that's another indication of how members 
opposite have tried to, shall we say, misdirect the people of 
Saskatchewan. They have time and time again stood up in this 
House and told partial truths. They have changed figures to 
their benefit, and they have done it blatantly and bold-facedly. 
And they have done it without shame, and they do it every day, 
again and again and again continuously, Mr. Speaker. It is 
something that I've had to listen to here for the last four years, 
and I'm getting sick of it, and so are the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite have 
continually gone on trying to impugn the character of other 
members of this House time and again, time and again, and they 
have not only done it in the Chamber, they've done it outside as 
well, Mr. Speaker. And it's only 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

68 
 

by the good grace of some other hon. members that members, 
who are on the opposite, are not in court at the present time. 
 
But everything in love, war, and politics is fair, I guess, so I can 
put up with it — I can continue to put up with it. I suppose, Mr. 
Speaker, after the next election when they return even fewer on 
their side, the opposition will be shrunk in size, I'll still have to 
listen to it because time and again they will continue to try to 
mislead the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to get back to my constituency, I spoke yesterday 
of the number of improvements that have happened in the last 
four years and I feel proud of those improvements. And this 
morning I was talking to a young farmer out in my constituency 
who was a land bank recipient, and he talked to me back in 
November, and the financial institution that he deals with could 
no longer extend him moneys to operate on. He did not have 
sufficient collateral, in their opinion. He just got his cheque for 
6 per cent money, $25 an acre, and he's going out to buy his 
seed and his fertilizer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If it wasn't for this government, Mr. Speaker, that young farmer 
would be out of business. He is one of the opposition's beloved 
land bank tenants. And he's a good operator, Mr. Speaker, but 
he doesn't have any collateral left because the banks won't 
accept land owned by someone else, leased land, as collateral. 
You know that, Mr. Speaker — you're a farmer too. But that 
great bastion, that great wonderful elephant that the opposition 
created, the land bank, was supposed to save farmers from that. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it didn't; it didn't. It was programs like our 
government's 8 per cent money to help young farmers get 
started, and our 6 per cent money to keep young farmers 
farming, that has helped them. In my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, as I said earlier, that's very, very important. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, in my mail this morning, received an 
invitation from an elevator company to attend an opening and to 
officiate at it and that was from the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
in the town of Wadena. They have just completed a new 
elevator there, Mr. Speaker, and we're very fortunate in our area 
to have that company continuing to expand its operations. It's a 
fine company with a long tradition, well trusted by farmers. 
 
There are other areas in the province where the farmers aren't so 
lucky and their elevators are going. They have a problem, Mr. 
Speaker. The problem that the other farmers have is that tough 
times because of weather, because of world commodities, 
prices, have caused companies like Sask Wheat Pool to close 
their facilities or to definitely look at temporarily shutting them 
down, laying off staff, and that's unfortunate. 
 
Small business, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, in my 
constituency is very, very important and it relies on the farmers, 
and if it wasn't for governments like ours 

providing 8 per cent money for those farmers to own their own 
land, and if it wasn't for governments like ours providing 6 per 
cent money operating so they can continue to farm their own 
land, that small business wouldn't exist and the Sask Wheat 
Pool wouldn't be building an elevator. They wouldn't be 
constructing elevators; they wouldn't be hiring more staff; they 
wouldn't have their farm service centres open. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we not only have young people in our 
constituency, we have senior citizens as well. Many of those 
senior citizens have not been able to put away enough over the 
last 15 or 20 years so that they can afford private nursing or that 
they can afford someone to come in and look after them, and 
yet, Mr. Speaker, they do not qualify for a nursing home 
because they're in relatively good health. 
 
We came up with an interesting idea called enriched housing, 
Mr. Speaker, and in my constituency it's helping immensely. 
There's 16 units scheduled for the town of Kelliher — there's 
six already built. And in the town of Wynyard, Mr. Speaker, 
which is just adjacent to my constituency but serves many of 
them, there's been a new enriched housing complex being built, 
about 20 beds, I believe, and that's in the constituency of Quill 
Lakes. It serves a lot of people around there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency has done very, very well by this 
government. It's done better under this government than the 
former administration, indeed, and I believe part of that is 
because I'm a farmer and I understand farmers. I'm one of them. 
I understand their situations. I understand how they feel. And I 
have a family — not a family of Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, but a real, live family with young people and old 
people in it. And if it wasn't for our government any number of 
those people would not be enjoying the types of benefits they 
are enjoying today. 
 
And the members opposite are fond of crying about how tough 
times are, and we've heard from a number of farmers around the 
province, that yes, indeed, they're in trouble. And we've heard 
the opposition cry for years and years about how tough things 
were. But they never did anything, Mr. Speaker. High interest 
rates, '79, '80, and '81 — 24 per cent interest rates weren't 
abated. They never did anything. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, on the other hand, put together an agricultural 
input committee, a committee of cabinet that travelled around 
the province, Mr. Speaker. We spoke to hundreds and hundreds 
of farmers in every economic level there is. And we weren't just 
asking for them to tell us the same old things again and again 
about how tough things were or how the prices were or how 
low the prices were. We asked them for their solutions. We 
asked them what they would do. That's something that the 
members opposite have never, ever managed to do because they 
believe in centralized government, government from the top, 
and tell the people what's good for them. 
 
The member for Quill Lakes loves telling people what's good 
for them, and if he had the guts to stand up in this House and 
say something instead of speaking from his seat, we might learn 
something. I say "might," because I 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

69 
 

doubt it. 
 
But that ag input committee, Mr. Speaker, that travelled around, 
heard a number of solutions to some of our concerns. Security 
has always been important to the people of Saskatchewan, 
especially in the rural areas, because we have so little of it. 
We're subject to the whims of the weather, world prices, quotas, 
the wheat board, and indeed plagues. Eleven years of the NDP 
is indeed a plague. One thing that the people out in the 
countryside told us was that the security that they need has 
never been provided by any government — not just security of 
prices, Mr. Speaker, but security involving retirement. 
 
When I was campaigning in 1981 and 1982, Mr. Speaker, I 
talked to countless farm wives. And one of the biggest concerns 
that they had was: what happens to me if my husband should 
pass away? They didn't have any type of fund built up; they 
didn't belong to a big corporation that had a pension plan for 
them; and indeed the NDP had never done anything for them 
except tell them how wonderful the NDP was. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne we 
mentioned a pension plan for home-makers. Mr. Speaker, that 
pension plan for home-makers is one of the greatest things that 
could ever happen to agricultural people in Saskatchewan. That 
particular sector of society has been denied, through no fault of 
their own, access to that type of a pension plan. 
 
There's the old saw about farmers living poor and dying rich, 
and that may indeed be true. Farmers put back most of their 
income into the farm. They don't have access to government 
and company pension plans. They don't have oftentimes a 
steady source of income. Farming has been a boom and bust 
thing. And indeed these people want it. I've heard that; 
countless other members have heard it as well; and I'm sure the 
members opposite heard it too for 11 years, but they didn't 
anything about it. We are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those farm wives will now be able to put a certain amount of 
money aside, Mr. Speaker, for their retirement, for their comfort 
as they grow older, for their comfort when they quit farming, in 
their retirement. And that's something that they need. That's 
security, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's something the NDP never gave them. The NDP said, 
we'll come out and expropriate your farm. That was the security 
they had. We'll buy some potash mines and we'll be able to own 
them. That's security? I doubt it. I really doubt it, and the people 
of Saskatchewan doubt it too. That's why they elected us in 
1982. And they elected us to put this type of program into 
place. And it ties right in, Mr. Speaker, with our support of the 
family farm, our belief that families are more important than 
Crown corporations, our belief that without the family farm in 
rural Saskatchewan you won't have rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's another portion of rural Saskatchewan that 
we should talk about, and that's the young people. Those young 
people, Mr. Speaker, that are now in our elementary schools, 
our high schools, so on and so forth, had to look forward to 
their only opportunity 

being leaving the province of Saskatchewan prior to 1982. 
Indeed, many of us did. I had to; couldn't find a job here. I was 
a journeyman mechanic and couldn't get a job in Saskatchewan. 
I moved to B.C., but I came back to farming. I came back to 
farming. And for the information of the members opposite, yes, 
I was a good mechanic — better than some of the members 
opposite were lawyers, I understand. At least I could make a 
living at it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, countless other young people in the province 
had to leave too. Now these young people who are getting out 
of high school this year can look forward to jobs created here in 
Saskatchewan. The oil patch is still rolling. Thousands of jobs 
are being created. I know a lot of my young farmers go out to 
the oil patch in the winter-time or up on the diamond drills and 
they work and supplement their farm income. They're 
hard-working folks and they don't have to go to Ontario or B.C. 
or Alberta any longer. They can do it here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And they can it with training, Mr. Speaker. They no longer have 
to leave the province or wait two years to get into our technical 
institutes. Our new technical institute in Prince Albert, along 
with upgraded and enhanced programs in other institutes 
throughout the province, are giving these young people a place 
to go to get trained so they can get jobs — jobs that are 
available in Saskatchewan. 
 
And that's very, very important because those same young 
people are tomorrow's farmers, tomorrow's business men, and 
yes, even tomorrow's politicians. That's very, very, very 
important for us. Without a future, those people would have had 
to leave but now they have one. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite tell me that I might be back 
in B.C. after the next election. Well, that could be. After I'm 
elected I'd like to travel to B.C. to see how they're doing out 
there. I assure you that the members of the opposition won't 
have that opportunity. The best they'll be able to do is scurry 
home and hide their tails because they're going to lose. And 
they're going to lose because of the things I have pointed out 
today in my reply to the throne speech. They didn't care. They 
let Saskatchewan go down the tubes for 11 years. They still 
don't care, and now they're running around yelling doom and 
gloom, or else, me too; me too. And the people of 
Saskatchewan can see through that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne 
100 per cent. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meagher: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to rise today and join with my colleagues in 
replying to the throne speech. This throne speech has been 
described by some as an election throne speech. In fact, the 
Leader of the Opposition referred to it as an election throne 
speech. And I have to confess that I've referred to it as an 
election throne speech myself. And I can assure you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I would be prepared to go to the people on the 
basis of this throne speech and the 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

70 
 

initiatives that this throne speech lays out for the constituents of 
Prince Albert. 
 
It is a blueprint for further development in Prince Albert and 
across Saskatchewan. It's designed to advance the interests of 
individuals and families, which is the foundation for our society 
here in Saskatchewan, and it's a strong foundation indeed. And I 
am very pleased to see that the government recognizes the 
family as the basis of our society, and that it is the individual 
and his initiatives that makes the economy grow, not 
government. 
 
As an MLA who comes out of the small-business community, I 
am particularly pleased with a couple of specific initiatives 
proposed in this throne speech. The first one is the proposal to 
establish a code of conduct to govern the activities of elected 
public officials, particularly members of the legislature. 
 
Having been myself subjected to allegations of conflict of 
interest, that were unfounded by nevertheless created a 
perception of conflict in the public's mind, I believe that this 
initiative is overdue. And I want to compliment the Premier for 
including in the throne speech this commitment, as I have 
requested. 
 
This legislature, as are many other legislature and parliaments 
in Canada, are clearly under-represented by people from the 
small-business community. And I believe one of the reasons for 
that is the fact that they can be subjected to this kind of 
allegation and are hesitant to serve as a result. 
 
If our parliaments and legislatures are to truly represent a 
cross-section of the public, we must rectify this situation. And I 
believe that this government is again taking an initiative that 
may be unique in Canada in addressing this particular situation. 
 
It is not in the best interests, I submit, Mr. Speaker, of the 
public to be represented in Saskatchewan by schoolteachers, 
lawyers, and farmers, exclusively. With all due respect to all of 
those professions, I believe that people from the small-business 
community can make a contribution, and should, and are going 
to be hesitant to do so if they are subjected to allegations that 
they are in conflict every time they deal with government. 
Because the unfortunate reality in Saskatchewan, as elsewhere 
in Canada — a small-business man can't function without 
dealing with government. 
 
As a plumbing-heating contractor, I am obligated to deal with 
government every day. I have to take out permits from the 
Department of Health in order to do a plumbing project. Then I 
have to have it inspected by an inspector from the Department 
of Health. And clearly the allegation can be made that the 
plumbing job was passed because I am an MLA, and not 
because the work was done properly. The same applies to 
installing a gas furnace. I must apply for a permit from the 
Department of Labour, have an inspection done by an employee 
of the Department of Labour. And again the allegation can be 
made that he passed the job on the basis of my being an MLA, 
as opposed to it being done properly. 
 
So there's a never-ending circumstance for people in the 

small-business community to be accused of conflict of interest. 
And I feel that unless there are clear guide-lines that a layman 
out of the small-business community can understand and 
comply with, without having a battery of lawyers and 
accountants on each of his elbows, we won't see people from 
the small-business community serving in legislatures, and that 
is unfortunate. 
 
Another initiative in this throne speech that is particularly 
significant to people from the small-business community is the 
proposal to establish a first-ever Saskatchewan pension plan. I 
think that this initiative will be greeted enthusiastically by 
people in the small-business community who do not have 
employee pension plans because they're either not large enough 
or their employees are short-term. And I think that this plan is 
going to be very well received. 
 
I particularly like the fact that it's voluntary in nature, so that it 
isn't mandatory, as has been suggested by the opposition NDP. 
That lends itself to their philosophy, but voluntary in nature 
lends itself to mine. 
 
This plan will offer additional security to people who are unable 
to participate in employer-sponsored retirement programs, and 
will be available to home-makers, part-time workers, and 
employees in the small-business community. 
 
I believe it's an idea whose time has come, and I believe it will 
be received across Canada with a great deal of interest. I 
believe, as well, that this will be watched by jurisdictions 
outside of Canada, indeed all over North America, because we 
have a tradition here in Saskatchewan of being innovators and 
leaders. We are greeted that way all over North America and I 
think this plan will fall into that tradition very nicely. The 
tradition itself is recognized in the throne speech, and the 
government proposed to build on that tradition, and I salute the 
government for that. 
 
That tradition, while it's strong in Saskatchewan, is even 
stronger in northern Saskatchewan where an individual and his 
initiative is so important for survival and to carry on the 
optimism that has built northern Saskatchewan. And of course 
the strongest part of northern Saskatchewan is Prince Albert. 
 
However, not unlike the rest of the cities and towns in this 
province, our agricultural industry is the backbone of our 
economy. We did last year have a somewhat different year than 
other parts of the province, particularly the southern part. We 
had a tremendous crop, but a very difficult fall. The yields were 
good but the crops had to be dried, and it was costly for our 
producers to take off their crops. But our agricultural 
community in the Prince Albert area is optimistic. They are 
survivors, they always do survive, and they will look forward to 
1986 with a great deal of optimism. 
 
This being, in just under an hour, officially the first day of 
spring, I expect our farmers in the Prince Albert area to start 
building their optimism again, as is traditional this time of the 
year, and they're going to tackle 1986 with renewed optimism. 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

71 
 

Our second most important industry in Prince Albert is forestry. 
It has had its ups and downs as well in the past year, with some 
shut-downs at the pulp mill, strikes. It has been a difficult year. 
Many of the factors that caused it to be a difficult year are out 
of our control in this province, as is the case in agriculture and 
some other industries. The markets have been soft and these 
factors are things that we have no control over. 
 
However, there is a bright spot on the horizon in forestry, and 
it's not a fire. And I'm pleased that the fact of the low pulp 
prices and the lack of demand for pulp has not diminished our 
hope in the forest industry in Prince Albert. 
 
This government in fact, which is the owner of P.A. Pulp, has 
been seriously searching out and negotiating with the private 
sector for the establishment of a paper mill in Prince Albert. 
Such a facility would assure the pulp mill of an ongoing 
production requirement, and the pulp mill will still be in a 
position to negotiate sales of pulp to world markets as it has in 
past years. 
 
Employees in the pulp mill operations and in the wood 
harvesting operations will find much greater security and steady 
employment when we are successful in upgrading the forestry 
operations in Prince Albert. Many, many man-years of 
employment will be created in the construction phase alone, and 
several hundred new permanent jobs will come into place once 
the mill opens. 
 
Prince Albert last year was designated the forestry capital of 
Canada. And that did much to raise the public awareness of 
Prince Albert and its importance to the forestry industry. 
 
Tourism continues to be a growth industry for Prince Albert. 
Conventions, divisional meetings, sporting competitions, and 
similar events drawing tourist dollars to our business 
community surpassed an estimated $6 million in 1985. 
 
This government has placed a high priority on tourism, and 
Prince Albert has responded. Tourism has grown in Prince 
Albert over the past three years very significantly. We have 
found from surveys that most of the tourists are from other parts 
of western Canada and that the most effective advertising we 
can do is word-of-mouth advertising. If we treat our tourists in 
Prince Albert like they're special people, they will come back, 
because the natural attractions of northern Saskatchewan are 
equal to any in North America. 
 
Our number four industry, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert and 
northern Saskatchewan of course is mining, and it has just 
complete a year of unprecedented activity. Multimillion dollar 
expansions in the uranium mining sector have provided 
economic spin-offs throughout the province in employment, 
suppliers, and services. 
 
A turn-around in the uranium market and the acceptance of 
uranium as a power source would lead us to believe that more 
good things will be happening in the uranium industry. 
Economic benefits enjoyed in Prince Albert and district from 
the 1985 uranium operations include 163 persons employed, at 
an average salary of $30,000 per 

year. Using the common multiplier of 2.8, the uranium industry 
has created a total of 456 full- and part-time jobs in Prince 
Albert and in the commercial and service institutional 
employment sectors. 
 
Direct employment benefits to Prince Albert and district total 
$4.8 million per year and the total economic impact of these 
direct salary spin-offs amount to over $20 million of economic 
activity per year in Prince Albert. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
extremely significant for a city the size of Prince Albert. That is 
the economic value of just the uranium industry in our area. 
 
Gold mining has captured the limelight for most of 1985 and 
will probably continue to do so for the next few years. Some 
very exciting activity in the gold-mining industry in northern 
Saskatchewan is expected this year and in the year ahead. I 
expect many of these companies will be doing business in 
Prince Albert and maintaining offices in Prince Albert, and our 
area sales and service outlets will be experiencing a great deal 
of activity. 
 
(1515) 
 
Current developments under way in Prince Albert which will 
influence our 1986 economy include completion of the 
Northern Institute of Technology, a $30 million construction; 
completion of the Kinsmen Park waterslide development; a new 
restaurant on 2nd Avenue West; the Prince Albert exhibition 
auditorium building; completion of 1301 Central Avenue Plaza; 
eight apartment and condominium projects started throughout 
the city. 
 
Confirmed major construction projects to commence in 1986 
include a $6 million water treatment plant expansion; 
streetscape construction program on Central Avenue; 
commercial developments on 2nd Avenue West, 15th Street 
East, and 15th Avenue East; and a further five condominium 
and apartment projects. We will also see this year the large 
Dubal facility and property back into use. 
 
As well, other developments which appear imminent at this 
time and should be confirmed this year, if not moving into 
construction phases during the year, would include the levelling 
of the fire-damaged Revelstoke building and its replacement 
with a new commercial development; renovations and leasehold 
improvements to the Target 21 properties north of the city to 
accommodate one new manufacturing plant and one relocation 
and expansion of an existing manufacturing plant; 
establishment of a farm machinery dealership; several 
commercial and light industrial businesses by offshore 
investors, Mr. Speaker; expansion to one of our colleges, $2 
million expansion to the Vickers School; a new $3.5 million 
separate school east of 15th Avenue East; a district Indian 
chief's federal office building; and a new federal government 
office building; the sale, salvation and redevelopment of the 
Molson's brewery plant; a student resident complex in 
proximity to the Northern Institute of Technology; several more 
fourplexes and apartment blocks and, depending on interest 
rates, probably 150 to 200 new single-family dwellings will be 
constructed in 1986 in Prince Albert. 
 
Certainly the biggest project and one of the most sought 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

72 
 

after would be the construction of a paper mill in Prince Albert. 
But, Mr. Speaker, pride in Prince Albert has never been higher. 
Our Raiders won the Memorial Cup last year and we expect 
them to do it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meagher: — Last year Prince Albert gained a great deal of 
prominence and exposure by being named forestry capital of 
Canada. This year we believe opportunities in Prince Albert 
have never been better. We believe in our city, we believe in 
our province. Prince Albert will be the boom city of western 
Canada, and those individuals in Prince Albert who built this 
city on the basis of the social structures recognized in this 
throne speech, namely the family and the individuals, Mr. 
Speaker, they will go for it. They will capitalize on their 
opportunities. I believe these opportunities are made available 
because of this government's open for business philosophy and, 
Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert we intend to go for it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm 
pleased to rise in this Assembly today to speak in this debate on 
the Devine government's fifth throne speech — Mr. Speaker, 
the Devine government's last throne speech. 
 
I am proud to represent the people of the Athabasca 
constituency in this legislature, and I am proud to express here 
today their concerns and the issues on their mind, the issues of 
which they will decide the next election. 
 
Simply put, Mr. Speaker, the Devine government has been a 
deep disappointment to the communities and the families in 
Saskatchewan, and especially hard on the citizens of northern 
Saskatchewan. Throughout my constituency, community 
leaders, teachers, working families, trappers, fishermen, they all 
say the same thing — we just can’t afford four more years of 
the Devine government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's quite interesting that we see this throne speech 
here today. I know the member from Prince Albert has 
completely changed, done a good job today, and I congratulate 
you on that. But I want to say to the member from Prince Albert 
that I think he's done that four years too late because the next 
election I think you will see a new member in Prince Albert. 
 
I want to go back in history a little bit because I think we have 
to, and I see the former Liberal member smiling, who has been 
put in charge of the finances of this province. And I think that 
when a Conservative government has to get that low that they 
will put the finances, the trust of the finances of this province in 
the hands of a Liberal, then you know that there's troubles in the 
horizon. 
 
The last time that we had a Conservative government in this 
province was 55 years ago, between 1929 and 1934. And I say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the other members of this 
Assembly and the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, that history will repeat itself. You talk to citizens 
wherever you go in this province and they say they just cannot 
afford four more years of Conservative government. 
 
What really concerns them, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the last 
government in 1929 to '34 went for five years. And that really 
scares the citizens of this province because they say not only 
could they not afford to have this government in for another 
four years, but we just can't afford to have them around for 
another year. This has to come to an end. And we all know what 
happened, and I say to the members opposite that history will 
repeat itself. 
 
This is a government that's one term, but I just sincerely hope 
that they will do the wise thing and call the election and not go 
five years. Because let me tell you, this province is so far in 
debt, and when I get to the figures of the unemployment and the 
welfare rolls and the food banks, you're just going to see just 
how bad things have become in just four short years, what this 
government did. 
 
And I think that we have to learn from history. And there are a 
lot of citizens in this province who remember 1929 to 1934. 
 
Then we had the same type of government led by the member 
who was a very important part of that group, who is in charge 
of your treasury now, the Finance minister. And that was 
between '64 to '71 when we had a Liberal government. And we 
all know that the provincial treasurer, the new Finance minister, 
who was a part of that Liberal government at that time, was the 
man who master-minded, in 1971, Home Coming '71. He was 
the master-mind behind that and now . . . And you know what 
happened in 1971? It was a home-coming. It was a 
home-coming of the New Democratic Party. They came back 
after a disastrous seven years. I think history will repeat itself 
and you will see that the citizens of this province will not allow 
another term from this government. 
 
In 1967 the citizens of Saskatchewan had an opportunity to get 
rid of the Liberal government, and they didn't do it. And we all 
remember that dark Friday after the '67 election. And your 
Finance minister was a very important part of that Liberal 
regime. Now he's looking after your finances. 
 
I say to the member from Lloydminster: do you trust him? Well 
I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I don't trust him with the finances of 
this province, and I don't think anybody else does. 
 
I want to refer to an article here, and it just goes to show you 
what has really taken place in the last four years under a 
Conservative government. And I'm just going to quote from 
this. It's in the Leader-Post of March 26, 1983. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That was a good year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And the member from Prince Albert said 
that was a good year. That was the first deficit budget that we 
had from this Conservative government in 1983. 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

73 
 

And I'm going to quote for the former minister of co-operatives 
from the Leader-Post of March 26, 1983. 
 
With the way the government is moving, we will be number 
one in having the most people on welfare, number one in 
destroying the rights of workers, and number one in destroying 
unions. We will be number one poorest province in Canada. 
 
Just think, Mr. Speaker, they accomplished all this in their first 
year of power. Can you imagine what they will do in the 
remaining three years? Well, Mr. Speaker, we know what's 
happened in the remaining three years, and I intend to touch on 
that. 
 
There's a number of statements that I have here that I will be 
presenting today and presenting the argument why four years of 
this Conservative government is all that this province can 
handle. 
 
The huge, unfair tax increases on ordinary people, but huge tax 
breaks to big oil companies that cost this province $300 million 
a year, over a billion dollars in the four years that this 
government was in power — over a billion dollars. 
 
If you were to take the money that you gave away to the oil 
companies — and I will talk about that a little later as to just 
where they are and where the jobs are and the bragging that has 
been done by the Conservative Party over the last three years 
about what good corporate citizens they are and they deserve 
$300 million a year of the taxpayers' money — we could have 
had, if that $300 million would have been put into houses, to 
highways, and to hospitals and schools, we would have had 
people working and this province wouldn't be in the debt that it 
is today; a debt, Mr. Speaker, that we are all going to be 
suffering for and are, for generations to come. 
 
Three hundred million dollars a year, and that's a conservative 
figure, Mr. Speaker. Actually if you really take a look at all the 
royalty breaks and the money that's gone out to the oil 
companies, it's probably closer to $400 million a year. And that, 
my friends, is a lot of money, and we just wouldn't have the 
debt that we have today. 
 
And no wonder the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, are 
saying that they just can't afford another four years of this 
Conservative government. When we talk about the oil, the way 
they operated and gave all this money away . . . And the 
member of co-ops was just asking me where the heritage fund 
was. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Former member. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Former member. Well I want to say to him 
that there was a heritage fund. It was there. And now where is 
our heritage? Where is the 300 to $400 million a year and all 
the jobs? They're gone. They're just totally gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I have some guests in here. Mr. Speaker, if 
I may have the opportunity to introduce some guests. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce, Mr. Speaker, through you and to the Assembly, five 
students from the Westside Community College from Green 
Lake. They're seated in the Speaker's gallery and they're with 
their teacher, Mr. Heinz-Gerd Schulz. They're on another tour 
here of the legislature and of southern Saskatchewan. I would 
like all of the members to welcome the group from Green Lake. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, before I introduced the 
guests, I was talking about the massive give-aways that has 
taken place to the oil companies. but I say that we are in debt to 
the tune of close to $2 billion in this province right now, and we 
will find that out as soon as the Public Accounts are tabled in 
this House. But it's not strictly . . . I'm not going to lay all the 
blame on the government for getting us in this debt just through 
oil companies. That's not all the give-aways we've seen in the 
last four years; that's not all the give-aways. 
 
Let's take a look at the selling off of the Poplar coal mine to 
Manalta Coal from Alberta. They sold that off. They also gave a 
$100 million loan guarantee to Manalta Coal, and they're from 
Alberta. And the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, he 
says that that's a good idea to sign over $100 million to Manalta 
Coal of Alberta and he says that that's okay, that we should 
lease back for 30 years the coal that we sold to them — our own 
coal — and he says that's a good idea. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that that coal belonged to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. We owned it; we were mining it. We most 
certainly didn't need Manalta Coal to come in here and we 
didn't need to give them $100 million so that they could come 
in here and mine our coal. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the Conservative government of 
Saskatchewan sold them the drag-line for another $30 million 
that they signed over to them so that they could mine our coal, 
and they gave them a 30-year contract — a 30-year control — 
on that drag-line. No way they could lose. And the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster figures that's a good idea, because 
he lives fairly close to Alberta and he figures that the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers should be supporting Alberta. 
 
We have to take a look at the Pioneer Trust fiasco where the 
Devine mismanagement cost Saskatchewan another $28 million 
— another $28 million. That's not all, Mr. Speaker. It just 
continues and continues, and it gets worse and worse. 
 
We have Intercontinental Packers up in Saskatoon who 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

74 
 

process pigs in this province. They've been in this province 
operating for probably 50 years. They were running their plant 
at 50 per cent capacity and they wanted to expand. They wanted 
to expand. If there was a need, they were going to expand. 
 
But what happened? What happened? The Conservative 
government of Saskatchewan — and I would imagine that the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster would approve of this 
one also — signed over a contract for $21 million to one Peter 
Pocklington of Alberta. And we know who Mr. Peter 
Pocklington is. He's the man that owns the Edmonton Oilers, 
and he owns a packing company, and I'm sure that he didn't 
need no incentives to come and set up in Saskatchewan. If he 
thought that he wanted to set up in Saskatchewan and he has all 
that money that we know he has — he's got to have that, being 
the man that owns the Edmonton Oilers. 
 
But what did this government do? They gave him a $21 million 
loan guarantee and guaranteed him that if he set up, that $10 
million didn't have to be paid back. You gave him a $10 million 
grant. And you call that free enterprise. You call that free 
enterprise taken we have the business in our own province in 
Intercontinental Packers, and then you want to start up another 
pig packing facility. And Mr. Pocklington just happened to run 
for the leadership of the Conservative Party in Canada so you 
gave him $21 million to come in, when everything could have 
been done in Saskatoon. 
 
Now we see them starting to build in North Battleford and 
they're putting out contracts without tender, and where are the 
contracts going? They're going to Alberta. And that has just 
happened in the last few days where there was a contract given 
out and it wasn't tendered and it was got by a firm in Alberta . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
And the member from North Battleford, if he has something to 
say, then why don't you stand up and say that because that's 
where you should be speaking from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. We talk about the disasters of this 
province and the human tragedies, and one just has to take a 
look at the highway system in this province, the way it has 
deteriorated and what has really happened to our Highways 
department. And the Minister of Highways is sitting there, the 
new Minister of Highways. I'm sure he had something to do 
with the selling off of $40 million worth of highway equipment 
for approximately $5 million, and destroyed over 200 families 
while you were doing it. I think maybe he was — I'm not sure 
— but I think his firm was the auctioneer at that sale . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, I don't mind the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
speaking from his seat, but now he's speaking from behind the 
rails. I know he's got a problem with walking, so if Mr. Speaker 
will allow you to do that then I most certainly accept that. 
 
But let me tell you what happened. There was $40 million 
worth of highway equipment that was given away by the 
Conservative government and there was over 200 families who 
lost their jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

that's the Conservative record. That's why we're into this terrible 
mess that we have had in this province because you can pull off 
deals like that. 
 
You don't worry about families. You don't worry about 
individuals who were working for highways for 10 and 30 
years. No, you didn't. You hauled all the equipment from all 
over. You rented the space to auction it off. You got your fees 
for auctioneering them, and I'll you this province didn't get $5 
million for that $40 million worth of highway equipment. What 
they got was over 200 families who were literally destroyed. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's not what the minister of 
Highways . . . He got up in this House and he says, well we're 
not really laying them off. That's what he said, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You were here. He said, we're not really laying them 
off, we're just transferring them to the private sector. That's 
what he said. And where's the minister of highways today? Just 
where is the minister of highways today, the man who said he 
was transferring over 200 positions to the private sector? Well 
I'll tell you; he's not even running for the Conservative Party 
again. I hear on the news media this morning that's he bought a 
ranch up in Alberta, and he's moved to Alberta. So we have to 
be careful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there is a lot of money 
and a lot of people moving to Alberta. 
 
And we have to take a look at our highways system, at what has 
taken place in the last four years. I have a piece of road, 
Highway 155, which runs from Green Lake to La Loche. And 
that road, Mr. Deputy Speaker, had 10 miles to be completed in 
1982 — 10 miles to be completed. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there are still 10 miles to be completed. That 10 miles still has 
not been graded and dust-free. 
 
Take a look at Highway 55 north of Big River, a very important 
link between Big River and Green Lake. In 1982 we had 10 
miles of road built and dust-free. In four years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, not 1 inch has moved on that road — not 1 inch. Now 
that there's an election coming up, we see that they're starting to 
take some of the right of ways, the trees away. 
 
But I'll ask the Minister of Highways: what are you going to 
do? Are you going to build that road? And after four years, do 
you think the residents of Big River are going to believe that, 
just because you're clearing some bush and putting up a few 
pegs? That's what you do all over the province. They don't 
believe that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fred, why don't you tell the truth? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I'm telling the truth. And I want to just go 
back, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a few minutes. And I see the 
member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. He says, he's talking 
about the Husky upgrader, and he says it's going to go ahead. 
And I hope he's right. And I know that the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster hopes he's right. 
 
But I think it's time for that member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster to get his Minister of Energy and the 
minister of energy from Alberta and Canada to get together and 
get that project announced. You keep announcing it but it's 
never approved, and it's still there. 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

75 
 

And in the four years the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake indicates that there has never been one megaproject 
started in this province. He admits that, the member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake. He's not in his seat, but that's what he says. 
 
And I want to quote from the Prince Albert Herald, December 
12, 1985. And I’m quoting from Mr. Dutchak. And this is what 
Mr. Dutchak says, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I'm quoting from 
the Herald: 
 

The expansion of Gainers into Saskatchewan secures at 
least one megaproject in the province, and opens the doors 
to new food processing. 

 
He admits, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake admits, 
that there has never been any project started under your 
government. He admits that the megaproject is Gainers. And 
he's also admitting that you paid him $21 million to get him in 
here. You enticed him. That's the megaproject that you're 
talking about. 
 
Then the ads. The ads, they go on and on and on, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The ads go on and on and on. And I think the member 
for Cut Knife-Lloydminster has been following these ads and I 
know that he's concerned. 
 
And here I read in the Star-Phoenix, and this is February 18th 
of '86: "Husky decision will be made in three weeks." Mr. 
Price. He says it's going to be made in three weeks. I tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's five weeks ago. And I tell you, you 
better get that announcement made because there is a lot of 
citizens in north-western Saskatchewan who are hoping and 
praying that that project will go ahead. 
 
And we have to take a look at Gulf Canada, and we just take a 
look at all the ads that they were putting in the paper. And he 
talks about $300 million a year that the Conservative 
government gave the oil industry, the incentives to start drilling. 
And here's what he says: “Small adjustments pay back big in 
jobs and taxes." 
 
Small adjustments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, small adjustments — 
300 to $400 a year. Their suitcases are full, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and now we have massive lay-offs in the oil industry 
and they are leaving the province. And I ask any of the 
Conservative members to stand up in this House and deny that. 
 
I want to now turn . . . I know the member from North 
Battleford is in a hurry to get up off his seat, so I will not take 
much more time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I want to talk about 
northern Saskatchewan a little more — its rich resources, its 
solid families and communities, its valuable traditions, and its 
proud people. These are the strengths of the North. 
 
Premier Devine promised the people of northern Saskatchewan 
a new vision, and I'll tell you what that new vision is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It's massive unemployment and massive 
welfare and human tragedy. One just has to take a look at the 
compassion of this government when we look at the food 
transportation 

subsidy that they took off two years ago. The Minister of Health 
is sitting in his seat, and I've got a little article here that relates 
to the Minister of Health; $250,000 to provide fresh milk, 
vegetables, and fresh meat to the citizens of northern 
Saskatchewan — $250,000 a year, and they took that off. They 
said, well, we're taking it off because the tourist operators are 
the ones taking advantage of it. I say that's not true. 
 
But now the Minister of Health says yes, things are tough in 
northern Saskatchewan, and anybody who works up there for 
the government in that far north country needs a food subsidy. 
That's what the Minister of Health is saying. He now admits 
that. And he's sitting in his seat and says that that's not true. I 
say to you, Mr. Minister, and here's an article, and I'm going to 
quote. And let me quote: "Job vacancy, Uranium City, 
registered nurses." 
 
Let me reiterate this, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that $250,000 food 
subsidy that the Minister of Health has taken off, taken it away 
from the citizens up there who I say need that fresh food and 
vegetables and need that subsidy. 
 
(1545) 
 
Here I'm quoting, and I am quoting from the Department of 
Health: 
 

One full-time and two part-time positions; three shift 
rotations; salaries and benefits as per SUN collective 
agreement. Benefits include . . . (And this is for nurses up 
north. I know it's tough to get nurses and they have a big 
job in that department). Benefits include: northern 
allowance, accommodations provided at a reasonable rate 
(accommodations — that's to the nurses up there) and a 
food subsidy. 

 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister of Health, you say that you're 
not offering a food subsidy to your department, to the 
individuals that you're hiring. Well I say that that's wrong. It's 
right here in writing. You're offering a food subsidy. You took 
it away from the people of the North, but you know it's tough 
and you're giving it to your own. You're advertising and saying 
that that's what you're going to do. I say that's what you've done 
to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
You're trying to destroy the citizens of northern Saskatchewan. 
And there is absolutely no compassion in this government, and 
that's why, when this government gets up the nerve, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to call this election, I can assure you that history will 
repeat itself. I assure you it will repeat itself. There will be no 
more . . . There will be a food subsidy in northern 
Saskatchewan, not just for health workers, but for everybody 
living in that area because we will reinstate it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Unemployment and social assistance 
case-loads have jumped to unacceptable levels, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We don't have food banks in northern Saskatchewan, 
but let me tell you, we have people who are having a hard time 
to make a living up there. When 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

76 
 

they have to go on welfare and on the part-time jobs that have 
been provided by this government, it makes it very tough on 
families. Most of the jobs in the North are 20 weeks in duration, 
and it's a little game that the Conservative Party is playing with 
their colleagues in Ottawa — 20 weeks, then they get laid off 
and they hire another group for 20 weeks. What does that give 
them? That takes them off of welfare and puts them onto 
another assistance, unemployment insurance, and that's what 
you're doing. 
 
I think it's a shame when we go into our schools up north and 
we see this government trying to balance your budget, trying to 
cut down the deficit they have, on the back of individuals who 
cannot fight back. 
 
I go into the school at Stony Rapids a couple of weeks ago and I 
see you've got a candidate from up there. You had your 
nomination convention in Beauval. All 18 people were there at 
that convention and nine of them belong to my party, so that 
shows the success of the Conservative Party up north. I tell you 
that Conservative convention that you had in Athabasca, that's 
what's going to happen to you on election day and that's what's 
going to happen all over this province with Conservatives. 
 
And I went to Stony Rapids school and I see classes in one 
room — three classes in one room. I had the teachers telling me 
that there's just no way — and Mr. Deputy Speaker, you are a 
teacher and you know that — there's just no way that a teacher 
can take three classes over 30 students and try and do a good 
job. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's boloney. I taught 45 kids at one 
time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — If the former minister of co-ops would like 
to get to his feet. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now we can see 
why the Conservative Party is cutting teachers back, because 
the former minister of co-ops has just stood up in this House 
and said that he successfully taught 45 students, and that's what 
the teacher-pupil ratio should be. That's exactly what he's 
saying, and that's exactly what this Conservative Party stands 
for. You just from your seat said you taught 45 students and 
that's the way it should be. 
 
You're speaking on behalf of every Conservative member of 
this province, and I say that that's a shame. And that proves 
what this government is made of — guys like that. And I've no 
wonder that you're not back in cabinet. 
 
And when we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, three classes in one 
room . . . Then I go down to Beauval, and I go into the 
gymnasium where you held your big convention. And I'm 
talking to the teacher in there, and he has 35 students — the 
physical education teacher. And I said, how many classes is 
this? Oh, he said, that's only one. Thirty-five students. But the 
member from Saskatoon, he smiles; he figures 35 students is 
fine. But that teacher tells me that there's no way. And the 
member sitting behind you, he knows that you don't take 35 
students and a do a good job of them. 
 
Them days are gone. Them days were gone when the Liberal 
government between 1964 and '71 brought in 

the same program. And you know what the teachers did to the 
Liberal government in '71. And I tell you, the teachers will go 
out and they'll be doing the same thing again, because they don't 
believe what the former co-op minister is saying, that 45 
students is a good pupil-teacher ratio. They don't believe that. 
And I don't believe neither, and neither does the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I'm asking this government to take a 
serious look at what's going on in northern Saskatchewan, 
because you have made a mess. And I spoke about the 
tremendous waste that we had and why we’re in this terrible 
mess that we today. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and Buffalo Narrows and all over northern 
Saskatchewan and the rest of this province, people are saying, 
we just can't afford another four years of this Conservative 
government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the throne speech we heard the other day 
was remarkable because it sounded like a tired government 
afraid of reality it faces, not knowing way to turn. And I think 
that's right when we take a look at what's happening — a throne 
speech that still tries to flatter Mr. Mulroney; a PC government 
that still tries to say, in the words of Premier Devine, keep up 
the good work, Brian; a throne speech, the Devine sense of 
misplaced priorities. 
 
And we had an example here just the other day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I want to turn to the election that was held in our 
neighbouring province of Manitoba. And in Manitoba, the last 
Conservative government was in, things were bad. 
Unemployment was down, the same as it was in . . . 
Unemployment was high and now we have an NDP government 
and they have brought that up to the lowest unemployment rate 
in Canada — one of. 
 
When we left this province and we turned it over to the new 
minister there from Regina South, I believe, who will be no 
longer in this House after the next election, I can assure you that 
. . . But I can tell you, when this Conservative government took 
over this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the unemployment rate 
in Saskatchewan was a little over 4 per cent. We had $140 
million in the bank. That's what we left this province with. Now 
what do we have? Close to a $2 billion deficit — close to a $2 
billion deficit — unemployment nearing the 10 per cent. 
 
And the member, the former Co-op minister says it's boloney, 
from his seat. I ask him to stand up and say that because I was 
in Saskatoon a couple of weeks ago in the mall, and they were 
gathering food for the food banks in Saskatoon, and they were 
putting out ads all over radio and television for food for the 
food banks in Saskatoon. And you're proud of that? Well I'll tell 
you, the citizens of Saskatchewan who have to accept that are 
not very proud of it. These were men and women who had a job 
and were working, and now they're unemployed and they're on 
welfare and they don't get enough to eat and they're relying on 
food banks — the first time in the history of Saskatchewan that 
we ever had food banks. 
 
But I want to go back . . . I want to go back to Manitoba, 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

77 
 

and I want to show, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what's taking place in 
Manitoba and compare that to what's taking place in 
Saskatchewan. "Manitoba's population grows." Statistics 
Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm quoting from Statistics 
Canada statistics: 
 

Statistics Canada reported recently that as of October 1, 
1985, Manitoba's population reached 1,072,000, up 10,300 
in the past year. In addition, our population has increased 
by 2,100 since July of 1985. Manitoba's recent population 
growth is in sharp contrast to the serious decline that 
occurred under the previous Conservative government. 
During that time Manitoba experienced a population loss 
of almost 36,000 people. 

 
That's in Manitoba and Manitoba's population is growing. Now 
I to the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, the 31st day of the 12th month 
of 1985, and I quote: "Exodus from Saskatchewan biggest in 
decade." The biggest in the last decade. 
 
Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm quoting from Statistics 
Canada here: 
 

Residents left Saskatchewan at a greater overall clip 
during the first nine months of 1985 than at any time in 
the past decade, according to Statistics Canada. 

 
The biggest decline. They're leaving this province. 
 

The province lost a net total, (Mr. Deputy Speaker) of 
4,400 people to other parts of Canada between January and 
October of this year. 

 
Manitoba is growing and prospering under a New Democratic 
government. There we have it — Saskatchewan is not 
prospering, it's got high unemployment, unemployment rate 
dropping, everybody's leaving this province. Let me tell you 
when we see the statistics that are going to come out, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if this oil industry, this downturn keeps up, 
then you are going to see a massive exodus. It's just going to 
continue to go. I hope that this doesn't happen, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because it's a tragedy for the province, but let me tell 
you, if we had all the money that we gave oil companies, it 
would be a lot better off. 
 
I just want to close off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in indicating that 
we, as a New Democratic government, look forward with much 
anticipation to this next election. I say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that six weeks from now we'll be in this House 
debating another throne speech. I say to you that with all 
honesty. The Conservative members that get back, and I can tell 
you it won't be the member from Regina South, they'll be on 
this side, and we will be delivering the throne speech. We will 
be delivering a throne speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will 
make sense to this province and will get the people working 
again, and we won't have all the unemployment and the welfare 
rolls that we have. 
 
I look forward to that, and my colleagues are looking forward to 
that, and these are fundamental questions; 

only the people of Saskatchewan can decide on that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I therefore call on the Devine government, 
when they get the nerve, to call an election, to call it, and call it 
as soon as possible. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is certainly my pleasure to enter into the debate on the throne 
speech of the fifth session of the 20th Legislature. 
 
Although I notice by the comments of the member opposite 
who immediately preceded my speech, I don't know how much 
of his comments applied directly to actually the throne speech. 
In light of the comments made by the member for Athabasca, I 
think in all fairness to the people in this legislature and in all 
fairness to the people of Saskatchewan, I believe that we ought 
to tell the truth. And I believe we ought to cite some specific 
examples of the truth and the misconceptions that were put 
forward by that gentleman directly opposite. And I will start, 
Mr. Speaker, by speaking about something that I can stand here 
and say that I am somewhat of an authority on. And I was 
deeply insulted, I was deeply, personally insulted by the 
member opposite in this legislature here today, insulting me and 
the firm and the family that has build up an auction business 
over 30 years in this province. And he has made a statement 
that it was my company that bid on a government contract and 
conducted a government sale in Saskatoon. Now, my friends, 
that statement was absolutely incorrect — absolutely incorrect 
— and you know it, sir. You absolutely know it. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let us turn to the precise details of that 
auction sale, and there was, the member opposite states, $40 
million worth of equipment. Well the value of a piece of 
equipment is directly related to what the buying public will pay. 
And that figure that you stated, sir, was the replacement cost. 
And certainly, if all that equipment were to be bought new on 
the market today, yes, it may well be worth $40 million, but that 
was equipment that had sat idle for years and years — sat idle, 
had not moved. It was depreciated, and the buying public stood 
there at that auction sale and they paid what the fair market 
value was, and that was determined by a crowd of about 1,000 
or 2,000 people. Those people decided what that equipment was 
worth, and not you. Now, sir, I demand an apology for the 
inference that our firm conducted that sale. That was incorrect, 
sir. Now that's the one thing, and I'm deeply insulted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn 
to something else that the member has said, and here again, 
twisting and turning the facts. Give-aways to the oil companies, 
you talk about. Well, my friends, let's go out and ask the 
farmers of this province. Let's go and ask the farmers how they 
enjoy a 21-cents-a-gallon rebate on their fuel. Now if you 
people think . . . Do you people honestly think that that 21 cents 
a gallon came out of the air? Where do you think it came from? 
It came from 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

78 
 

royalties from those oil companies. 
 
When this government took over office, the oil pump jacks, the 
oil producing areas of this province were literally shut down, 
shut in. They were not working. Our government came to 
power and we've got the oil pump jacks working again. The oil 
wells were flowing, the pump jacks were working, and they 
were paying royalties to this government. And that is precisely 
where money such as the 21-cents-a-gallon rebate going to the 
farmers of this province has come from. 
 
Now you people go on and on in talking about big is bad and 
the oil companies are bad. Well the chances are that the only 
way they got big was because they provided a service. And I 
say, my friends, that you had better apologize to the oil people 
of this province. And you go down in the southern part of the 
province and see who is working down there, see the number of 
farm boys that are working today in the oil patch. Now you 
apologize to those people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Now you people talk about deficits. 
Well let me tell you gentlemen here today, let me tell my 
colleagues here today, and let me tell the people of 
Saskatchewan exactly what you people did when you were in 
government. What you did was called creative accounting — 
creative accounting. Well in the business world we have 
another term for it. It's called fraud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And you, my friends, took pension 
plans — pension plans of the people of this province, money 
that were supposed to be vested in trust — and what did you do 
with them? You didn't put it there. We have unfunded liabilities 
in the pension plans of the antituberculosis superannuation plan, 
the workmens' compensation plan, on and on down — 
hospitals, teachers, civic employees. And you took their pension 
plans, and what did you do? You did not vest that money to the 
tune of about a $3 billion deficit. So don't you stand here and 
talk about deficits to me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Now furthermore, my friends, you talk 
about deficits. What did you do? I want to get to your creative 
accounting policies: the Crown management umbrella 
corporation handing out dividends back and forth and literally 
driving every Crown corporation in this province into debt. 
 
Now do you call that a deficit? Is that creative accounting or 
just what is that? As I said, people in business have another 
word for it — it's fraud; it's absolute nonsense. And so don't you 
ever accuse this government of deficit financing. You people 
had deficits, and you know full well. 
 
Now, my friends, I want to talk about something else. You talk 
about highways in this province. Now, my friends, you have 
cited a specific example, a specific example of some highway 
you would like to work on. Let 

me ask you this, sir: if you were genuinely representing your 
constituency, genuinely doing your job, we have a new Minister 
of Highways here today, and my door is open to you. You're an 
MLA, as everyone is in this legislature. You come on in. I 
would be happy to chat with you about that highway. Don't 
stand up in the legislature and complain. Come to my office and 
deal with me, and I'll be happy to talk to you. 
 
Now you talk of a lack of compassion. Now where were you 
gentlemen? Where were you in 1979, 1980, 1981, when the 
interest rates of this province and across the country were 18, 
19, 20 per cent, when small-business people on their accounts 
payable were paying 24, 25, 26 per cent on their accounts 
payable? Where were you people? You were not around. You 
wouldn't consider doing a thing. 
 
Where were you people when home owners in this province 
were paying 18 and 19 per cent on their mortgages? You didn't 
give a rip about those people. All you gave a rip about was your 
family of Crown corporations who were absolutely debt-laden. 
You did nothing for the families. 
 
Where were you when the gas prices were so high? Who was it 
that took the gas tax off? And let ask you how many dollars that 
has saved absolutely every family in this province. You people 
stand up there and twist and turn things — you name it. 
 
My friends, I think I shall get back to some things and address 
the people of the Melfort constituency who have placed a great 
trust in me and, I feel, will listen to me far more than the people 
across the floor will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, normally I would address you and the members of 
this Assembly as Minister of Highways and Transportation, but 
today I would like to address you, not as the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation specifically, but first and 
foremost as the member of the Legislative Assembly for the 
Melfort constituency. 
 
And this is a very, very important Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to be able to address my constituents as 
their elected member. 
 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, back on June 18th of 1982, when I 
had the honour to move, and that was seconded by the member 
for Saskatoon Riversdale, the very first throne speech presented 
to this Assembly under the leadership of a Progressive 
Conservative government. And I remember that, Mr. Speaker. 
And much of that throne speech on June 17, 1982 was 
reinforced again on March 17, 1986. 
 
And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that the integrity of this 
throne speech we debate today had its beginning in that first 
throne speech nearly four years ago. And I would like at this 
time to direct my comments specifically to my constituents in 
the Melfort area. And since being elected I have enjoyed their 
assistance, their support, and their co-operation. And I have 
worked hard on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, and I have enjoyed 
my work, working for people because I am a representative that 
cares for my constituents and will work tirelessly for them. 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

79 
 

And the people of Melfort constituency don't ask that much. 
They ask only that their representative and their government 
work by their side and work with them. They don't ask that a 
government work from above; not from a distance. They 
believe that government should be the servant and not the 
master. And my friends opposite, they feel opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, because they believe that the government should be 
master. And that is not the philosophy of this Progressive 
Conservative government. That is not the philosophy of myself. 
 
And I pledge today, Mr. Speaker, that I will continue. I will 
continue to represent the views of the people in the Melfort 
constituency in this legislature as one who is a neighbour and 
one who is a friend. And I shall never lose touch with my 
constituents, Mr. Speaker. And we all recall the Monday night 
massacre, as it has been referred to, and the precise reason that 
there is such a small group of individuals across the legislature 
is because those particular people lost touch with their 
constituents. 
 
And I want to thank the people of the Melfort constituency, and 
I look forward to serving the people of the Melfort constituency 
for many, many years to come. I am a young man, Mr. Speaker, 
and I have enjoyed my first four years in this legislature, and I 
look very, very much forward to being in this legislature 
serving the people of the Melfort constituency for a number of 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to now turn directly to the throne 
speech and demonstrate that this Speech from the Throne is a 
document of trust. It is a record of consistency. It is a record of 
achievement. And it is a record of growth. This throne speech 
gives leadership, direction, and style. It is anchored by the 
concepts of protection, opportunity, and change. This throne 
speech is evidence that this government is as good as its word. 
This is the message that it carries to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And that is the message that I carry to the 
constituents of Melfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Melfort constituency is in the centre of one of 
Saskatchewan's most rich agriculture areas. The farm economy 
is the staple of communities like St. Brieux, Star City, Naicam, 
Melfort. But despite being blessed with that highly productive 
land, our farming population has not been immune to the 
fluctuations of interest rates and commodity prices. 
 
When this government came to power, high interest rates were 
suffocating farm growth and development. And it was 
becoming extremely difficult for young farmers to get a start. 
And even more alarming high interest rates were accelerating 
the drift toward rented farm land under the guise of land 
banking. And this government took action. We no longer have 
that same attitude of state control of the land. 
 
This government introduced the Saskatchewan family farm 
purchase program, and their program's aim was to promote the 
transfer of farm land from one generation to another by 
providing once in a lifetime low-interest loans. And the young 
farmers in the Melfort constituency have benefited. Since this 
program came into effect, more than 100 farmers have been 
enrolled in the program in my constituency alone. The total 
interest rebate to those 

young farmers amounts to somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
660-some-odd thousand dollars. I compare that program, my 
friends, to the former administration's land bank program. 
 
Those opposite most definitely agree in state ownership of land, 
and that is fine; that is their philosophy. I would like to think 
. . . I would know that the vast, the large, majority of the people 
in this province did not come here to have state control of their 
land. That is your philosophy; our philosophy is vastly 
different. 
 
I would tend to think that the founding fathers of Canada and 
the pioneers who came to Saskatchewan, if they ever would 
have had any idea that a government ever would come to power 
that wanted state control of the land, they would have passed 
legislation absolutely abolishing it. But they could not even 
conceive, they could not even conceive at that time, back in 
1867, that a government would come to power that would want 
state control, state ownership of farm land. There is something 
about pride of ownership of farm land that is innate in people, 
innate in people that live in North America and in most of the 
countries of Europe with the exception of Russia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, needless to say, land bank is no longer a threat 
today; land bank will no longer be a threat for many, many, 
many years to come. Mr. Speaker, that program of family farm 
purchase was an investment in the future of this province. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, low commodity prices and high input costs 
have created another threat to our farmers. This cost-price 
squeeze has drained the cash flow of our farmers to the point 
where their ability to finance the seeding of this year's crop was 
in jeopardy. And in keeping with the consistent nature of this 
government, 6 per cent operating capital was provided over 
three years. Over 1,000 farmers, over 1,000 farmers in the 
Melfort constituency alone, applied for almost $18 million in 
assistance. 
 
This government said that it would support the farm economy 
with the provincial treasury, and the $1 billion production loan 
program is proof that we have kept our word. I compare that to 
any program the former administration had for agriculture, and 
I don't even recall what they were, other than land bank was the 
most profound one they had. This government has committed 
more dollars, more dollars to agriculture, I dare say, than any 
government in the history of this province, or indeed in the 
history of the whole country. 
 
I am extremely proud here, Mr. Speaker, to stand and talk about 
that 6 per cent operating capital, and I think that everybody in 
this whole province understands. I think everybody in this 
whole province understands or they should understand, that 
when farming wins, when the farmer wins, the whole province 
wins. When the farmer has money in his pocket, that money is 
spent in implement dealerships, and it's spent in hotels and 
restaurants and gas stations, and the economy flows. 
 
(1615) 
 
And our Premier, I am proud to say, has very much 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

80 
 

recognized that fact. And the commitment that we have made to 
agriculture is unprecedented. And I am so proud to stand here 
and talk about that program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has made a pledge to preserve 
and maintain the Saskatchewan rural way of life. The farm 
purchase program and the production loan program have indeed 
protected the business of farming. And when you protect the 
business of farming, you have protected the interest of the entire 
population of this province; the quality of life in rural 
Saskatchewan without question has been enhanced. 
 
I could turn to a number of more programs that our government 
has initiated. I'd like to talk a little bit about the natural gas 
service program. And I have statistics here that in the 
constituency of Melfort more than 500 farmers have benefited 
from the program. 
 
And I was very pleased of our Premier. I was proud of our 
Premier when the other day at the SARM convention he 
announced that to the entire rural population of this province 
they would be granted private-line telephone service. And that 
program, Mr. Speaker, has been so well accepted by the public. 
I have been out in my seat travelling and chatting with people, 
and there is another program for the farmers of this province 
that has shown beyond a question of doubt our commitment to 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the protection and enhancement of Melfort's farm 
economy does not stop at the farm gate. Many small businesses 
that serve our farming population have also felt the effects of 
this government — a government that keeps its word, a 
government that is trusted. In my constituency alone 
approximately 50 businesses have taken advantage of a host of 
small-business programs. And the small-business people in my 
constituency are happy with this government; in fact, they are 
very, very pleased with this government. 
 
Home owners in the Melfort constituency and throughout this 
province have also benefited greatly. Some 520 home owners in 
the Melfort constituency alone have benefited from this 
government's mortgage interest reduction program. The savings 
in interest to those home owners — those young people 25, 30 
years of age, who had mortgages on their homes at 19 and 20 
per cent have benefited to the tune of over half a million dollars 
in one constituency alone from that program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to now turn to a program that has 
been outlined in the throne speech, and that is the new 
voluntary Saskatchewan pension plan. Here is another example 
of a bold, imaginative and exciting program for the people of 
this province. 
 
This program is a very forward-thinking step in protecting 
home-makers, part-time workers, small-business employees, 
farm people. And each one of these groups does indeed make a 
valuable contribution to our society, and they deserve 
recognition and benefits for their contributions. And the people 
of the Melfort constituency welcome this bold initiative. And 
my office has been literally flooded — literally flooded — with 
telephone calls about this particular program. The people of the 
Melfort constituency know that they can trust this 

government to deliver on its promises. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there is the core services of our society 
that we, as a government, have demonstrated our trust. Health, 
education, and care for our senior citizens has not been pushed 
aside. And these core services, these fundamental services that 
are so important to society have been well served in the history 
of the Melfort constituency. 
 
And I would like to cite examples in my consistency, the 
Melfort constituency: a $7 million addition to the Melfort 
Hospital has been completed. And the members opposite . . . 
and I recall during the last campaign and I recall hearing from 
my colleagues about what the NDP, how the NDP attacked 
medicare. And they went around to the elderly people in this 
province and tried to scare them, and said the Conservative 
government would take away medicare. I remember in my 
home constituency, I remember politicians going to senior 
citizens' high-rises, elderly people that were 65, 75 years of age, 
and threatening them that the Conservative government would 
abolish medicare, and all this nonsense. 
 
Well, my friends, there is a perfect example of unethical 
conduct, dishonest conduct and conduct that absolutely upsets 
me. This government and the people on this side of the House 
have principles, and those same types of principles are certainly 
not enjoyed by many, many members of the NDP, going around 
and threatening old people. And I was never so disgusted to 
hear such talk in my entire life! 
 
I want to turn now to education. The members opposite say, 
well, not enough money is being spent on education, and what 
are you doing? Well, I will tell you what's happened in the 
Melfort constituency. Virtually every school in the constituency 
of Melfort has been renovated or has had additions to it, or is 
indeed brand-new. And I am extremely proud to tell this 
legislature about our record of education in the Melfort 
constituency. 
 
I want to talk about another program for our seniors in the 
constituency of Melfort. We have a full-time chiropodist, a 
chiropody clinic where elderly people can go and see this 
chiropodist at a very, very nominal charge. And this program, 
this service to the people of the Melfort constituency, is a great 
benefit. 
 
I want to talk about something else that's happened in the 
Melfort constituency. And the members opposite, the members 
of the New Democratic Party, talk about nursing homes and 
what they would do for nursing homes — going around and 
promising nursing homes here and nursing homes there. Well, I 
ask you, members opposite: what did you do for the record of 
nursing homes when you people were in power? I understand 
that there was a moratorium placed on nursing homes, that you 
had said that was enough. Well, my friends, I want to tell this 
legislature and I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
there is indeed a great demand for nursing homes. And it was 
because of the lack of foresight — no long-range future 
planning whatsoever — that today this government has such a 
demand on nursing homes that is directly attributable to the lack 
of foresight, the lack of planning, and indeed the lack of 
compassion for the 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

81 
 

elderly people of this province. 
 
In the constituency of Melfort I'd like to talk specifically about 
nursing homes. We have a nursing home complex — it's not 
exactly a nursing home but it's a senior citizens’ apartment — 
that was built on the main street of the city of Melfort and it 
houses today members of the Canadian Legion. And there is 
approximately, I believe it is a 24-unit, a beautiful complex 
where the seniors, the seniors who have served our country 
overseas are now residing, and there is no group more 
worthwhile than those people. And I am very proud to have that 
in my constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Here, here! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The seniors of St. Brieux, a fine little 
French community in my constituency, will be having a nursing 
home there that will have approximately, I believe, 30 beds. 
And I recall the promises made by the former administration — 
we'll build you a nursing home; we'll build you a highway — to 
the people of St. Brieux. Well, no nursing home was 
forthcoming. No highway was forthcoming. You people had 
election flags or survey flags on many, many highways and they 
had no intention of starting them. Now the people of St. Brieux 
have concrete evidence today that they are receiving a nursing 
home. The have concrete evidence that their highway will be 
constructed and that will be reflected in their voting procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the senior citizens, the farmers, the small-business 
men, the home owner and the home-maker in the Melfort 
constituency know that they can trust this government. We have 
been consistent and we have our priorities in the right place. 
And we have gained the trust of the people of the Melfort 
constituency and I believe of all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I set out at the start of this debate to show you and 
members of the Assembly that we are a government of our 
word. And using the Melfort constituency as an example I have 
shown this government to be a consistent government and a 
trustworthy government. 
 
We have a Premier who is an inspiration to everyone in 
Saskatchewan. And I want to congratulate our Premier for his 
prudence and his stewardship. There is not a man, not a man 
around, that I admire more than our Premier; a man who shows 
decisiveness, who shows leadership, who shows compassion for 
families — not families of Crown corporations, I might add, but 
the real true families of our province. And every time the 
Premier of our province stands up to speak, whether it's in 
Melfort, or whether it's in Swift Current, or whether it's in this 
legislature, I am more inspired and more motivated that I want 
to be in this legislature for many, many years to come. And I 
am so proud to have the Premier of this province as our leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the MLA for the Melfort constituency, I want 
to say that I indeed support this throne speech and the motion 
before us now. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, members of the 
Assembly, today this speech is probably my final speech as far 
as throne speeches are concerned. And while I can easily spend 
the next hour praising the visions and programs and policies of 
the Devine government, I prefer instead to share some of the 
memories of this very special place. 
 
In October of 1974, people met in a small hall in Warman in a 
contested nomination and elected me the candidate to represent 
the Conservatives in the Rosthern riding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Katzman: — It was a humbling experience and yet, as all 
people who have decided to seek public life, I believed I had 
something to offer and that I could do a good job. Only time 
and history will show if my thoughts were right or wrong. 
Certainly it can never be said that Ralph Katzman didn't try. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Today, in 1986, I look back and ask was it 
worthwhile for my constituents, for the province of 
Saskatchewan, or Canada, or me? I hope the answer to all these 
questions was yes. Certainly I enjoyed life here and it has been 
kind to me. 
 
When I first entered the House, Mr. Speaker, I was petrified — 
and I mean I was scared. Today as most of you see me, I speak 
on many different topics and I have conquered the fear that this 
place has. To those who have never been elected, who have 
never had the opportunity to enjoy life in this Chamber, I have 
words of advice. If you come to this place, treat it with respect, 
honour it for its traditions, but be prepared to work for the 
betterment of parliament and improve it. 
 
I believe in my 11 years I have had the unique privilege of 
having friends on all sides of the House, be they Progressive 
Conservative members, Liberal members, or NDP members. 
These are cherished times, Mr. Speaker, times when we forget 
our partisan politics after we leave the debates of the House and 
we act simply as friends. I think more of that is needed, because 
you must understand the other man. By knowing each other as 
friends, politics aside, we at least learn to respect the member, 
not for what he says, but for at least that we believe he believes 
in it even though our political philosophies are different. 
 
I guess my first major accomplishment as an MLA will always 
be with me. It was pushing for a water line that served the 
communities of Martensville, Warman, Osler, and Dalmeny. It 
was the first time that I had felt personal accomplishments in 
the service of my constituents. 
 
When I came here, I chose one route of working which is my 
style and for me it was the right one. I believed, and still do, in 
negotiations behind closed doors, not in front of television 
cameras or press or out in the public eye. You don't get a lot of 
credit from the press when you do it that way, but your 
constituents get results, and that's what's always been the most 
important thing to me. 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

82 
 

Since I have been a member, both in opposition and 
government, I've had school expansions, new schools, new 
nursing homes, and future nursing homes to come, new housing 
complexes, roads, and many other things that are required in a 
rural area to make the small communities and the rural farming 
successful. 
 
(1630) 
 
I can remember sitting down with a former minister, and he 
said, Ralph, you have a problem, haven't you? And I said, yes, 
and we have two choices. We either solve it in your office this 
morning, or we get up in the House and fight about it. If we get 
in the House and fight about it, I will have to embarrass you to 
the point that you either give in or I will not succeed and my 
constituents will not benefit. But if you don't take the risk of the 
embarrassment, Mr. Minister, you may be prepared to bend a 
little and my constituents will benefit, even though I don't get 
the press. And that was important. Those deals were important. 
I still think they are important to all members who enter this 
House. 
 
It has been my experience through the years that most members 
are honourable ones, and most of them deal on an honourable 
basis on a one-to-one. I guess the most humiliating thing that 
happened to me in this House, and I guess I owe an apology and 
a thank you, was one day when I got carried away with the 
facts. And that seems to happen occasionally in this House. 
 
A former attorney general, who is a good friend of mine today, 
came in behind Tony Merchant, who was the member for 
Wascana in those days, and myself, and basically wiped us up. I 
left the Chamber and I quote again. I said, hey, Roy, I thought 
you were a friend. And he said, some day, Ralph, you'll thank 
me for the favour. 
 
I thought about that for a long time and I was scared to rise in 
this House and speak again after that tongue-lashing. But I 
thought about it. And what it said to me is, if your facts are 
right, if you believe what you say, then don't be scared; but if 
your facts aren't right, you're in trouble and you've asked for it. 
 
I am pleased to say that's a lesson I have pretty well followed 
for the rest of the years in this House. Once or twice my 
credibility was stretched, and once or twice I had to wait till I 
got home from the weekend to produce documents that I said I 
had to prove I was right and prove the minister wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, honourable colleagues: your task is to make sure 
that this House functions for the betterment of the people of 
Saskatchewan. I repeat: your task is to make sure this House 
functions for the betterment of the people of Saskatchewan, no 
matter which side of the House you sit on. The courtesies that 
you extend to each other as ladies and gentlemen is important, 
even though you may be opponents in philosophy. You are 
important examples to the people of this province, especially 
the young people of this province, this great and wonderful 
province within Canada. 
 
In 1975, as I've said earlier, I made friends with members from 
all sides of this House and I still have friends on all 

sides. Today it seems that there is less friendship between the 
parties and the members. The little hope I have for the future is 
that it will slowly turn around and people on both sides can still 
be friends. As I jokingly say, I coach a hockey team back home 
and one of the key people on my executive is a very strong 
NDPer. But we don't get into political debates at a hockey game 
and together we put out not a bad little hockey team in our 
league. And hopefully we'll get better as the years go by. 
 
To the media listening to my remarks, I would suggest that 
sometimes your reporting is perceived to be biased one way or 
the other, subject to who is in government and subject to who is 
speaking. You must maintain your credibility and guard it 
carefully or soon people will start to say: why read that 
newspaper or listen to that television station or that radio? 
Those fellows don't tell it the way it happened. So that is an 
important lesson for you and also a lesson for politicians, future 
and present. You must speak the facts. 
 
In terms of accomplishments for my constituency, I believe I 
have served the Rosthern constituency well. I hope they feel the 
same way. 
 
In this House, and I don't think I'm boasting, I have probably 
been one of the busier members sitting on committees, sitting 
on different hearings, and quietly handling the constituency 
problems and so forth. I've derived a great amount of pleasure 
and satisfaction from this, and of course, while I sat as 
vice-chairman of the library committee under the Hon. Doug 
McArthur, the results of that committee are now showing forth 
in the rejuvenation of the legislative library. 
 
I enjoyed my time when I sat as a member of the fire committee 
and I was chairman. And some of the members are still 
members of this House, and I thank them, once again publicly, 
for their assistance in what they did. It brought my ego into 
check during my term as chairman. You had to be neutral or the 
whole committee wouldn't function. 
 
I have the permission of the hon. member I'm about to speak of 
to speak on this subject. I have a picture at home of the member 
from Assiniboia and myself in a whirlpool — it's quite a 
picture; and it was a big pool — just having a chat. Maybe 
things like that are required more often between politicians so 
they can understand each other and, even though there are 
political differences in their belief, work better for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We may get mad at each other on occasion, but 
we still understand each other and we know where each other is 
coming from. 
 
Let me get back a little to talk about 1982 and the defeat of the 
Blakeney government and the election of the Devine 
government — my government — a fact which I'm very proud 
of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an exciting time. When I came here in 1975 
we said among ourselves, the seven of us, in the next election 
we had to be the official opposition, then we could become 
government. And that is true. History shows it has happened. 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

83 
 

It is interesting to note there were very few governments in 
Saskatchewan when three political parties ran that were elected 
on 50 per cent of the political vote. We were, because the 
people believed in us and they still do. 
 
When it came time to move chairs to get our administration into 
place, into running the government, I was thanked after it was 
all over by politicians from the other side, and I refer to the 
member from Elphinstone. He suggested that we had done the 
transfer of power with dignity and regard for those who were 
involved. And whenever a government changes, be it 20 years 
from now or 30 or whatever, I hope the following example of 
treating all those with dignity and respect may always continue. 
It may not always be respect for the man or the party, but it 
must, Mr. Speaker, be respect for the office which they hold 
and which is so important to our country. 
 
I guess my rule-breaking of those days is now going to stay 
forever and I hope it does, and I refer to when government was 
changing and I was collecting cars from all the former 
ministers. I informed the Leader of the Opposition that if he 
would turn his credit cards at the time over, but please keep the 
car, because I believed that a member who was the Leader of 
the Opposition should be treated the same as cabinet ministers. 
That has now become a policy which I believe should always 
be. It is respecting the position that the man holds and we must 
continue that practice. When I did it, I did it with no malice or 
disregard to this Assembly or our political process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am accused of knowing the system of this 
building very well, and I plead guilty to that charge because 
over the years I have learned how to use it well. I think it is 
wise of a politician who gets elected to know how it works so 
that they can get things done. 
 
Let me say on another subject, as one who will receive no 
benefits from changes but should be done for other members in 
the future, and once again, I'm talking about dignity. 
 
It brings me to the subject of work, pay and other benefits 
accorded MLA's. And once again I must remember '82 when I 
say this. When a member is defeated or retires, we do not give 
him or her any time to rearrange his or her life as, for example, 
other provinces do. They allow several months of pay to give 
you time to move home, rearrange your life and find 
opportunity or employment. Some are fortunate and have the 
opportunity to have a job waiting, as I am one of those 
members. I think it is important we find a committee of 
individuals who can transcend the boundaries and understand 
this place and can arrange to make sure that all members that 
leave this place leave it with dignity and ability to have some 
time. 
 
And with a little humility, I would suggest some members who 
could probably serve this function very well after the next 
election. They are the ex-member from Kindersley, Mr. Neil 
McMillan, a former Liberal; the ex-member from Biggar, the 
NDP member, Mr. Elwood Cowley; and of course myself, who 
from our own group has been here fairly well on. This 
committee, I think, could make some recommendations that 
only people who have been here and understand the system 
could make, to allow the dignity of when members change 
between elections. 

Mr. Speaker, on another topic of responsibility, and working, 
and pay. In my opinion, 50 per cent of the members that are 
usually in the House work well over 2,000 hours a year, and 
2,000 hours a year is considered a full work year in most 
employment. Another 25 per cent of the members in this House 
work well over 3,000 hours, and another group of members 
work around the thousand. 
 
The House is considered to be a part-time job, and the pay was 
designed under that system. It is unfortunate that the pay does 
not reflect the real value of a good MLA. Today an MLA is 
paid just under $14,000 and $7,000 for the session. If an MLA 
leaves his job and does this full-time, it is rather difficult, and 
he must have other assistance, or his wife working, to be able to 
afford it. 
 
I think that some time in the future we must correct that, but I 
do not know how. There are several ways, and I once again 
would compliment the former member from Biggar who 
improved many things before he left this House, compared to 
the way they were in 1975 when I entered, by allowing 
additional help for us in our constituency offices, and so forth. 
That has made it better. 
 
And now I speak, not for ministers, not for legislative 
secretaries, leaders of the opposition, but for the back-bench 
members on both sides. And I recommend that maybe in the 
future that additional services should be provided for their 
benefit — not their caucuses, not their party — to assist them in 
doing their job, if we choose not to pay them more money so 
they can do it. There are methods; there are ways. 
 
(1645) 
 
In this session, Mr. Speaker, we have the wonderment of the 
WCC, and the last time we had the wonderment of the Unionest 
party. Mr. Speaker, those people left the party that they were 
elected to when they entered the House to form another party. 
What I am about to say, I say with no malice, but with concern 
for the parliamentary tradition, that a member must have the 
right to leave on principle and privilege when he chooses to, 
without going to the polls for election. 
 
But when he does those two things, when he does for those 
reasons, he should not, and neither should the party that he goes 
to, get any financial benefits. If you leave on principle, then 
leave on principle. You should not get any financial benefits, 
and neither there should for the party you moved to, but your 
individual benefits as an MLA should continue. 
 
I think that is a very important right for privilege, for tradition, 
and for principle, because many members have crossed the 
floor, be it one way or the other over history, because of 
principle, and it should be for principle and not for financial 
reward. Only financial reward should be allowed if you are 
elected to that party and to that position. 
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, ways in which all members serve their 
constituencies well. It is simply by understanding the rules, 
knowing the system, that an MLA wants to get 
  



 
March 20, 1986 

 

84 
 

further ahead I suggest he work within the system — learn the 
system, the rules of the House, the rules of parliament, who 
looks after what. And that way he will be able to accomplish 
much more than the person who I believe is always looking for 
headlines. We are elected here, not for headlines, but to work 
for our constituents, to work for our province, and that should 
be the foremost in our minds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask your indulgence for what I'm about to 
say. There was one sad day in this House for me, and I think 
you were aware that I cried for the traditions of parliament that 
day. There must be a system in this House where parliament 
cannot be held for ransom, yet the opposition must have its 
right, and I repeat, the opposition must have its right to speak. 
And I refer to the famous bell-ringing session, that terrible day 
the doors were locked, the bells were allowed to continue to 
ring, and the members could not answer. That was a terrible day 
for tradition, and it should be cured. 
 
Ottawa has come up with a new system, Mr. Speaker, and I 
hope our members would look at it in the future. The system 
looks interesting. The basis of it is, if there is a dispute and you 
can't agree, rather than ring the bells for a long period and days 
and days, could you agree to move to a new topic and come 
back when cooler minds and cooler heads can handle the 
dispute that you got hung up on. In that way, parliament will 
continue to function, and yet the opposition's right will still be 
protected. They call it stacking up of votes or something in 
Ottawa, and I would suggest future members of the House look 
at it. 
 
To all of you, I wish you success in the next election, and my 
personal reasons and for obvious ones, I would like to see and I 
would prefer to see and I wish to see the Devine government 
and the Conservatives re-elected. I believe our party represents 
the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan, and I believe it 
is only fair that I don't pretend that I do not care who wins 
because obviously I prefer the party I work for and the political 
philosophy I believe in, and you may believe yours. 
 
On a personal note, as many of you know, I came here in 1975, 
my wife and I, my wife working for the CNR as a ticket agent 
and we had a family farm. I left the city of Saskatoon on a leave 
of absence as a recreation employee. Over the years, the Lord 
has been kind to me, and I have been blessed with two 
wonderful children, and my wife has had to carry on the burden 
of running our farm and the several businesses that we have 
been involved in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to all the staffs of all the departments I've ever had 
the pleasure of working with as a legislative secretary or a 
member, I say thank you to the courtesies that you have 
extended to me over the years, and God bless you. 
 
To my constituents I say, God bless you, and thank you for the 
privilege of allowing me to serve. 
 
To my good friend, John Schriner, who's been with me since 
day one, I say thank you. 
 
It is my time, when the next election is over, to go back to 

my family, to watch them grow. And the road of life takes a 
curve for me at that time, as I leave this place which I respect, 
admire, and will miss. I have been privileged to choose when I 
leave. Others have not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, members, Mr. Leader of the 
Opposition, may God grant you the wisdom that you require 
and bless you all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I was going to add a 
word of commendation to address to the House concerning the 
remarks of the member for Rosthern, but the House has stated it 
more emphatically than could I. I think that all of us here in this 
House sometimes conduct ourselves in a manner which belies 
our appreciation of the traditions which we carry on, and the job 
we have to do on behalf of the people who elect us. 
 
None the less I think most of us, and I would suspect all of us, 
understand that what we're about is important work; not every 
moment of it is important, but overall it is important work on 
behalf of people who are carrying on a tradition of responsible 
and democratic government — a tradition which, as I have said 
many times, is all too rare in the world and that accordingly 
must be nourished. 
 
The member for Rosthern has been a now long-time and 
acknowledged to be a hard-working and committed member of 
this legislature. He has served in many capacities. I am not now 
delivering a funeral eulogy because he is still very much 
around. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Emphasis on the round. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes. I don't know when the election is 
going to be. Obviously he has some more information on that 
than I, and we may have battles yet in this legislature. However, 
I do want to commend him for his remarks, for the tenor of his 
remarks, and for the respect which it shows to the institution 
which we all serve. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to address some remarks to the 
House with respect to the throne speech. I would . . . I believe 
that I would spare the House some ad lib remarks if I asked for 
leave to adjourn and start it off tomorrow morning, and 
accordingly I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 
 


