


















































May 1, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 1, 1986 
 
 

995 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today on behalf 
of the Premier, the hon. member from Estevan, who is unable to 
be present today . . . He extends his regrets, but he also extends 
a welcome to 15 students and three adults seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. Mr. Speaker, these young people are grade 
11 students in the Lampman High School in the Estevan 
constituency. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 
Wayne Medwid, as well as two chaperons, Aldyth Fleck and 
Bernice Mitchell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with this group shortly after 
question period, and I look forward to entertaining some 
questions from them and hope that they find their visit to the 
gallery education, to say the very least. And I would ask all 
members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a pleasure to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, two very special guests who are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. I introduce Mr. Jay Attarian, who is 
accompanied by his wife, Virginia. Mr. Attarian is the Optimist 
International president which includes membership from United 
States, Jamaica, and Canada. He heads 4,000 Optimists clubs 
with a membership of over 150,000 people. The Attarians have 
three children and they hail from Woodland Hills in California. 
 
Our American guests are being hosted by the governor of the 
Optimist International District of Alberta, Montana, 
Saskatchewan, and northern Wyoming. I speak of a Reginan, 
and Mr. Jim Ursu, who is here along with his wife Jan, as well 
as with the district secretary-treasurer, Mr. Gary Cross. 
 
On behalf of the members of this Legislative Assembly, I 
extend to you, Mr. and Mrs. Attarian, a very special welcome to 
Canada, and to Saskatchewan in particular. Americans and 
Canadians have a great deal in common, not the least of which 
is a strong belief in the concepts of promoting 
self-improvement, community service, family life, and a 
devotion to working with youth. As citizens of these two great 
countries, we share the belief that the international Optimists 
have, which is a commitment to these ideals. We commend you 
for the significant contribution that you have made over the 
years, and we wish you the best in your visitation to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask the members on both sides of the House to extend a very 
warm welcome to our American guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and to members of this Assembly, 10 adult students from 
the Key reserve, north of Norquay.  

They’re here on a little visit to Regina, and I’m sure they’re 
going to enjoy the proceedings in this House this afternoon. We 
appreciate them coming in. I hope that you’ll find question 
period and the time that you spend here this afternoon 
interesting and informative. I’ll be meeting with you after 
question period for some questions and some refreshments. I’d 
like all of you to welcome them to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Recent Visit of Minister of Health to Ottawa 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health. It has to do with a meeting you had earlier 
this week with your federal counterpart. And during estimates 
last week you indicated that you were going to Ottawa to 
convince the Mulroney government to end the vicious cut-back 
in health care that was proposed in the Michael Wilson budget 
earlier this year. I wonder, Mr. Minister, whether you can 
inform the Assembly and the people of the province whether or 
not the $9 million that was to have been cut out of the transfer 
payments to the province for health care has been reinstated by 
the Mulroney government as a result of your trip and meeting in 
Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well thank you very much. I’m pleased 
to be able to report on my very successful meeting in Ottawa 
with my fellow ministers and the federal minister, the Hon. Jake 
Epp. As you recall, Mr. Speaker, there were a couple of things 
that we went down to discuss. Certainly one had to do with the 
Patent Act, the changes in the Patent Act which would have 
repercussions on the . . . Mr. Speaker, I will explain to the 
member, if he would be quiet, the outcome of the meeting. We 
put forward our position on the Patent Act, and I’m proud to tell 
the people of this Assembly, the people of the province, that 
because of these initiatives, led by Saskatchewan, that the 
Patent Act is on hold, and I don’t think it will be introduced. 
And there’s going to be more consultation on the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And I am pleased to see that we could 
work in that co-operative fashion with the federal government. 
On the matter of EPF (established program funding) funding 
. . . If the members care to shout from their seats, it will take me 
more time to explain. On the matter of EPF funding, Mr. 
Speaker, I, along with a number of the other Health ministers 
from across Canada, pressed the federal member to have a 
meeting, to call a meeting, of provincial and federal Health and 
Finance ministers. The minister did not turn that suggestion 
down. At the same time, we said, at such a meeting we would 
like to look at future directions coming from the Nielsen report 
that will affect health care across Canada. I want to say I feel 
very positive about the dialogue that took place at that meeting 
and am very pleased that the changes to the Patent Act have 
been put on hold. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

996 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, I had asked you a 
very specific question, and if we could cut out the long-winded 
speeches which ministers are being given for the last number of 
weeks in this Assembly, I would ask you whether or not the $9 
million that is proposed to be cut from the transfer payments to 
the province of Saskatchewan for health for the coming year, 
whether or not you got that 9 million reinstated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If the member would listen to the 
answers, Mr. Speaker, I indicated to him that I, as well as other 
provincial Health ministers, asked the federal minister to 
convene a meeting of Health and Finance ministers to discuss 
the future of health care funding in Saskatchewan. And that has 
to have more vision than the type of suggestion that’s coming 
from the opposition. 
 
I believe it’s important that we sit down and we look at how the 
dollars in health care in Canada can be spent the most effective 
and efficient way possible, and that’s what we asked for. And I 
feel that we will get a meeting of that type where we can all sit 
down — all ministers from across this country — sit down and 
say, look, health care is costing a lot of money; it’s something 
that is a priority of our people; how are we going to address that 
to best serve the needs of all Canadians and maintain a standard 
service across this country? 
 
Those are the kind of things that we sit down and discuss, and 
that’s what we did with the drug . . . the patent Act. And I’m 
proud to see that the federal government and the Hon. Jake Epp 
listened, and action is being taken that will be to the betterment 
of health care for all Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. A couple of 
weeks ago, Mr. Minister, in the Assembly, you told the 
Saskatchewan people you were going to Ottawa to convince the 
Mulroney PC government to drop its plans to cut transfer 
payments. You said, and I quote: “I will stick up for 
Saskatchewan health care. I’m going to see if I can carve a 
better deal for Saskatchewan people.” That, Mr. Minister, was 
your description of your trek to Ottawa. 
 
Do I take it from the minister’s answer that you come back 
empty-handed and without any commitment to anything from 
the Mulroney government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly you don’t take that 
inference. I don’t know how he gets that idea, when I said I was 
going there for two reasons: the patent Act and EPF funding. I 
came back — I came back — with the patent Act held off; it 
isn’t going to hit the floor of the legislature till more 
consultation is worked out with the provinces. That’s the word 
of the federal minister, Michel Côté. He said, they have 
convinced us that we need to have more consultations. So I 
think we won — in Saskatchewan we won big on that. 
 
Secondly, to look at the whole area and to say that there’s cuts 
in EPF is simply not correct. The member’s trying to mislead 
again. This year’s EPF haven’t been cut; it’s slowing the rate of 
growth, is the thing that we were talking about. And we are 
saying, let’s sit down, let’s sit  

down with our colleagues, the Finance people. Because you 
know, and I’ve explained in this House time after time, that the 
EPF arrangements are basically done between the Finance 
ministers. 
 
But because health care is so important to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the people of Canada, we said to the 
federal minister, our federal minister, we said, let’s call together 
a meeting so that we can all address that situation. I supported 
that, and I should indicate also it was supported by Mr. 
Desjardins, the NDP Minister of Health in Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you failed to convince the 
Mulroney government to reinstate about 9 million in health care 
payments to Saskatchewan this year. It was this year’s cut. And 
Mr. Minister, the Canadian Hospital Association has looked at 
the Mulroney proposals and has forecast that Saskatchewan will 
lost $154 million in the next five years. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell this Assembly, since you’ve come 
back empty-handed with nothing from the federal government, 
will you tell this Assembly whether you’re going to cut 
programs or raise taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, I suppose, if we look at 
raising taxes, the NDP are the people on record. I remember just 
a while ago when their leader said, we may have to raise taxes if 
we get in in power, I want that to be understood — well spelled 
out what they would do. What we will do is maintain services, 
and we will work for a better deal with the federal government. 
And I believe, when I was able to go down there and lead the 
discussions — that they should withhold the changes in the 
patent Act that could possibly cost the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan $15 million, $15 million per year — I think we 
certainly gained for Saskatchewan from those discussions. 

 
Salaries of Crown Corporations Executives 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address a 
question to the minister responsible for Crown management, 
Crown Management Board. Yesterday the Premier confirmed 
that at a time when the Saskatchewan families are seeing their 
taxes increased by your government, that your government has 
provided salary increases in excess of 3 per cent to all cabinet 
ministers’ political aides, not professional public servants, but 
to the political hacks, and that these increases have been made 
retroactive to October. That was confirmed. My question to 
you, Mr. Minister, has to do with the salary increases for the 
executives of the various Crown corporations. Have the salaries 
and other benefits of the top executives at the various Crown 
corporations been increased in recent months, and if so, what 
was the general rate increase approved by your board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I think the observation by the 
Premier yesterday was that the various staff people were treated 
exactly the same way as our contract that we negotiated with 
the in-scope sector, the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union) sector. And that is around 3 per cent. It’s 
much the same as the Minister of Health has been able to 
negotiate. I see in the  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

997 
 

paper today an agreement, or tentative agreement, with the 
nurses of Saskatchewan, and I think he should be commended 
for that type of action. 
 
With regards to the specific question, Mr. Speaker, as the 
members opposite might know, the salaries of any of the chief 
executive officers of various Crown corporations are, in fact, set 
by the boards of those various Crown corporations. The 
tradition in this Assembly has been for a long period of time to 
ask those specific questions in the Crown Corporations 
Committee. Those Crown Corporations Committees are sitting 
at this point in time. We broke with tradition, Mr. Speaker, 
when we took office in this province, of detailing many of those 
salaries that were always held back before, and certainly any 
salaries that the particular chief executive officer does not 
negotiate with regard to his contract would be kept in 
confidence. So that many of those salaries have been, in fact, 
released. They have been, in fact, established by the various 
boards of the Crown corporations. 
 
With regard to the Crown corporation that I am responsible for, 
Mr. Speaker . . . the particular Crown corporation that I am 
responsible for, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
Mr. Speaker, I thought that the hon. members would like to hear 
the answer to the particular question. 
 
The particular Crown corporation that I am responsible for has, 
in fact, reduced the number of people working in that Crown 
corporation by over 50 per cent, and the salary increases have 
been zero for this particular year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I’ll ask another question, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would expect that the minister will address the question. 
And I would hope that the Speaker will also call the member to 
order if he doesn’t answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. If the member wants to 
ask a point of order, he can do it under orders of the day after 
question period, but this time is not the time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you. I will want to do that later then. 
 
I want to ask a supplement to the minister. But you have said 
that there is no agreement entered into whereby Crown 
management, in fact, sets or increases the general executives of 
the Crown corporations and controls their fringe benefits. I 
want to say, are you in fact concerned when you look what is 
happening in the Crown corporations in respect to the senior 
executives in SaskCOMP; they have received a 6 per cent jump 
in total salary benefits. And in SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation) the executives have seen 7 per cent 
increase in salaries. and in Sask Housing, not only have they 
increased them, they have increased the size of the top 
executive, Mr. Minister, plus their remuneration. Sask Housing 
has in fact increased the salaries by 17 per cent in the last year. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: being the holding company in respect 
to all the Crown corporations, do you think it’s fair that the 
executives of Crown corporations, the highest paid of the lot, 
should get 17 per cent while others are  

held to 3 or less than 3 if they’re government employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, we have learned some 
time ago not to take the members’ opposite figures at face 
value. I don’t know exactly what the increases are for the 
various Crown corporation chairmen. I can indicate to you that 
those figures are probably wrong, as is obviously the case 
usually. 
 
But I will undertake, Mr. Speaker, to find out whether or not 
those figures are, in fact, wrong and report back to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The first man up was the 
member for Regina North West. I now recognize him. 
 

Flat Tax on Net Income 
 

Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for your 
consideration. My question is to the Minister of Finance. 
Yesterday in this House we had some confusing debate on the 
flat tax that has been implemented by the government in 
Saskatchewan. The NDP have offered a platform suggesting 
that they’re going to eliminate the flat tax in Saskatchewan. 
 
The confusion arises, Mr. Minister, from an Alberta promise 
that the NDP have made in Alberta to initiate the flat tax in 
Alberta. And there are several people in my constituency who 
have requested some . . . the confusion that’s been created by 
the party in Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you answer the question, Mr. Minister: is the flat tax that 
your government presently has, is it an ongoing situation that 
will lead to a flat tax offer by Mr. Pocklington which will give 
you a flat tax across the board of 17, 18 or 20 per cent, or is it a 
flat tax as the NDP have offered in Alberta — simply a tax on 
the rich? Can you please outline to the people of Saskatchewan 
and clarify that confusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I cannot speak, Mr. Speaker, for the 
confusion within the New Democratic Party. The confusion that 
runs from their various positions on the gas tax, the P.A. 
pulp-mill, the paper-mill . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Nor can I speak for the further confusion in 
the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, when on the one hand 
their leader says that they are prepared to raise taxes if they’re 
elected to government. 
 
With regard to the flat tax . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would ask the minister to stay on the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I, of course, was asked about the confusion 
in the New Democratic Party, but the question about the flat 
tax, we have made it clear that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to ask for order in the Chamber. 
It’s impossible to hear the questions or the answers with the 
amount of yelling in here. 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

998 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The pure flat tax has the benefit of 
simplifying the tax system for all Canadians. And secondly, it 
has the advantage of taking away those tax loopholes and 
making sure that those who can afford to pay, that have been 
avoiding tax, will in fact be paying the tax. And that was the 
thrust, as the government has made it abundantly clear. 
 
I again repeat what I said yesterday, so that there is no 
confusion as the hon. member indicates, that people making less 
than $20,000 in Saskatchewan pay less to government than any 
other place in Canada, and that does not include the recent 
removal of the sales tax on clothing under $300; that people 
making $30,000 pay less to government than any other place in 
Canada, except the province of Alberta; and thirdly, that those 
making less than $40,000 pay less to government in the 
province of Saskatchewan than any other province in Canada 
except Alberta, and that does not include the new initiative of 
removing sales tax on clothing for a value of less than $300. 
 

Salaries of Crown Corporation Executives 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Minister, not only do you not want to answer questions on 
salaries of executives in the Crown corporations, but in the 
annual reports for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and for 
Sedco and for SGI and the crop insurance corporation, it is not 
even stated, or is it shown, what the annual remuneration is paid 
to the top executives. It’s not even shown, Mr. Minister, and 
that’s got to be a Saskatchewan first. 
 
Can you explain why not? And since Saskatchewan taxpayers 
are the ones who pay for these salaries, will you undertake to 
report to this Assembly on the total compensation paid to the 
top executive group at each of these public companies in 1984 
and 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well as I understand those type of 
questions, when I’ve appeared before the Crown Corporations 
Committee, and as all my colleagues appear before the Crown 
Corporations Committee, those particular questions are asked, 
and that particular answer is supplied. 
 
And for the hon. member to indicate and to try to chastise this 
government for not providing information with regards to 
salaries, they wrote the book on keeping things quiet, whether it 
was salaries or PCBs or whatever you want to talk about. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, the reason we have to ask these questions is because 
you have not come before the Crown Corporations Committee 
since the 1983 report, which is yet to be considered by the 
Crown Corporations Committee. What are you trying to hide? 
 
Mr. Minister, another area related to this subject, which I want 
to ask you about, is the remuneration for the boards of directors 
of each of these Crown corporations. The  

boards of directors. There has been a general rate increase that 
has been approved. And I’m asking you: has there been a 
general rate increase which has been approved for directors of 
these public companies? 
 
And if not, Mr. Minister, can you explain the 98 per cent jump 
in remuneration for the board of SaskCOMP last year, the 70 
per cent jump for the board of Saskatchewan Housing, and the 
15 per cent increase in payments made to the board of the 
directors of Sask Minerals? 
 
One would think that they dine on caviar at lunch breaks. Why 
this kind of increase, Mr. Minister, in payments to these various 
Crown corporations directors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You asked a question with regard to 
SaskCOMP. I’ll have the minister of SaskCOMP respond to 
those particular questions, and I believe he was before the 
Crown Corporations Committee this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And responding to the hon. member’s 
question, I wish he had been there this morning because he 
would have had the answer to the question. The situation is: 
one, there were more meetings — there were more meetings of 
the general board; secondly, SaskCOMP, as I made it clear this 
morning, there was no change in the per diem remuneration; 
finally for SaskCOMP, SaskCOMP got into a concept called 
videotex. We’re trying to increase the data bases available to 
rural Saskatchewan. We’re increasing the agricultural data 
bases available to the farmers of Saskatchewan, and we are 
increasing the data bases to enhance those in rural 
Saskatchewan’s access to information. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to ask the members 
to listen when the answers are being given, rather than shout all 
the way through. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m very disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that 
the opposition would criticize the efforts of SaskCOMP to try 
and enhance rural life and, secondly, enhance the ability of our 
farmers to have access to information, which is the reason for 
the increase in expenditures to the board. And I think that that 
money is very well spent for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Distribution of InfoCentre Network Materials 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
minister in charge of Supply and Services. Can the minister 
confirm that under the terms of a recent contract signed by your 
department, Saskatchewan taxpayers will be shelling out 
$85,000 a year to a former employee of the PC party to 
distribute government propaganda to grocery stores and 
shopping malls around the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t confirm that, 
obviously. If he could be a little more specific, I can maybe find 
out what we’re talking about. 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

999 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I thought the minister 
would never ask. I have a memo here dated Tuesday of this 
week which details something called the InfoCentre Network. 
It’s signed by your deputy minister, and it is addressed to 31 
government departments and Crown corporations who will be 
placing brochures and other PC propaganda in grocery stores 
and shopping malls at taxpayers’ expense. 
 
By way of background, Mr. Speaker . . . and it lists Associated 
Business Consultants as the firm responsible for the distribution 
of material. Now Associated Business Consultants is the 
registered business name, and the sole proprietor is one Ronald 
Ryan, a former employee of Dick Collver and the PC Party of 
Saskatchewan, and the business associate of the Premier’s 
former principal secretary, Dave Tkachuk. Does this jog the 
minister’s memory? And can he tell the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan why shelling out $85,000 a year to a Tory hack 
to distribute government brochures at corner grocery stores and 
malls is in the best interest of the taxpayers of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, the concept that we are 
trying to pursue has nothing to do with shopping malls or 
centres. One of the things that we learned when our consultation 
process . . . when we toured the province talking to business 
men, primarily small-business men around the province was 
that much of the information, outside of Regina and Saskatoon, 
that the government had on programs was not readily available, 
and they wanted some improvements. 
 
One of the things we will be doing is moving our business 
resource centres into a mobile form in the fact that information 
will be taken to these various communities. 
 
Another effort will be to make the information that we have 
available in the departments more readily available to the 
public, and I believe that is the program or the concept that the 
member speaks about. I think that the intent is to put it into 
government buildings where people go to pay bills and so it is 
readily available. I suggest very strongly to the member that it 
will be information that deals with government programs. If he 
wishes to suggest that is propaganda, I would suggest that he go 
and view that before making that accusation. I think that he will 
be very satisfied. I know he is a very honourable member and 
would not want to slander the effect of this program, to make 
information available to the public. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Information Assist Line on the Situation in the Ukraine 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a 
statement today regarding Saskatchewan’s interest in the 
nuclear accident which has occurred last weekend in the Soviet 
Union. 
 
All of us are well aware that many residents of Saskatchewan 
have relatives or friends living in the Soviet Union, and more 
particularly in the Ukraine, the area where this nuclear accident 
took place. Others may have friends currently visiting the 
Soviet Union. Naturally  

these people are concerned about the whereabouts and 
well-being of their relatives and friends in the U.S.S.R. 
 
The Soviet Union has made it difficult for everyone in the West 
to gather accurate information about this situation in the 
Ukraine. Ordinary citizens who have tried at all hours of the 
day and night to reach their relatives in the Ukraine have been 
stymied. The Government of Saskatchewan shares the concerns 
of its residents who are desperate for information about their 
friends and relatives now in the Soviet Union. 
 
In order to assist them, Sask Telecommunications has 
established a toll-free line to the protocol office in Executive 
Council which will compile a list of people trying to learn more 
about the status of their friends and relatives in the Ukraine. 
The protocol office will pass these names on to the Department 
of External Affairs which is already employing its diplomatic 
resources to assist all Canadians who have personal concerns 
stemming from the nuclear accident in the U.S.S.R. 
 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications established this toll-free 
line in very short notice and had it in operation yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker. The number is 1-800-667-7150. I wish to commend 
the people of SaskTel for their swift reaction to the 
government’s request that this information assistance line be 
established. And I also wish to thank the protocol office for 
taking on this important service to the people of Saskatchewan 
on such very short notice. 
 
I’m sure that all members of this House join me in expressing 
the wish that the heavy loss of human life has not resulted from 
what appears to be a terrible nuclear accident. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 
minister, and I say in advance, I appreciate getting a copy of 
this. Sometimes we don’t, but I do appreciate joining, being 
able to join with you in expressing to the families who may 
have people who were, in fact, injured or killed in the accident 
— the terrible accident that happened in the Soviet Union near 
Kiev — wishing the very deepest sympathy to the families in 
Saskatchewan who may have been affected by the tragedy that 
occurred, either in terms of contamination or injury or 
otherwise. I think the idea of having a toll-free number is, in 
fact, an excellent idea. 
 
I think the whole issue of the terrible disaster that occurred 
points out very clearly — once again it brings close to home the 
importance of having international regulations and controls over 
the use of a very potent type of material that is used to produce 
power. I think it points out yet once again that the need for 
safety regulations at existing power plants that are fueled with 
nuclear power, that the importance of carrying on, every short 
time, serious reviews of the safety component of those 
operations, it brings that very close to home. 
 
I think that what we are seeing happening — where the United 
States government and Italy have proposed and offered help to 
the people in the Soviet Union — I say that I hope the same 
offer is being made by Canada and the Atomic Energy of 
Canada, because we do have  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1000 
 

professionals in that field who know a great deal about it. And I 
would just wish with the minister that the very best would come 
of this attempt to allow members of families to contact their 
people in that area. 
 

Student Assistance Initiatives 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Minister of Advanced Education, the hon. member for Meadow 
Lake, I am pleased to be able to announce today details of the 
student assistance initiatives that were announced in the budget 
this spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for some time now students and parents have 
identified restrictions that have limited access to funds under 
the existing Canada student loan, Saskatchewan student bursary 
program. As well, they have identified that the Canada student 
loan program has not kept pace with increasing costs. 
 
This initiative has two components, Mr. Speaker. Firstly, 
effective May 1, 1986, the following changes will be made to 
the existing program: (1) the assets of parents will no longer be 
a factor in the assessment process; (2) the required contribution 
from parental income will be decreased; (3) single parents, Mr. 
Speaker, for the first time ever, will be eligible for the special 
incentives program and therefore will be eligible for increased 
funding in remission of loans borrowed for schooling; (4) the 
interest rate on all loans authorized after May 1, 1986, will be 
reduced, Mr. Speaker, from the current rate of 12 and 
one-quarter per cent to 6 per cent. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, effective May 1 of this year, the 
Saskatchewan supplementary loan program will be 
implemented. This needs-based program will provide additional 
funding to those currently eligible for assistance and will 
provide assistance to some students previously ineligible under 
the current system. The maximum loan available will be $3,000 
per year. Mr. Speaker, these loans will also be provided at a rate 
of 6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is particularly pleased with the 
changes to the student aid program as they pertain to single 
parents, for the majority of single parents are women. More 
opportunities for training and employment have been identified 
as one of the most important factors in meeting the needs of 
women in our province. The revised eligibility criteria will 
mean greater opportunities for both women and men who are 
single parents, or who need to upgrade skills in order to re-enter 
the work-force. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, more money will now be made available 
for those women and men who have special needs or additional 
costs, such as child care or other family responsibilities. Single 
parents will, for the first time, be included under the special 
incentive program which offers bursaries to people with special 
needs. This program offers up to $110 per week to eligible 
full-time students in addition to support available from the 
Canada student loan and our own provincial bursary program. 
Mr. Speaker, the government projects that up to 1,000 single 
parents will take advantage of this program in this year, 1986. 
 

Previously many married women and men were not eligible for 
student aid because the combined net income of the couple was 
used to calculate their eligibility. Mr. Speaker, this factor will 
no longer be as important because spousal contributions based 
on income will be reduced. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, more 
married people will be eligible for student assistance. 
 
With the increased access to student aid it will encourage those 
people who otherwise would not have the resources to continue 
their education and, in fact, improve their job prospects. Mr. 
Speaker, these initiatives simply reaffirm our commitment to 
make post-secondary education more accessible to a greater 
number of students. We are providing the opportunity for 
individuals to invest in their future and, Mr. Speaker, the return 
on that investment will be tenfold, not only for Saskatchewan 
but indeed Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a few 
comments with respect to the Minister of Education’s statement 
on behalf of her colleague, the Minister of Advanced Education 
and Manpower. I want to first of all indicate that we welcome 
any assistance in the expansion of the availability of student 
loans and funds for students. I certainly welcome it because it 
has been a very difficult impediment to student assistance, and 
that is taking into consideration in determination of student 
loans the parental assets. I want to say that it was basically very 
unfair because what had happened is that particularly on the 
farms, farm land had appreciated very significantly, and even 
though farm families may not have a significant amount of 
money to send their children on, they had a significant amount 
of assets. 
 
And I know as a fact, I had one in my constituency where a 
family had three children in university and they farmed three 
and a half quarters of land — good land, mind you — but they 
couldn’t get any qualification of student loans whatsoever 
because the asset disqualified them. 
 
So I welcome the initiatives taken by the government. I 
certainly think that parental assets — exclusion of those — is in 
line. I think one step further that they might have looked at, and 
that is when a student is entitled to be qualified as independent 
of his parents. Students at universities have indicated to me that 
they feel that one year out of high school, if they attended one 
year of post-secondary, university, that then they should qualify 
on their own, independent of their parents, rather than as it is at 
the present time. 
 
I guess the other comment that I make is that, while I welcome 
these initiatives that are announced here, Mr. Speaker, I am 
concerned with the province’s ability to continue to make the 
promises and the province’s ability to pay for the promises that 
they’re making. Because at the present time what you’re doing, 
I say, is to take the people’s credit card, and you’re running up a 
huge further deficit on every program that you’re promising. So 
people are saying, so what? They’re offering new programs, but 
they’re running it up on our credit card with a further deficit. 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1001 
 

The crux of what is missing here, Mr. Speaker, in this 
statement, is that in fact what the Minister of Advanced 
Education has failed to address is indeed the fact of continuing 
contribution by the federal government. They have allowed the 
federal government off the hook in its continuation to pay for 
post-secondary education, and accordingly I say that the 
provinces across Canada are not going to be able to sustain a 
high quality education without the commitment of the federal 
government, and that is not addressed in this statement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 31 — An Act respecting the Provision of Home 
Care Services 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Provision of Home Care Services. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act respecting the Licensing and 
Inspection of Amusement Rides 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 24, 
An Act respecting the Licensing and Inspection of Amusement 
Rides, now be read a second time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was hoping that the 
minister would have had a speech to give on the Bill. But I want 
to say a few words on second reading of the Bill and maybe ask 
the minister whether or not he would like the opportunity to say 
a few words of explanation. Seriously, Mr. Speaker, I do 
believe that the minister wasn’t on his feet and probably does 
want to say a word on the Bill. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I apologize. I was a little slow to be on 
my feet or a little fast to be off my feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, I apologize for my error. I’m not 
perfect and I try to limit my errors to small matters of this 
nature. I hope I don’t make any large errors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act, in my opinion, is long overdue. Every 
province has an Act of this nature except the province of 
Ontario. And I expect that they will soon be following the lead 
of other provinces. This proposed Act was proposed by the 
Western Canada Fair Association, and it adopts the Canadian 
Standards Association safety code for amusement rides. 
 
Now there is a clear need for safety in amusement rides. In 
1977 there was a fatality at Cumberland House. In 1981 there 
were three injuries at North Battleford. And  

since my appointment as minister I’ve given considerable 
priority to bringing this Bill before the House. And the reason 
for this Bill, Mr. Minister, is to protect the public and establish 
safety standards for amusement rides. These are primarily the 
rides that you see at fairs, the rides that my children and other 
people’s children ride on, the rides that adults ride on, all the 
rides that you see around this province. 
 
As a result of this Bill there will be a duty on the operator and 
owner of all rides to make them safe. There will be a 
requirement for licensing of these rides and liability insurance. 
There will be one exemption and as minister I will have the 
power to make other exemptions, but the one exemption that I 
will allow at this time is that the kiddie-operated rides that you 
see in the malls — the little helicopters that go up and down, 
the coin-operated rides — these will be exempt from this 
legislation. 
 
It will also require that the operators of rides file an itinerary 
with my department so that we can have an inspector making 
inspections of the rides throughout the province. 
 
And should there be an accident, the Act provides that there 
will be an investigation of these accidents to determine the 
cause and to prevent future accidents. 
 
We anticipate that this Bill will cover, during this summer, 
about 400 rides. There will be enforcement by means of an 
inspector. One additional person will be hired in my department 
for the purpose of inspecting these rides, at a cost of about 
$55,000 a year, which includes the travel expenses of this 
individual. 
 
This inspector will have the power to revoke licences, to seal or 
shut down rides and to initiate prosecutions for contraventions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of this Act, safety will be improved, 
and it’s quite likely that this summer some rides will be ordered 
to make improvements in order to continue operating. 
 
I am pleased, therefore, Mr. Speaker, to introduce this Bill for 
the safety of the people of Saskatchewan and, in fact, for my 
very own children. Therefore, I so move. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I 
want an opportunity . . . This Bill arises . . . I first heard some 
discussion of this Bill some years ago when there was actually 
an accident on an amusement ride in Saskatchewan involving 
injuries. I’m not sure if it was a loss of life. It was involving 
some injuries. 
 
It was suggested then, some years ago. It is now coming before 
the Legislative Assembly. Members of this caucus will want, 
Mr. Speaker, to review the legislation in the light of the 
minister’s comments. 
 
I may say, Mr. Minister, I dearly wished we could induce 
ministers in question period to be as brief as you were when 
you first moved second reading of the Bill. If you could impart 
some of that to other ministers, we’d be doing well. 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1002 
 

But nevertheless I want to consider it in the light of your more 
extended comments later. I therefore beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 1 — An Act 
respecting the Establishment and Operation of the Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre for the Provision of Rehabilitation 
and Extended Care Services in Saskatchewan be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a few 
words to the second reading of this Bill, and only to say that 
we’re disappointed, to say the least, that after four years, or into 
the fifth year of this government, we are just now getting 
around to setting up a board. And I say that this Bill deals only 
with setting up a board of the Wascana Hospital. 
 
And as you will be aware, Mr. Speaker, the Wascana Hospital 
rehab centre, which was planned and ready to go in 1982, 
should have been built and being used by injured people from 
around the province in terms of rehabilitation, is only now 
being built. And I might add, as well, at a much less scale than 
what was planned in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 
 
At that time the facility was going to be built adjacent to the 
Plains Hospital, as I recall. The planning had been done. 
Everyone was in agreement. When this government was 
elected, it was put on hold. And not only put on hold, but the 
whole plan was changed and a much down-scaled hospital, I 
might add, is being built. 
 
I’m not arguing that it isn’t an improvement. Obviously it is. 
But what I’m saying is that the priorities of building a 
full-fledged rehab centre adjacent to the Plains Hospital, where 
all the studies at that time indicated that it should be, where the 
health care givers, the people who were involved in 
rehabilitation, were indicating that it should be built. This 
government chose to do something different. 
 
I don’t have a great deal more to say, other than to say we’re 
getting something better than nothing. But it certainly isn’t what 
was needed and what was planned at the time of the 1982 
election, and the promises that were made at that time and the 
agreements that were made at that time with the injured 
workers, as well as the Department of Health and the care 
givers in the province, that that facility was cancelled. The 
project didn’t go ahead. And something at a much lesser scale is 
now in the process of being built, and the workers, or people 
who are injured, who need this facility, will still have to wait 
some time before the facility is completed and in use. 
 
And I just say that while we agree that this is a step in the right 
direction, that it falls far short of what was planned and what 
was available and agreed to at the time of the 1982 election. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I have 
explained on a number of occasions the new Wascana rehab 
centre that’s being built. I just want to correct some of the 
statements of the member opposite. 
 
Certainly this centre, when it is completed, will be, I think, state 
of the art for all of Canada. The planning that went into this 
took people on the board and people in the design, right across 
Canada, to look at some of the best rehab centres in existence. 
And many of those components are going to be in place in the 
new Wascana rehab. 
 
As far as the change of location, certainly we changed the 
location from beside the Plains Hospital out there in a rather 
windy and dismal part of Regina to the very pleasant 
surroundings of the Wascana Centre. And that was done with 
considerable negotiation with the Wascana Centre Authority. 
And I want to thank them for allowing this to take place, this 
expansion to take place here in the park, where I believe the 
aesthetics will do a great deal towards people who are in there 
having rehabilitative services. 
 
The member says it is not designed to what the need is. I 
question that assumption. It will have outreach services for 
handicapped children across southern Saskatchewan, something 
that has been lacking in this province for many, many years. 
And I think that will be a wonderful addition to the care of 
people in the southern part of the province. 
 
I want to also point out that it was brought together with the 
consultation and co-operation of the Workers’ Compensation 
Board and the Department of Veterans’ Affairs. And I want to 
thank those people for their co-operation in having input into 
the design and now the construction. 
 
Certainly we’re well into the construction phase. The necessity 
of course now is to have a board. It has previously been under 
the South Saskatchewan Hospital Board. I think to leave it 
under the management of a hospital board would be taking 
away from the whole aspect and the whole concept of 
rehabilitation — because that’s what it’s going to be — and it’s 
also going to provide services for long-term care. 
 
So I think what we have brought together is certainly a great 
improvement over what was designed previously, and I’m sure, 
Mr. Speaker, you will recall, but just for other members of the 
Assembly, I know very well just on the eve of the last election 
in 1982 there was a frantic call over to the Department of 
Health to design a rehab centre because they thought they 
should promise it to win votes in Regina. You can obviously 
see that that hasn’t been the case. 
 
We have been in planning over a number of years. We’ve been 
in construction all through the last winter, and the piles are in, 
the excavation has taken place. Within a very short period of 
time you will see some of the steel going up, Mr. Chairman, and 
mark my words, when it is completed it will be a facility that 
certainly all of Saskatchewan can be very, very proud of and 
will  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1003 
 

certainly improve services, rehab services, in this part of the 
province. 
 
With that, I move second reading of the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dutchak that Bill No. 15 — An Act 
respecting the Application in Saskatchewan of the United 
Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have only a very 
few words to say. As I indicated last day, we are in agreement; 
we have no objections to what is the principle of the Bill and 
will be supporting the provisions therein. 
 
I take it — and the minister might want to clarify this — that all 
of the supporting provinces will have to first of all, in fact, pass 
the necessary legislation that we’re doing here, I take it, and 
then the federal government is then in a position to make the 
final acceptance of the enforcement on behalf of the entire 
country. 
 
(1500) 
 
I take it that is, and in fact I would appreciate — we can get into 
it when we deal with the Bill — but I take it that’s the 
procedure that is going to be used because I note in the remarks 
of the minister, you indicate that once all the jurisdictions have 
passed implementing legislation, the Government of Canada 
will formally accede to the convention. So I take it that it’s 
necessary to get all of the provinces to accept it, and then the 
federal government can accede to the convention. Not an 
important issue, but I just want that clarification, if he could. 
We will be supporting the legislation. I think it’s well intended. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday we left off with my colleague, the member from 
Regina Centre, asking you some questions about assessment. 
Can you confirm whether you have decided as a government to 
establish an independent assessment management agency or a 
commission? I think you did mention that. Is that the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I understand that in the 
consideration of the establishment of this, the government did 
establish a committee of some MLAs, and if I recollect 
correctly, there was the member from  

Nipawin, that is Mr. Sauder, and the member from The 
Battlefords, Mr. Morin. Was this committee established that 
studied the whole question of assessment in the province? Was 
there such a committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I understand that there was an urban study 
directed by one of those individuals which you mentioned; a 
rural study directed by the other individual. The Local 
Government Finance Commission, in its interim report, I guess, 
recommended the establishment of a single independent 
agency. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was not 
aware that there were two separate studies, so I appreciate that 
information. Can you tell me when these two members began 
their study? Was it started a year ago, or two years ago? And 
having done the study, when was the report finished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I understand that the individuals completed 
their work some time in mid-’85. The Local Government 
Finance Commission released its recommendation for an 
independent assessment agency some time in September of ’85. 
And it was about this same time, in that general time-frame, that 
both SUMA and SARM were talking about the need for some 
form of independent assessment agency. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I know that SUMA and SARM had 
been considering this, and that’s why I’m quite interested in this 
subject because . . . and I’m sure the minister will agree that the 
whole question of assessment and reassessment has not been 
without its difficulties. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, was the 
expense of the work done by these members, whether they had 
staff — obviously they must have had some assistance — but 
the cost of the study, was that paid for by your department in 
the case of the rural . . . in the case of the urban study, or were 
the costs borne by some other agency or other department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I understand the assessment authority 
funded the rural and urban, and of course the Local Government 
Finance Commission would have been funded out of the 
Department of Finance for its activities. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So therefore any expenses incurred or 
costs incurred as these members did — I assume they were 
legislative secretaries — but any costs that they incurred in the 
process of their work would have been paid by the Department 
of Finance. Is that what you’re telling me? Because the only 
reason I want to know is I want to know where to ask the 
questions about the cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — For those particular individuals the costs 
would have come out of the assessment authority, and the 
question should be appropriately raised at the time that the 
authority is discussed in estimates. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Therefore, I won’t . . . 
(inaudible) . . . that aspect of this, because I will take your word 
for it and pursue it in the Department of Finance estimates. 
 
I have one other question, regarding the structure and the 
organization of the proposed assessment management  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1004 
 

agency. You will no doubt be aware, Mr. Minister, that at the 
present time, under the arrangement as it exists, the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon have their own assessment agencies, or 
whatever they call them. Is it proposed in the new arrangement 
that Saskatoon and Regina would become part of this 
independent provincial management agency, or would they still 
continue to operate their independent agencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The issue of where Saskatoon and 
Regina’s assessment functions would come into or relate to this 
particular independent agency has not been finalized yet, in the 
sense that a Bill has not been presented to the legislature. 
Obviously that would be dealt with at that time, although we 
have had discussions with them, and consideration is being 
given for them to have the option to stay as they are, to run 
independently, or to opt in to an agency, should they wish to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I assume the Bill will be brought forward 
in this session. Can I ask you when that might happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — In due course it will be here. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Good answer. I won’t pursue that further. 
I don’t suspect you will give me any further indication. 
 
But I do say, Mr. Minister, I really think it’s important that it be 
brought forward early. I mean it’s no secret that there may — 
and some people might say there may not — but there may very 
well be an election. And I think that this issue is of such 
magnitude and such importance that it really would be quite 
regrettable if the government chose not to deal with it when you 
know, as well as I know, that municipalities out there are 
concerned about it — and so they should be — and that they are 
wanting to know what that legislation will be. 
 
I accept your word that consultation is taking place, although 
we certainly have evidence that in some cases — and I’m not 
directing this at you, yourself, personally — but in some cases 
when the government has talked about consultation, it has been 
found that that consultation really never took place. 
 
But I would urge you to table that legislation quickly and early. 
It’s been like you said, the final report came in and the 
recommendation came in in September of 1985. Surely it’s not 
unreasonable to expect that the work since that recommendation 
to be completed by May of 1986. It’s not unreasonable to 
expect that that work should not have been completed by now. 
So I will leave it at that. 
 
(1515) 
 
I want to deal now, Mr. Minister, with another issue, briefly. 
You will be aware — and, if you’re not, I’m sure your staff will 
be able to inform you — that the provincial government made 
some amendments to The Urban Municipality Act which did, 
among other things, permit the province to, I suppose I could 
call it, shift some portion or quite a large portion of the cost of 
prisoner escort services back to the major cities. That was an 
amendment that I recollect reading about in the  

newspaper some time ago. And the major shift was to the cities 
of Regina and Saskatoon. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, in the 
House, how much additional cost the cities of Saskatoon and 
Regina, each individually, will have to bear because of that 
amendment, if I’m correct in that the amendment has been 
made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I think it can fairly be argued that in 
fact there has not been an increase in cost to the cities. If you 
will recall, the cities of Regina and Saskatoon used to provide 
prisoner escort services. There naturally was a certain cost 
associated with the provision of that service, and that cost of 
course was shouldered by the city. They unilaterally decided to 
no longer provide that prisoner escort service. In so doing, that 
cost is no longer incurred by them. And then they, of course, 
had additional revenue — because they were no longer 
spending it there — to spend somewhere else. 
 
In essence, of course, that cost was now put unilaterally on to 
the province. It was a cost that the province was not willing to 
bear, and the decision was made, therefore, that the revenues 
would not be returned to the cities, in a commensurate amount, 
so that in fact there would be no change then in terms of the 
revenue or cost to either of the governments. And I hope you 
understand that particular reasoning. The city did have a cost. 
They no longer had a cost. They are spending that revenue 
somewhere else now. So as a consequence, there’s a balancing 
out. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m not sure, Mr. Minister, that I can 
agree with you that there is a balancing out, because the 
statistics that I have, and I remind you that this was a matter 
that was raised by the city of Saskatoon police commissioners 
of the mayor of Saskatoon, Mr. Cliff Wright, who I think was, 
and is, the chairman of that commission. And they expressed 
some concern about this. I am told, and I quote from what the 
mayor had to say. He said: 
 

It is basically and fundamentally wrong. The cost of 
prisoner escort services are all related to Criminal Code 
offences from which the city receives no revenue at all. 

 
And I think he had a good point. 
 
In the case of Saskatoon, Mr. Minister, the new arrangement 
will allow the province to withhold 18 per cent of the $1.1 
million levying fines annually by Saskatoon courts and use it to 
pay for security costs associated with transporting prisoners 
from jail to court or back. The revenue loss will be $300,000 
per year to the city of Saskatoon, according to the mayor and 
the police commission. And in Regina’s case, 39 per cent will 
be withheld, or close to $400,000 annually. That surely cannot 
be considered an insignificant amount of money. 
 
And I once again repeat what the police commission said, that 
most of the people paying fines for breaking municipal by-laws 
like traffic or zoning by-laws require no prisoner escort or 
security of any kind. I’m sure you will agree with that. The kind 
of people requiring a security escort are those with criminal 
charge or Criminal Code offences. And so therefore I ask: why 
have you decided that since the are Criminal Code offences and  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1005 
 

could have happened anywhere in the province, not in just those 
two respective cities, does your government feel that it’s the 
responsibility of the cities to pay for the escort services in those 
cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The cities have historically paid for these 
services, and they chose unilaterally to no longer provide those 
services. The province therefore has to bear the burden of 
providing the services. To cover the cost of so doing, we have 
simply made the decision to withhold a commensurate amount 
of fine revenue to now cover off the costs that we incur in 
providing those services when the city previously provided 
those particular services. 
 
So I think that’s a reasonable balancing act in response to the 
unilateral decision taken by the cities. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Since the cases in question, Mr. Minister, 
are Criminal Code cases, can I ask you to give me the 
explanation for why you think it would be reasonable when the 
cities, strictly speaking, have no responsibility in this matter. 
By-law infractions, yes. Traffic violations, yes. If you, Mr. 
Minister, get picked up tonight because you are speeding 
through Wascana Park — and I know that’s not possible to 
happen — but if you were picked up, the fine levied, the city of 
Regina would get some revenue. 
 
But under Criminal Code charges, I would like you to tell me 
what’s the rationale to have the cities bear the cost of escort 
services. And I ask that because I really don’t understand. And 
since you have your officials there who can help me, maybe 
you can help me understand. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Back in 1982 the province took over the 
municipal court operations in the cities of Regina and 
Saskatoon, the costs of facility and court staff and so on, and 
that resulted in an annual saving to each city of about $340,000. 
So the cities are now saving significant amounts of money 
because of the action taken by the province back in 1982. 
 
Then the cities unilaterally decide to no longer provide this 
escort service. I understand the Department of Justice attempted 
to negotiate with them, but that was not possible. They simply 
unilaterally chose to make that decision. In other words, they 
unilaterally chose to foist a cost on to the shoulders of the 
senior government. It was felt that we had no option but to 
cover off the cost of that extra burden, which has now been 
shouldered on to the provincial government, by withholding a 
commensurate amount of fine revenue to cover off that cost. 
 
So the cities saved 340,000 each as a result of the province 
already taking over some particular services. Now the city 
decides unilaterally that the province should take over more 
services. We felt that that was not appropriate, attempted to 
negotiate, were not successful, and consequently took what we 
believe to be the reasonable decision, to withhold the fine 
revenues in order to pay for those particular services. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think with your preoccupation with 
unilateral, Mr. Minister, you forgot to answer the question. I’m 
quite aware that in 1982 the changes were made, and the 
province took responsibility for, I think it  

was the provincial court. That’s not news to anybody. 
 
And I’m quite aware that the cities are no longer responsible for 
that. My question simply is: what’s the rationale in the 
government’s minds for asking the two cities to pay for escort 
services for criminal code offences where the city really has no 
responsibility; where the city really gains no revenue because of 
fines levied, as I understand it? I ask you again the question: 
what’s the rationale behind it? 
 
Whether the cities decided unilaterally or not, and I would 
really question that, that’s not the point here. The point here is 
the question of this being an unfair imposition on the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon. Both cities have expressed concern 
about it. The police commission and the chairman, Mr. Cliff 
Wright, in Saskatoon, has expressed concern about it. And I 
think it’s only fair for the government to be able to tell them 
what the rationale is for continuing to have the cities bear this 
cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well as I indicated, Justice attempted to 
negotiate and were unsuccessful. Perhaps something could have 
been worked out if negotiations had taken place. But the 
rationale is simply a cost rationale. The decision was taken 
unilaterally to foist the burden upon the provincial government. 
It was felt that that was not appropriate that the provincial 
government was going to have to cover these costs somehow, 
and therefore the decision was made to withhold a 
commensurate amount of fine revenue so that the costs and the 
revenue balance out to both the provincial government and to 
the municipal governments. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m not going to pursue it 
any longer. I think I’ve made my point. I don’t agree with you. 
The cities of Saskatoon and Regina don’t agree with you. The 
police commissions don’t agree with you. It’s the usual story, as 
everybody is wrong and you’re right. I mean, whether we’re 
talking about this question, or whether we’re talking about the 
property improvement grant, or whether we’re talking about no 
formula for revenue-sharing pool, or the distribution of the 
revenue-sharing pool, everybody who’s expressed a concern to 
your government, you say, is wrong, and you’re right. 
 
I’m saying in this case — without wanting to get into a debate 
on it further, and I will drop it here — I believe you’re wrong. 
Because I consider this, as do many others, that this is nothing 
more than another example of the tax shift from the provincial 
level to the municipal levels. There are many more glaring 
examples involving a great deal more money, such as property 
improvement grant, which is a tax shift of $80 million in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We disagree. A New Democratic government would change 
that. You choose, in your government, not to deal with it, but 
simply to say, they’re wrong and you’re right. We’ll agree to 
disagree, and I won’t pursue it any more. But my colleague, the 
member from Shaunavon, has some questions that I know he 
wants to ask on the legislation involving Urban Affairs, and I 
will give him some time to do that. 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1006 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
have a few questions here, Mr. Minister, and it’s in regard to a 
Bill that was dealt with last May 17th, I believe it was. I’m 
reading from a photocopy of Hansard, and maybe it would be 
worth our while if I got it copied for you and sent it across, and 
I’ll do that. 
 
But it deals with a Bill, an Act to amend The Local Government 
Election Act — some changes that took place at that time, but 
other changes that took place in a previous amendment to the 
Bill by your government after the ’82 election. And I’m sure the 
staff in your department are well aware of it, because it’s been 
going on and burning in a number of rural communities for 
some time. And it has to do with the issue of people who are not 
residents of towns in the province, or villages in the province, 
being able to vote in municipal elections. 
 
The scenario, and I’ll use it only as a scenario, goes something 
like this. A small town, on the appropriate day when everyone 
has an election, prepares the voters list, and on the voters list 
can be anyone who has property in that town. You don’t have to 
be a resident. You can be a resident in Regina and vote in 
Ernfold, for example, if you have your name on a piece of 
property. In fact, you don’t even have to own the property; you 
can have an agreement for sale. There’s no limit on the number 
of names that can be on the agreement for sale. You could have 
40 people who are buying a lot worth $1 in Ernfold, on the 
voters’ list. They could come out from Regina and affect the 
election in that town. 
 
(1530) 
 
Now what I would like to do here, Mr. Minister, is if you would 
give me a background on this issue and tell me what led up to 
this change; what happened as a result of it; how much problem 
it has caused; and what is your solution to that problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — If I could just take a moment for the 
member, Mr. Chairman, if I could just have the attention of the 
member for a moment. 
 
I’ll just give you the historical or chronological sequence here. 
Prior to ’82 all non-resident property owners could vote in 
municipal elections. In 1982, at the request of the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, the Act was amended so that 
non-resident property owners could not vote — in ’82. 
 
The ensuing concerns on the part of electors and the pressure 
put upon SUMA, and SUMA communicating back to us, as a 
consequence the Act was amended in 1984 to bring it back to 
the state that it was in in 1982, or prior to 1982, so that 
non-residents could, in fact, vote. That’s the way it was for a 
number of years prior to this government being in operation. I 
think you’ll recall that that was the situation under your 
administration, that non-residents could vote. 
 
So then in 1984 the amendments were made that once again 
non-resident property owners could vote. The situation did arise 
in one particular municipality which you mentioned. If I 
remember correctly, the Ferland situation which made it very 
clear that for many years  

prior to ’82 and since 1984 there has been a loophole which 
permitted this kind of unfortunate situation to arise. And 
officials from my department and the Department of Justice are 
attempting to come up with the most reasonable legislative 
solution which will satisfy everybody, if that is possible. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I understand what you’re 
saying, and I now understand, at least with a very broad brush, 
the background. What I would like to know is that when the 
proposed changes took place, and when I say proposed changes, 
I’m talking about moving away from the property owners who 
are non-residents not having a vote and then the amendment 
that allowed them to have a vote; you say that pressure came 
from Urban Affairs for the change — or from SUMA to Urban 
Affairs — that the change would take place. 
 
What correspondence took place at that time? Was there memos 
exchanged between SUMA and the department, and you will 
have to ask your officials because you weren’t the minister, and 
I’m not laying that on you. But can you indicate how that 
exchange took place and who initiated the changes. Was there 
an exchange of letters and proposals or what took place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I understand it — and I was not in this 
particular responsibility at that time — but as a consequence of 
the amendments passed in 1982, that at various local levels 
around the province dissatisfaction was being expressed. That 
dissatisfaction was communicated to the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association; they passed a resolution at their 
convention requesting a change, and consequently department 
officials will have had discussions with them. I’m not aware of 
any letters or memos that you’re referring to actually having 
taken place. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I guess what the minister is saying then is 
the pressure that was coming on the department was coming as 
a result of a resolution passed at an annual SUMA convention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can the minister indicate which year . . . 
Do you have the resolution handy, the wording of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I don’t have the resolution here. But it was 
put back in the Act in 1984 in response to a 1983 SUMA 
resolution. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister can explain — 
have you had any communities writing to you or meetings with 
communities, or your predecessor, on the issue of the 
non-residents voting in small communities? Can you indicate 
how many communities it was a problem in? I know I have one 
in my constituency, and I don’t know whether it’s widespread 
or not. I can see how it could be, and I’m sure the minister can 
understand how it could become a major issue if we allow 
non-residents, but property owners, to vote in small 
communities. 
 
Let’s say, for example, in a community where there’s 99 
people, 99 voters who are resident, and there’s a close race. All 
you have to go to is the next town down the road  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1007 
 

and they can come in and buy a lot. They don’t even have to 
buy it, just have an agreement for sale, put 20 names on the 
agreement for sale, and you understand how ludicrous this can 
become. The campaign then, to win the election, doesn’t 
become who’s going to do the best job for the residents, but it 
becomes an issue of going to different communities around and 
about, get them to put their name on a piece of the property, and 
theoretically you could have hundreds of people voting in an 
election in a community where there are only 50 to 60 people. 
 
And if you could inform me how many people have approached 
you with this problem; do you have any idea how many found it 
to be a problem in the last election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I think the fact that only one community 
has actually had the problem and has expressed the problem is 
an indication generally of the integrity and, I suppose, the 
fairness of the average Saskatchewan elector out there. In 
theory, I suppose this could have happened a long time ago and 
it never did. And I think we should all be thankful that it didn’t. 
And as I said, it’s likely an indication of the fact that 
Saskatchewan people are generally fair and want to deal with 
one another when it comes to elections in fair ways. So it was 
unfortunate that this one particular incident did take place. I’m 
only aware of this one. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can the minister tell me, and this is a 
different theory than we have at the provincial level. You’ll 
obviously be aware that when it comes to voting in the province 
in a provincial election that ownership of property does not give 
you the right to vote in Saskatchewan. I say to you that if you’re 
a resident of Alberta and have property in Saskatchewan, it then 
does not follow that you can put your name on the voters’ list 
for a provincial election. 
 
And I wonder, at this time, is there any consideration being 
given to changing that Act, or to amend the Act, to make sure 
that the people who vote in these small towns are in fact 
residents? And I’m here just asking you, basically do you have 
any intention to make amendments to the legislation that would 
deal with this problem? 
 
And I’m interested that it’s only one community, because I had 
heard that there were a number of communities in the province 
that had expressed to the department concerns about it. And I 
just want you to confirm that — there’s only one community 
that has expressed concerns about that option of people who are 
not residents being allowed to vote in the small centres. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, as I indicated, since that election there 
is only that one community for which this has been a problem. 
Even though it was only one community, and even though it is a 
small community and, you know, speaking in the large 
provincial context, it’s not a lot of people involved, nevertheless 
I think the problem is a significant problem. And now that it has 
taken place, clearly it needs attention. 
 
The exact way in which you fix the problem up is another issue 
altogether. I’m not so sure you want to fix that problem up by 
disenfranchising a whole bunch of  

people, for example, who own property and they spend a good 
deal of time out in other various locations where they own that 
property; indeed, they may live there half of the year. 
 
So the means whereby that particular problem is ameliorated is 
a little bit difficult. Nevertheless, we are dealing with that, and 
we will be providing the House with what we believe to be a 
reasonable legislative solution prior to the next round of local 
elections. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has clearly indicated that 
it’s a . . . And while I agree with him on the integrity of 
Saskatchewan voters, he will be well aware that in the heat of 
an election, when you have a contest in a small community, that 
it’s got very little to do with the integrity of the people of 
Saskatchewan, which we both agree is very upright, but more to 
do with the laws of the land that allow for this to happen. 
 
There’s nothing wrong with it. I mean there’s nothing wrong 
with going to another community and arranging for 40 people 
to put their name on a lot, an option to buy for a dollar, and then 
allowing them to vote. That’s legal. I mean that’s got nothing to 
do with integrity. Those can be people with a great deal of 
integrity who do that, because the law that you have allows 
them to do it. 
 
And to say that if they did that, they would then not be honest 
people, says something about the government who passed the 
law and allowed it to be done. And I’m not arguing with you 
about it. All I’m saying is that in going into the next round of 
municipal elections, and I say that it’s a problem now because 
in some of them — and you will know in the community that 
we’ve talked about — there have been court challenges to the 
election. And always within that realm if there are appeals of 
the decision, I understand the challenge was dismissed, but I 
suppose it could be appealed. I don’t know the legal 
ramifications, and there could be a by-election. 
 
(1545) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Then what? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Then what happens if we haven’t dealt 
with the issue? 
 
And what I’m saying that in that community, the problem that’s 
been caused — and I don’t think it was intentional, although I 
do say that when the amendment was before the Assembly in 
1985 on May 17th, my colleague, the member from Assiniboia, 
clearly outlined to you what could happen, and it subsequently 
did happen in the fall of 1985. It’s not that we were unaware 
because at that time we could already see the problem 
occurring. And my colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
clearly indicated that that possibility existed in the town of 
Ferland where people from outside the community could 
prearrange to put their name on a title — they didn’t have to 
buy the lot, I’ll add there again they didn’t have to buy the lot 
— but have an agreement for sale, have 40 names on the 
agreement for sale; they would then be eligible voters in the 
town of Ferland. And he outlined that and told you clearly that; 
not that he would say one side shouldn’t do it or one side 
should, but the option was  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1008 
 

there for them to do it. The suggestion was there that it was 
going to happen and that we should deal with it on May 17th of 
1985. 
 
And the minister at that time indicated that he wasn’t going to 
do anything, and subsequently didn’t do anything. Then we 
ended up with the problem that you and I know about where 
individuals who were non-residents — not business people 
living outside of the town, or the periphery of the town, who 
may have an interest in being able to vote in the community — 
but people from hundreds of miles away — hundreds of 
kilometres away — got their name on some property and then 
subsequently voted. 
 
And I’m not sure whether both sides in the contest did it or not, 
and they may have, because it was a perfect option for them to 
do it. It was within your law that you allowed to be there that 
they should do that, and we have the strange case of more 
people voting in that election than what lived in the town. 
 
Now we’d have an interesting problem if that was the case 
provincially where we would have more people deciding who 
the Government of Saskatchewan was than the number of 
voters who lived in the province. And we would quickly do 
something about that because there are ramifications that come 
from that that really say to the individuals who live in the town 
that people from Regina, who have never paid a cent of tax in 
Ferland, have every much right to vote and decide on the 
organization of that village as the person who has lived there for 
40 years and paid their taxes. 
 
Now in my mind that isn’t fair. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What town are you referring to? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The town is Ferland, and it happened in 
the last election. My colleague, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, clearly indicated that this was a 
possibility. 
 
And if I could, Mr. Chairman, I would just like to quote from 
some of the relevant parts of the argument that was being made 
at that time, and to let you know that there was discussion going 
on prior to the amendments before the Assembly. And I quote 
from page 2443, May 23, 1985, and Mr. Engel, the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is speaking. And he says: 
 

Mr. Minister, I believe you had some guests this morning 
that came and visited me as well. (This) is a problem that 
is raised by (a) small community (and here I believe he’s 
referring to Ferland) that have people that will . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well they don’t even need to 
buy a lot, I understand it. They take out (an) option to buy 
a lot, and there’d be 20 names on that option, saying, these 
20 people want to buy a lot. Would they have a right to 
vote in a municipal . . . election. 

 
And Mr. Embury responds: 
 

Well, I think, Mr. Chairman, yes, I did meet with  

those people from the village of Ferland this morning. 
They have an unusual problem down there, but basically 
the rules are that if you have your name on the title, you 
are a property owner, and you would be allowed to vote. 

 
Now here we have the problem being laid out to a government 
that refused to listen to the problem. And now we have a 
community that is split down the middle as a result of your 
government’s inaction. And I say to you that the problem they 
express . . . And I’m not saying here that one is right and one is 
wrong, but obviously you’ve created a big problem that you 
knew about in advance. And I just say to you that we have the 
possibility of a great number of these problems occurring, and 
the government has to be responsible. 
 
If it’s a problem that could have happened at any time in the 
past, or there was a suggestion that government would have had 
a responsibility to deal with it, regardless of who was in power 
. . . It just so happens that the problem came up before the 1985 
election. It was explained to you articulately, or your 
government, the problem that would happen if this amendment 
didn’t take place to not allow people from outside the 
community to vote who had no interest in the community. And 
you did nothing about it. 
 
And I’m just saying to you: what are the plans in place now, the 
studies that are going on? What would the general ramifications 
of the changes that you’re proposing be to the Act as it now 
exists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, as I indicated to the member 
opposite, the issue has been looked at in terms of finding a 
legislative solution that is constitutionally correct. Because we 
are dealing with the ownership of property, and there are those 
particular individuals who may argue one way or another that 
by disenfranchising any particular person who happens to own 
even a little bit of property, you may, in fact, be doing 
something that’s unconstitutional. 
 
So we are trying to come up as expeditiously as we can with the 
appropriate legislative solution that will be seen to be 
constitutional, in order to rectify the problem. I do want to 
comment once more that the problem — you’re right — the 
problem could have happened at any time in the past. It 
happened now. I think that we can certainly commend the 
people of Saskatchewan that they are people of integrity and 
that in fact they, in large measure, have decided not to take 
advantage of what is now seen to be a loophole in the 
legislation, and that they have conducted themselves with a 
fairness towards one another during past municipal elections. 
 
So we are striving to, as expeditiously as possible, find the 
legislative solution that, as I indicated before, will be 
constitutionally correct and will be acceptable for all the 
citizens of the province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I understand people’s concern about 
federal laws that may have precedence over provincial laws, 
and that’s fair. But what I’m clearly saying here is that there 
was a time when the law was different, and it wasn’t a 
constitutional problem, that it wasn’t a constitutional problem. 
The issue here is, is what  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1009 
 

legislation you can pass and not who was responsible for the 
constitution. 
 
If you want to give us credit for the constitution, good, then 
we’re responsible for the constitution. But the issue here is, is 
that it was different, where residents had a vote and 
non-residents didn’t have a vote in Ferland, and there was no 
problem with the constitution. 
 
So to try to say that there’s a constitutional problem is 
obviously a way out of the discussion and the debate that’s 
going on. The question that I put to you was this: what are your 
plans to deal with the problem? 
 
Are you saying that you’re going to leave it the way it is — and 
that’s an option — I agree that’s an option? Are you going to 
say that you have to own property for a certain length of time 
— a year, two years — that’s an option? Or are you saying that 
you have to be a resident? Or are you saying that people who 
live within a radius of the centre, 10 miles let’s say, because 
there are people who live outside and have a business in town 
who you may want to say need a vote, that’s an option. But 
what I’m asking you is: which way are you leaning? 
 
Obviously it is now a year. This debate was taking place in this 
Assembly May 23, 1985. We’ve gone through the election in 
the fall of ’85. The problem we predicted has now occurred. 
You’ve now had about six months since then to discuss and 
look at it. What are the proposals that you’re now looking at, 
and which one are you leaning towards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we do want to find the most effective 
solution which will stand the test of time. I think that is what we 
would all want to strive for, and the most effective solution that 
will stand the test of time; it may be one option, it may be 
another option. For example, you may put on some kind of a 
residency requirement or a time ownership requirement 
whereby a person would have to own the particular piece of 
property for a period of time; for example, six months, a year. I 
don’t know what would be an appropriate ownership 
time-frame that you would want to apply. That may be one 
particular solution. 
 
Another option that you may want to consider would be to 
restrict the number of individuals who would be deemed to own 
a particular piece of property or would actually own a particular 
piece of property for the purposes of the election, so that you 
couldn’t have a ballooning of people owning one particular 
piece of property very shortly before an election, but that in fact 
it would be restricted in some way, so that you may just have a 
husband and a wife, for example, who would be owning a 
particular piece of property. It may be more. 
 
Those are examples of the kinds of solutions that are being 
looked at. We naturally want to have the input of legal people, 
Justice people, to ensure that the legislative solution that is 
brought forward is in fact one that will stand the test of time and 
will work effectively in our municipal elections. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to get the minister clearly on 
record here. Then you’re looking at the option of  

having a time limit on the length of time you have to own the 
property. Is that the one you’re looking at? Well which one are 
you considering the . . . If you’re preparing legislation to be 
ready by the next round of elections, which option are you 
looking at bringing before the House? 
 
What I’m saying to you, if you don’t know, then just say, I 
don’t know. I don’t understand how I’m going to solve this 
problem, but don’t stand here and say that after a year we still 
don’t have any decision making. I mean, that’s not good 
enough. I mean, you’re in your fifth year of your mandate, and 
the people are saying, why can’t this man make a decision? 
That’s what they’re saying. You caused all these problems out 
there. You have families split down the middle as a result of the 
inaction on this issue, and you’re saying now that I still don’t 
know what I’m doing. That’s what you’re saying. You’re 
saying, I’m confused. We’re in disarray. I’m trying to get ready 
for an election and I don’t have time to deal with this small 
issue. Basically that’s the message you’re sending out. And I’m 
saying that’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member 
from Swift Current can say “nonsense” all she wants, from her 
seat. And the member from Saskatoon. 
 
But I’m going to ask questions anyway, regardless of people 
shouting from their seats. We’ve got a job to do here, and that’s 
to deal with a problem that was created by your government. 
And what I would like to know is what your proposal is that 
will solve the problem. That’s the question. Do you have a 
solution to the problem that I have outlined and the people from 
Ferland have outlined? Is there a solution at hand to the 
problem? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — You will see the solution to solve the 
problem when the Bill is tabled in the legislature. At that time 
you will know what the solution is that we are bringing forward 
to solve the problem. 
 
In the meantime, we are looking extensively at a variety of 
options to ensure that the solution which is brought forward to 
the legislature is indeed the best one which will most effectively 
stand the test of time. Now that seems to me to be the 
responsible course of action to take. And you will see what it is 
when the Bill is tabled here in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think you can see 
the arrogance of this government, the arrogance of this 
government, that in their fifth year, a problem that was clearly 
outlined to them, both by the community — and I refer again to 
the meeting that took place between the minister, the member 
for Lakeview I believe, Mr. Embury, who was the minister at 
that time — and the people from Ferland, who outlined to him 
what problem would come in the fall if they didn’t amend the 
Act. 
 
The minister has now admitted that he’s going to amend the 
Act. Obviously he says there’s a Bill coming. That’s what he 
said today. There’s a Bill coming. But he’s not telling anyone 
what’s going to be in the Bill. I call that arrogance to the people 
of Ferland. 
 
That is a good example of the arrogance of this massive  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1010 
 

majority government, that we presently have in the province. 
And it’s not unlike the arrogance of other big majority 
governments, whether it’s Pierre Elliott Trudeau, or the first 
Bourassa government in Quebec, or the Lougheed government 
in Alberta. 
 
And I tell you that this kind of arrogance in clinging to power 
and telling people it’s none of their business what legislation 
I’m going to bring forward, and that to the people of Ferland 
. . . Like, I don’t mind you saying it to me. That’s fine. We can 
stand the cut and thrust. We’ve done if for four years with you 
birds, and it doesn’t hurt very much. Let me tell you, it doesn’t 
hurt very much. 
 
But you’re saying this to the people of Ferland. What you’re 
saying to them is what you just said. What you’ve said is, bug 
out. That’s basically what you’ve said. I’ll tell you my solution 
to the problem when I bloody well feel like it. That’s what 
you’re saying . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member 
from Saskatoon says, watch your language. Well I’ll tell you, 
the language that is used in there by those people from their 
seats from time to time would make people’s hair stand up on 
end. 
 
And I’ll tell you that the minister doesn’t get away easily with 
making statements to the people of Ferland that he does not 
have to answer to them when they say, what are the changes to 
the legislation going to be? What are the changes going to be? 
To stand up here and arrogantly say that I don’t have to tell you, 
is the height of arrogance. 
 
And here we have a minister running from a little town. I don’t 
know how many people there are in Ferland. There might be 40 
or 50 or 100 voters. But here we have a minister who will hide 
in Regina and not deal with the problem. And we’ve seen this 
government hiding from people everywhere along the way — 
hiding in Swift Current from the farmers; hiding in Estevan and 
Weyburn from the nurses. And I say to you that a government 
that will hide from the people and not make decisions is one 
that should not be in power in this province — should not be in 
power. 
 
And I say to you: this is one of the problems that happens after 
you have a government that’s been in power for five years and 
unwilling to have an election. This is the arrogance that they are 
still showing. I think this government is more arrogant now than 
it was when it was first elected. I see that in their faces. 
 
And I would like to ask you again, Mr. Minister, if you can 
outline what the legislation will be. What changes are you 
proposing to make at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has 
accused me and this particular government of acting in an 
arrogant fashion. And I would simply respond to the member 
opposite that when a problem is pointed out with a particular 
piece of legislation, and when actions are taken to attempt to 
find the best possible solution that will stand the test of time, 
and when those various options are analysed by Justice officials 
to ensure that we have the appropriate legal solution, and when 
those options and so on are discussed with the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association to ensure that we have their 
concurrence, that there’s nothing arrogant about that. In  

fact what that is is very reasonable and responsible government 
in action. And I think the people of the province understand 
that. 
 
I suppose the member opposite can throw his accusations of 
arrogance any time he wants to. I’m not going to respond to 
those. I’m simply going to indicate that we are looking at 
various solutions. I have kindly given those solutions that we 
are considering to the member opposite this afternoon, and we 
are looking for the best possible legislative solution that will 
stand the test of time. When we are convinced that we have that 
solution, then we will bring forward to this Assembly the 
appropriate amendment, and all members of the Assembly at 
that time will have an opportunity to debate that particular 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to ask the minister, on the issue of 
the amendments that are being looked at, do you intend that in 
this session you will have amendments ready to bring before the 
Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, when we have received all of the 
advice that we believe is necessary for us to receive, and when 
we’ve had an opportunity to consult further with SUMA, when 
we believe that we have found what we consider to be the most 
effective solution that will stand the test of time, then we will 
bring it to this Assembly post-haste. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister will know what happens 
from time to time is a piece of legislation is brought before the 
Assembly, and then it can be amended in committee, but it 
opens up the debate. I wonder if the minister would consider at 
this stage bringing forward a Bill that would deal with the 
problem. And I just put that forward because it’s an option that 
governments both federally and provincially have used, and 
used effectively, to get input. You could use the Bill. If we 
adjourn when we get done — we usually adjourn as opposed to 
prorogue — you could take the Bill around and see what the 
reactions of the communities are. 
 
I wonder if you’d consider at this time in the session to bring 
forward a Bill that would deal with the problem that has been 
enunciated by the people from Ferland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well as I indicated, when we have 
determined what we believe to be the appropriate legislative 
solution that everyone involved is convinced will stand the test 
of time, then that will be incorporated into an amendment and 
will be brought forward to the legislature and will be debated. 
And we certainly want to do that as expeditiously as we can. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, have you had any lobby group 
from Ferland approach you to overturn the results of the 
Ferland election? Has your department had any application of 
that type or suggestions or requests that that would take place as 
a result of this bad legislation that you have put on the books? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I have not had anyone approach me asking 
for the election to be overturned, nor would I have the authority 
to do so. Now I don’t know if that’s exactly the question that 
you are asking. 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1011 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Sorry if I didn’t make myself clear, Mr. 
Minister. I had asked if you or your department officials or 
anyone in your department had been approached by a lobby 
group or an individual from the town of Ferland trying to get 
the election results overturned because of what they see to be a 
great loophole that was put into place by your government and 
allowed to remain there, even after the arguments that they 
made to your government on May 17th in 1985. Have there 
been any delegations or individuals come to you with that kind 
of suggestion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I personally, nor did my officials ever have 
anybody come and say we want the election overturned. I think 
a better description would be that solicitors from both of the 
disputing sides wanted to see some kind of an inquiry into the 
issue. Because there were a number of points it was felt that the 
appropriate route to go would be to utilize The Controverted 
Elections Act as the means to settle the issue and, of course, it 
did go to the courts and the decision was made there, which you 
are well aware of. I do not have the authority to overturn an 
election. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, nor am I suggesting 
that you have that power, nor should you have the power. The 
question was whether or not you had applications or 
suggestions that it take place. 
 
On the issue of the inquiry that was suggested, did you have 
lobbying for an inquiry into that election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It’s my understanding that there is some 
question as to whether or not both sides in this particular 
dispute in fact attempted to use the same means to win the 
election. The losing party did want to have some kind of an 
investigation or an inquiry. The decision was made, however, to 
go the route of The Controverted Elections Act. That was 
deemed to be a better route to go. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Who was it, what office in your 
department . . . would the decision to go with the inquiry or not 
to go with an inquiry have been made by yourself or by the 
deputy minister? Can you indicate where that decision was 
made at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The decision to not proceed with any kind 
of an investigation or inquiry was made at the ministerial level. 
And then of course the parties to the dispute have the option, 
which they chose, to go the route of The Controverted Elections 
Act. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think I understand the minister saying 
that it was done at the ministerial level, and I think that’s 
obviously where it should be done. Do you know at this time 
whether an option to appeal that decision is present for the 
parties involved? Can you tell me that, and if in fact you know 
whether an appeal has been started by either of the parties 
involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I understand they could appeal if they 
chose to do so, but we’re not aware that they have done that. 
 
(1615) 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would just close 
off here by saying that I’m disappointed with the minister and 
his answers on this issue, given the fact that last May these 
people from Ferland were in to see your government and the 
minister at that time. And I don’t blame you, sir, for your lack 
of doing something at that time because you weren’t minister. 
 
But I do say to your government and to the previous minister 
and to you since your appointment to the position, that I’m very 
disappointed that there hasn’t been a solution to this problem. 
Because I think there can be and will be after the next election 
— obviously there will be. And what you’re doing is simply 
playing politics and postponing the issue until after the next 
provincial election. That’s what you’re doing. Obviously that’s 
what you’re doing or we would have an amendment to this Bill, 
which you have said is coming, now, here before the Assembly. 
 
And what you are doing is simply not fair to the people of 
Ferland. It is not an appropriate action of a government or a 
minister to say to them, look, you will see the legislation when I 
get ready to show you. That’s what you’ve said here today. And 
while I’m not happy with it, as a member of a not very large 
opposition, we have to accept the decisions made by a large 
majority government. That’s the way it is and we accept that. 
 
But I say to you that it’s unfortunate that a government in its 
fifth year of what is traditionally a four-year term . . . And that 
may sound like a contradiction of terms but that’s what we see 
in Saskatchewan at the present time: a government in the fifth 
year of a four-year term clinging to power and telling yet 
another group in this province to never mind, we’ll get around 
to the legislation when we feel like it, that has virtually ripped 
that community apart — virtually ripped the community apart. 
 
And I find it unfortunate, sir, that you would come into this 
Assembly in a jocular manner and deal with this issue in a 
non-serious way, because we’re not dealing with it in a serious 
way because you’re saying that you will deal with it when you 
bloody well get time. That’s what you’ve told us today . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, that’s what he said. 
 
And I find it unfortunate. There’s nothing we can do about it 
because a government with your majority can ram down the 
throats of the people of the province whatever you want. And I 
know this is just a small community. And the farmers, when 
they met in Swift Current, that wasn’t a very large crowd either 
and you didn’t have to meet with them. And I know you don’t 
have to go to every small town to meet with the nurses. But I 
say that a government that is running from the people of the 
province is a government that should be turfed out at the first 
opportunity, and I say, Mr. Chairman, likely will be. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I think my colleague from 
Shaunavon has made the point very well. It is really 
unacceptable that a problem brought to the attention of a 
government a year ago by the community, by people in the 
community, again brought to the attention of the government in 
this House by an elected member, goes  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1012 
 

ignored by this government for a whole year. They call a 
session of the legislature last fall which could have dealt with 
some legislation or some amendment. We are now sitting in day 
32 of this session — the 32nd day of this legislature. There still 
isn’t an amendment. There’s no amendment, and that seems to 
be the scenario of what we are seeing happening in this 
pre-election legislature. 
 
The members of the opposition, as few as we are, are putting a 
lot of work into preparing for these estimates. We come to the 
House, ask the questions, and the ministers can’t provide the 
answers because they’ve been too preoccupied thinking about 
an election and have given absolutely no consideration for the 
legislative agenda of this legislature. And here comes the 
question of mismanagement. There is no management of the 
legislative agenda by this government in this session. 
 
This is a very serious problem that should have had an 
amendment. It’s not good enough for the minister to say in this 
case, it will come in due course, because you’ve had 32 days of 
session, you’ve had 12 months of a year to deal with it. The 
same thing we see with the pension Bill, and I suspect that will 
be out of order, so I won’t pursue it, Mr. Chairman. But there 
are numerous occasions where announcements have been made 
with no legislation brought forward to show what the true intent 
of the government is. 
 
One of the excuses you have used, Mr. Minister, about not 
having this amendment, is that you’re concerned about some 
constitutional problems. Well, that one’s hard to figure because 
if we have provincial laws regulating elections that establish 
how elections can be held, and there is no constitutional 
problem how, Mr. Minister — and I would like you to answer 
this question — how, in your view or the view of your officials, 
can the establishment of municipal law present a constitutional 
problem when the constitution itself gives the power to the 
province to legislate municipal government and establish 
municipal government in the province? That’s where the power 
lies — at the province — as written in the constitution. So 
would you explain to the House, Mr. Minister, why you’re 
concerned about the possible constitutional implications of any 
amendment you might make? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, as a government that believes in 
fairness, we want to make sure that no elector in any way would 
be discriminated through any option which would be brought 
forward in legislation. We want the fair decision, the fair 
solution that will stand the test of time, as I indicated. And for 
that reason, it’s quite natural that whatever solution our 
particular department officials would propose and that I would 
review, that those kinds of options would naturally be presented 
to the Justice department and legislative review officials, as all 
legislation is presented, to ensure that it is indeed appropriate 
and that we are treating the citizens of the province fairly and 
justly. 
 
I believe that certainly it is my intention and my motivation to 
ensure that we do have the best possible legislative solution 
which will stand the test of time. The members opposite can 
make accusations about arrogance or politics or whatever. I’m 
not about to get  

into that particular kind of a debate. I think my responsibility as 
Minister of Urban Affairs is to ensure that we have the best 
possible legislation. I understand that the next municipal 
elections are held in 1988, and we do want to have the best 
possible legislative solution that will stand the test of time to 
ensure that this one particular isolated but unfortunate incident 
would not be repeated again in the province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We too would like to see the best 
possible legislation, Mr. Minister. Let me give you every 
assurance of that. We too would not like to see any elector 
discriminated against. We, too, believe it should withstand the 
test of time. 
 
But we don’t agree that it should have taken you a year of 
neglect — and not you personally because you have not been 
the minister for a year — it should not have taken a year of 
neglect, resulting in nothing being brought forward to this 
legislature up to this time, which then leads to the danger of this 
House being dissolved because of the call of an election and 
therefore no legislation in place to solve what may become 
another problem somewhere else. 
 
That’s the point, Mr. Minister. You did not answer the question. 
And the only reason I asked it is because you used it as an 
argument to defend the position of yourself. You did not answer 
the question on how could municipal legislation passed by a 
province which is authorized to establish municipalities 
possibly be in conflict with the constitution which you 
acclaimed was one of your leading problems in not having an 
amendment before us today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well as I indicated, we are wanting to 
ensure that whatever legislative solution, whatever amendment 
is brought forward, does not discriminate against any particular 
person or voter. And I think that’s fairly straightforward and 
obvious. The Justice officials will naturally want to review that, 
to ensure that, because this is a provincial piece of legislation, 
and they will want to ensure that it is an appropriate piece of 
legislation that is not discriminatory. 
 
The member opposite talks about an election that may happen. 
He seems to imply that it would be a municipal election that 
would happen perhaps later this summer or this fall and that 
somehow this particular amendment, if it were not passed, 
would in fact create a problem. In fact, the next municipal 
elections, the next round of elections, is of course something 
which is slated for 1988. 
 
Now that doesn’t mean that you might not have some aberration 
somewhere at some point in time, where for some reason you 
may have to have some kind of a municipal election prior to 
that. But you leave the impression that somehow the entire 
province would be held ransom by this particular problem, and 
that is not the case. So I think it’s important to clear that issue 
up. Having said that, we are moving as expeditiously as is 
possible to find the best possible solution that will stand the test 
of time. I think that’s what the people of this province would 
expect any government to do, and that is what we are doing. 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1013 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — As was once said to me, Mr. Minister, by 
another colleague of mine when he was referring to some other 
situation, if there was any sign of motion it would appear like a 
burst of speed. And I think that clearly applies in this case as to 
how quickly you have moved on this problem. You know very 
well that I did not indicate that there could be a potential 
problem around the province, but I did indicate, and I’m sure 
you would agree, that in some municipality there may indeed 
have to be a by-election like there is at a provincial level. Then 
you are faced with a problem. 
 
Now I guess our little discussion here has proven again — and I 
hope that maybe you and others on your treasury benches will 
take to heart and learn — don’t use arguments in defence of 
your negligence, which are false. And the argument you used 
about the constitutionality was a non-argument. You threw it 
out because you tried to get the thing side-tracked so that it 
wouldn’t get to the heart of the issue. That didn’t work. 
 
Unfortunately . . . It’s unfortunate that a minister of the Crown 
would take that tactic, but obviously that’s beside the point. 
That’s not the most important issue, the fact that you used that 
argument. The important issue is that no action has been taken 
even though the problem has confronted you for a year. Your 
government was aware of it. Nothing has happened. Can I ask 
you one final question, Mr. Minister? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sure. Go right ahead. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. The member from 
Moosomin says he will allow me to ask a question. Mr. 
Minister, have you presented to SUMA — because if you’re 
going to present legislation to this House in this session, I’m 
sure SUMA will want to consider the options that you are going 
to be picking your final one from — have you presented to 
SUMA your options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We have had preliminary discussions with 
SUMA officials. We want to, of course, have the full input from 
the Justice officials here in the provincial government 
concerning the most appropriate legislative solution, and at that 
time we will of course be communicating back with SUMA. 
 
I would simply add that it is unfortunate that the member has 
made some of the comments that he has made today. Because 
what he has really done by saying that somehow there’s been 
tardiness or there’s been inaction, he has in fact called into 
question the professionalism and the integrity of the people who 
work in the Urban Affairs department who know full well that 
the issue is being addressed, that it has been addressed 
expeditiously, that an appropriate solution is being sought and 
will be forthcoming as quickly as possible. 
 
(1630) 
 
I think it’s unfortunate that the member has impugned the 
professional people who work for the citizens of this province 
in the fashion that he has today. I regret to say that, because 
certainly after I became minister of Social Services, or pardon 
me, of Urban Affairs, this was an issue that was brought 
immediately to my attention, and it was  

something that we have engaged in very quickly, and naturally 
a solution will be brought forward as soon as it can. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well it’s interesting that you have now 
indicated that when you became minister five months ago this 
was brought to the minister’s attention, Mr. Chairman. He’s 
indicated that. I think . . . I have no doubt that the officials of 
the department have been cognizant of this, because I know that 
they’re aware of what’s been happening in the Ferland case. So 
I have no doubt about that. 
 
I submit to you, Mr. Minister, the problem is not one of the 
officials in the department. The problem is one of lack of 
government decision at the political level, at the cabinet level. 
That’s where the initiative has to come for this. The officials 
don’t decide when you bring legislation to the Chamber, Mr. 
Minister; you do. You and your Premier and your cabinet 
around the cabinet table make that decision. I have no doubt 
that this has been discussed in the department. 
 
You say, Mr. Minister, that preliminary discussions have been 
carried out with officials of SUMA. Am I to hear you say 
therefore that the discussions have not considered various 
options with SUMA? Have your officials and the SUMA 
officials talked about the possible options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’m informed that there were preliminary, 
very general discussions with the senior SUMA official. 
Because of the detailed legal complexities in this kind of 
question, SUMA understandably at that particular preliminary 
point was not able to offer what they felt would be a legal 
solution. And clearly we need to find a legal solution to this 
particular issue because it is an issue that affects all other 
municipalities. That’s why it is important that we find that 
particular best solution which will stand the test of time. 
 
And for the member opposite to suggest that somehow you rush 
into this kind of an issue and immediately bring forward 
legislation to solve the problem, and within a two- or 
three-month period of time, I think is inappropriate. And I know 
that he hasn’t suggested that verbally, but the implication has 
been very clear that having been minister for four or five 
months that you now should have solved the problem. 
 
Well, in fact, things don’t work that way when you’re dealing 
with a complex legal issue where you want to have the kind of 
consultation with SUMA; you want to have the kind of 
consultation with the legal officials that you need to have; you 
want to have further consultation with SUMA officials again; 
that takes, of course, a reasonable amount of time. And that is 
why, of course, we are continuing on with our discussions with 
the Justice officials and the individuals in my department, and 
we will be bringing forward as expeditiously as is possible, as I 
indicated before, a reasonable solution that will stand the test of 
time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I guess, Mr. Minister, I would not 
consider one year rushing. One year dealing with a problem that 
was brought to the government’s attention a year ago is not in 
my definition of what would be rushing  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1014 
 

on the part of the government. As a matter of fact, even five 
months, in my opinion, would not be an example of rushing on 
the part of the minister. Mr. Minister, I think that’s clear. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s move on to something else. I simply want to 
ask you: can you give a commitment to this House that you will 
have amendments to this part of this Bill, this legislation, in this 
session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I would correct the member opposite, 
it’s been only five months since the election actually took place. 
There may have been discussions about this particular kind of a 
problem occurring or not occurring in the past, but the election 
itself took place about five months ago. The court decision was 
rendered not that long ago. And so the course of action that we 
have taken to, within these past few months, investigate various 
kinds of legal solutions — and we will be engaging in the 
appropriate discussions with the necessary individuals and will 
be bringing forth to the Assembly the necessary amendments, in 
due course, as expeditiously as is possible. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg brought it to your attention one year 
ago in this House through the former minister. Am I led to 
believe, therefore, that when you say as soon as possible, that 
you will have an amendment to that legislation in this session of 
the legislature? That was my question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, all things are possible. 
Whether or not all things are likely is another question. I simply 
indicated that we will find the best possible legal solution that 
we can that will stand the test of time. Once we have found that 
and done the appropriate consultations, then we will bring 
forward, in due course, as expeditiously as possible, to this 
Assembly, that particular legal solution. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay, Mr. Minister. I will leave it at that. 
I can’t get from you a commitment that legislation will be 
brought forward in this session of the legislature; that’s clear. 
 
We will move on to the next item that I wanted to ask some 
questions about. Mr. Minister, there has been a considerable 
amount of concern that has been expressed from various 
sources, but predominantly by the city of Regina, dealing with 
the question of grants in lieu of taxes. Mr. Minister, I know that 
representations have been made to your department, possibly to 
the former minister, and I believe to yourself. Can you inform 
the House what your government’s position is on the issue of 
grants in lieu of taxes as has been presented to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Our policy today is the same as your 
administration’s policy when you were in government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m not sure I want to be 
complimented for having your policy to be the same as ours, 
but that wasn’t my question. You’ve been the government for 
four years; you’re now the government into your fifth year. It’s 
an irrelevancy to discuss what may have been policy four years 
ago. You’re responsible for  

answering for your policy. And I just ask you a simple question 
because I think you have an obligation to state to the people 
who have been raising it with you: what is the government’s 
position on grants in lieu of taxes? Will you please explain that 
to the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well as I indicated, our policy on grants in 
lieu of taxes is identical to the policy that you had in place when 
your particular NDP administration was in power, concerning 
grants in lieu of taxes. So there has been no change in policy 
over the years on the issue of grants in lieu of taxes. The 
member opposite knows what that particular policy is. He could 
have stated it quite readily when he rose to his feet and asked 
me if there had been any change in that particular policy. He 
chose not to do that. I will read the policy. 
 
The province currently pays grants in lieu of taxes on property 
owned by Crown corporations, but not on property directly 
owned by the government. That policy is as I indicated, and for 
the benefit of the public watching, that policy is identical to the 
policy of the former NDP administration. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Does the government pay grants in lieu 
of taxes for all the Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe SPC pays a surcharge based on 
sales, but generally all other Crown corporations pay grants in 
lieu of taxes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Generally all, or all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I understand it, most Crowns pay grants 
in lieu of taxes. There are, I believe, two exceptions — I’m not 
aware of any more; there may be — SaskPower Corporation, 
which provides revenue based on a percentage of SPC revenue, 
and Sedco, which may negotiate special arrangements with 
regard to undeveloped lands, but I’m not sure what kind of 
arrangements they have. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — For the sake of time, Mr. Minister, can 
you undertake . . . Can you have your officials or yourself at 
some time within the next week or so provide me with an 
answer about those who pay and those who may not pay? Is that 
a fair question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I don’t have a definitive answer. It may 
take some time to get that. I won’t be able to get it within the 
next minute or two. I don’t even know if that would be readily 
available today, but we’ll try and get that for you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s fair enough. I know you can’t get 
it today probably. But as long as you can tell me that you will 
get it for me and send it to me, I’d be quite satisfied. Is that 
okay with you? Thank you; it’s okay with the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have information on what some provinces do. 
Can maybe your officials inform you, and you can inform me, 
whether other provinces, whether all the other provinces 
provide grants in lieu of taxes to the municipalities in which 
they have government buildings? Do you have that easily 
accessible? 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1015 
 

(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — One other province does not. So two 
provinces, one other province plus Saskatchewan. All other 
provinces, to some degree, pay grants in lieu of taxes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. The two that I have, that I’m 
aware of, is Quebec, and I use the example of Quebec City, 
which has roughly the same population as Saskatchewan at . . . 
or the same population as Regina and Saskatoon at about 
166,000. and in 1985, the city of Quebec City received from, I 
guess, the province of Quebec, $23.9 million grant in lieu of 
taxes. 
 
Another one is the city of Victoria in British Columbia, with a 
population of 64,000. And it received, in 1985, $2 million grant 
in lieu of taxes. So I simply mention those to underline with 
you, Mr. Minister, the importance with which the municipalities 
consider this issue. 
 
I know now, because you have said it, that your government has 
no intention of changing the policy. I hope you will at least take 
under serious consideration representations that have been made 
to you. And I know that the city of Regina intends to, if it has 
not already, make a presentation to the government, because 
their legislative committee has considered this issue. There has 
been a lot of debate on it. 
 
The city has to provide the infrastructure and other kinds of 
services at great cost, to these facilities. And whether it was 
done 20 years ago, I think, is not totally relevant. We are now 
living in 1986, and like many other programs and policies of 
government, it sometimes . . . They always need to be 
reconsidered from time to time. 
 
So I hope at least, Mr. Minister, that your government will take 
seriously the representations that might be made by the cities of 
Saskatchewan with regard to this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I would just indicate for the interest of the 
member opposite. He will be interested in hearing this. You 
quoted Quebec City as an example of receiving 23 million-plus 
dollars in 1985. The fact is, however, that Quebec City does not 
receive any revenue sharing from the senior government. 
 
So when you consider the fact that Regina receives revenue 
sharing from the provincial government, and in addition 
receives an additional 1.8 million on top of the 23.5 million, in 
fact Regina, with a similar population, receives more money 
from this provincial government — this was in 1985 — than 
Quebec City did. So it is important that we provide all of the 
information when we deal with these particular matters. 
 
As I indicated at different times, we do not intend to change the 
particular policy concerning grants in lieu of taxes. I have 
received representation by way of letter from the city of Regina 
requesting, of course, a change. I would indicate for the 
member opposite that the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, which represents all municipalities, has not 
expressed support for this particular suggestion. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I agree with you, Mr. Minister. It’s 
important to provide all the information and that’s why, when 
you made your remarks, you should have mentioned that the 
city of Quebec, like other cities in Quebec, get other funding 
from the government. They may not call it revenue sharing like 
we have it here in Saskatchewan, but you know very well that 
urban municipalities in that province, as other provinces, get 
provincial funding under transportation programs and capital 
programs and so on. 
 
So let’s not play those kind of misleading games. That funding 
. . . Those cities like the city of Quebec have received on top of 
the grant in lieu of taxes of 23.9 million. I don’t know why you 
persist in trying to play those kind of games in your estimates, 
Mr. Minister. All it’s doing is delaying your estimates because I 
think it’s an obligation on our part to correct your erroneous 
statements, and we’ll continue to do that as long as you make 
them. 
 
Why don’t you follow the advice of your officials, answer as 
they give you the answers? And then we’ll get along quite well 
here and get to the next item on the estimates. 
 
I’m just about concluded on this. I think one of my colleagues 
has a few questions on this particular issue and I will let him 
ask the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The member, of course, referred to things 
such as capital grants and transit grants, suggesting that 
somehow Quebec City received those and Regina does not. And 
he made reference to erroneous remarks. I think the record 
needs to be corrected and the public watching need to be 
informed that what he suggested was in fact erroneous. By 
implication that’s in fact what he was suggesting. Regina does 
receive transit grants, and they do receive capital grants, and 
they do receive revenue sharing, and in addition, they do 
receive some grants in lieu from Crown corporations. So 
certainly the city of Regina is in a very well-off financial 
position, comparatively speaking, to Quebec City, when it 
comes to revenue proceeding out of provincial coffers. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the mayor of Regina and I 
seem to be making a common cause on so many issues. This is 
another. I report to you an article in January 31, 1986 in which 
. . . I direct quote from the Leader-Post of that date. I’m sorry, 
it’s February 1, 1986, the next day. 
 

Mayor Larry Schneider hasn’t given up on plans to get $6 
million in grants in place of property taxes on provincial 
government buildings in Regina. 

 
Mr. Minister, your colleague, your Minister of Finance, went 
out of his way to criticize Regina city council in his budget — 
some quite gratuitous comments which contributed nothing to 
the speech and which appeared to be nothing other than a 
mean-spirited swipe at Regina city council. The means by 
which he chose to take that swipe was by saying to the 
Assembly that evening that Regina city council collected 
something like a third of the property taxes in the province. 
 
A couple of days ago he repeated his comment, made a 
comment along the same vein by suggesting that Regina’s  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1016 
 

taxes were unduly high. Well I think, Mr. Minister, one of the 
reasons why Regina taxes are higher is because in this city, 
unlike other capitals, the provincial government buildings 
largely sit tax free, and that makes an awful difference. If you 
compare this city to Saskatoon — cities of approximately the 
same size — the office buildings, the places of employment of 
people of the city of Saskatoon, all pay property taxes. In this 
city they don’t, and that makes an awful difference in terms of 
this city’s tax base. 
 
One of the reasons why the taxes of this city are so high is 
because this city, unlike I gather virtually every other 
community in the country, receives no grants in lieu of taxes. I 
suggest, Mr. Minister, if your Minister of Finance believes that 
this city has been beset by inefficient and wasteful councils, he 
might try putting them on the same footing as other 
communities before he makes those disparaging comments. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you don’t think that this is a 
significant contributing factor to the high taxes about which 
your Minister of Finance has been so bitterly critical. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well perhaps the member could clarify: 
are you in favour of the provincial government paying grants in 
lieu of taxes on all the property that it owns to the city of 
Regina? Perhaps that would clarify for me, so I could better 
understand where the debate’s going to go. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The city council has spent some time on 
this, Mr. Minister. I cannot believe that you are unaware of their 
question. I am not going to allow this debate to be led into a 
highly detailed area. I’ll be quite candid and tell you that I don’t 
have all the information you have; nor do I have all the 
information the city of Regina has. 
 
I want to know whether or not a request which appears perfectly 
legitimate on the face of it from the Regina city council and 
from the mayor of Regina is going to be honoured by this 
government, or are you going to go on making mean-spirited 
swipes at the city council for reasons that are in part beyond 
their control? I suggest this is one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well here you are asking a question of a 
minister of the Crown concerning a particular policy, saying 
that you don’t have all of the information. I suggest that as a 
responsible member of the opposition you should be taking the 
time to find out the detailed information from the city of Regina 
to decide whether or not you think it is in the best interest of the 
taxpayers of the province for the provincial government to pay 
grants in lieu of taxes. And then you should take a position and 
say, I believe that you should or you should not, and I am 
advocating this particular position. 
 
Now I want to know whether or not you are in favour of the 
provincial government providing grants in lieu of taxes to the 
city of Regina. If you don’t want to state your position, that’s 
fine. All right? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I will. Sit down. Okay, sit down. Yes. 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, just sit down and wait till . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. The minister’s still 
speaking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’m interested in knowing because, if I 
remember correctly, you represented a seat here in Regina for 
many years under the former NDP administration, and indeed 
you were a minister of the cabinet during the former NDP 
administration, and you likely could have had some influence in 
determining whether or not your NDP administration would 
have provided grants in lieu of taxes to the city of Regina. Now 
your administration never did that. Now I’m interested in 
knowing now whether you have changed your mind, and 
whether or not you believe that the provincial government 
should now provide grants in lieu of taxes to the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Answer: yes. I do now and always did, 
notwithstanding any action that may or may not have been 
taken by the former administration. Now, Mr. Minister, will you 
answer the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — So you have taken the position that the 
provincial government should now provide grants in lieu of 
taxes to the city of Regina, even though the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association — which represents literally 
hundreds of individuals, indeed thousands of people around the 
province — is not supportive of that particular idea. They do 
not support the idea that the provincial government should 
provide grants in lieu of taxes to the city of Regina. 
 
Indeed, I believe the city of Saskatoon is not supportive of that 
particular suggestion. Indeed the city of Moose Jaw is on record 
as stating that it would be pleased to see the relocation of 
provincial capital and government departments and buildings 
from Regina, and they would not wish to tax those buildings if 
only they could have that particular kind of activity and 
economic development that would ensue from that in the city of 
Moose Jaw. And of course the city of Melville is most 
interested in seeing some particular government departments 
there. 
 
If this particular policy were to be put in place it would result in 
the city, in essence, imposing taxes on hospitals, which would 
increase health care costs. It would result in a tax bill to the 
University of Regina, in essence, increasing the tuition fee costs 
in the order of about 35 per cent to students here in the city. 
 
So I think that clearly the people of this province, in large 
measure, and the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, and many other municipalities, do not believe that 
it would be in the best interests of the taxpayers of this province 
for the provincial government to pay grants in lieu of taxes to 
the city of Regina. 
 
Now that was the position, I suspect, that your former NDP 
administration took. It happens to be one of the few positions 
that this particular government agrees with your former 
administration on. We do not accept the position that we should 
be paying grants in lieu of taxes, and that’s the way the issue 
will stay. 
 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

 

1017 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you stated that the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association had taken a 
position opposing grants in lieu of taxes. I’d appreciate 
knowing the minister’s authority for that statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Regina brought forward a resolution, I 
believe it was at the most recent SUMA convention, and the 
resolution was not carried at the convention. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well there may be . . . Assuming that 
information to be correct, there may be a number of other 
explanations for the resolution not having been passed, besides 
them being opposed. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wish you’d deal with the merits of the issue and 
not take refuge in the petty jealousy of other cities. And I 
suspect that’s what the comments of the people from Moose 
Jaw and the officials from Melville and the officials from 
Prince Albert are. Those are petty jealousies of other 
communities; scarcely represent what I regard as an adequate 
response to a legitimate request, a request which other capitals 
have met. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, there may not be time now, but I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, over the lunch-hour to give the matter some 
consideration and give the question a reasonable response. To 
suggest that Prince Albert and Moose Jaw and Melville would 
all like to have the Legislative Building moved to their 
communities is scarcely an adequate response to this request. 
So I suggest, Mr. Chairman, since the minister appears not to 
have adequately thought out the issue that we call it 5 o’clock, 
give him a chance to do so over lunch, and I will await a more 
learned response at 7 o’clock. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, just prior to the House 
rising for supper, I would reiterate again, for the member’s 
edification, that the Regina proposal concerning grants in lieu 
of taxes was rather resoundly defeated by the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association convention delegates at their 
1986 convention in Regina. Obviously, it’s got nothing to do 
with petty jealousies. The other people in the province — other 
municipalities — recognize the unfairness of the position that 
the Regina council was advancing. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


