


















































April 24, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 24, 1986 
 

831 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the 
pleasure today of introducing a gentleman from other lands. We 
have in the Speaker’s gallery Mr. Adolph Cameron, 
accompanied by Terry McKague from STF, who needs no 
introduction to the members of this House. 
 
Mr. Cameron is on tour at the invitation of the Canadian 
Teachers’ Federation, and three provinces have taken the 
opportunity of hosting him — Nova Scotia, Alberta, and we are 
pleased to see that our own teachers in Saskatchewan. I will be 
meeting with him shortly after to discuss educational matters, 
and I would hope that the members would welcome him to this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rybchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, two 
students and their teacher, Donna Hanson from Cochrane High 
School, that is situated in the constituency of Regina Victoria. 
They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. I’d like to inform them 
that I’ll be meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures and 
refreshments, and I hope your stay here is both interesting and 
educational. And I ask all members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Cuts in Staff and Budget of Ombudsman 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Premier. In light of the fact that the provincial Ombudsman 
entered 1986 with a backlog of 800 investigated complaints, 
and in light of the fact that many people have to wait up to two 
years to have their complaints against this government carefully 
investigated by the Ombudsman, can you explain, sir, why you 
decided to cut the staff and the budget of the Ombudsman in 
this year’s provincial budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have had salary 
increases as low as zero. We have had departments held to zero. 
We have had some increases at 2 per cent and 3 per cent, as a 
matter to make sure that we can be as responsible as possible 
with respect to the public funds. And obviously we had targeted 
some areas that we thought some increases were necessary — 
health, education, agriculture, and jobs. 
 
And those, Mr. Speaker, are very important to the 
Saskatchewan public, and we will obviously be prepared to 
defend those decisions in terms of what is important. But I 
believe that the large increases in expenditures in health and 
education and jobs and agriculture is important, and other areas 
we’ve held to zero, and some, in fact, we have cut back. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. In view 
of the fact that there is this very large and growing backlog and 
in view of the fact that the time for getting complaints 
investigated has lengthened and lengthened, and in view of the 
fact that your budget actually cut the staff for the Ombudsman, 
can you advise this Assembly whether the decision to cut the 
staff of the Ombudsman had anything to do with the 
Ombudsman’s strong criticisms of your government’s policies, 
particularly in the area of social services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the allocation of our budget 
to various kinds of sectors that we think are important have 
nothing to do with the Ombudsman and his inquiries — 
absolutely nothing. And his own staff have nothing to do with it 
either. We make those decisions on what we believe 
Saskatchewan people think are important. 
 
In my view, they’re telling me, at least, that health and 
education and agriculture and job creation are the number one 
issues and that we should be spending money on those. And we 
have, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. In view 
of the fact, Mr. Premier, that you well know that the Minister of 
Social Services has been in a violent dispute with the 
Ombudsman during most of 1985 with respect to the policies 
and performance of his department, do you deny, Mr. Premier, 
that the Minister of Social Services urged you to cut the money 
that went to the Ombudsman in order that his ability to oversee 
that department would be reduced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m a little surprised 
at the Leader of the Opposition to suggest that that might be the 
case. We, and I’m sure as his cabinet operated, we sit in our 
planning exercises with respect to the budget in cabinet, and we 
go through what we think the people of Saskatchewan feel are 
important, and we allocate it to those areas that obviously we 
think are of the most concern to the public. 
 
So we have allocated them to health and education, jobs and 
agriculture. And I would venture to say in most places in the 
province that’s precisely where they should be allocated, and in 
some we had freezes and in some we had less money to spend. 
And we make that decision because we want to focus and target 
our money in the areas that are most important. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. A 
supplementary to the Premier. Mr. Premier, you have already 
confirmed in this House that your government is spending more 
than ever before in Saskatchewan history on government 
advertising, something like $11.5 million two years ago, and no 
one knows what it is going to be this year because your 
government refused to tell us, but we know it will be a lot more. 
 
In light of the serious backlog which has been referred to — 
backlog of investigations at the Ombudsman’s office, could you 
not, or could your Minister of Finance not  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

832 
 

figure out how you could cut even $100,000 out of that 
multi-million dollar government advertising budget this year so 
that ordinary people could have their complaints against your 
government adequately investigated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would just share with the 
hon. member that when you are talking with constituents, and in 
conversation with people across Saskatchewan, they can raise 
legitimate concerns that we need money in health care and 
education and agriculture and job creation, and they said that’s 
where we should be putting our funds. And they’ve said that. 
They wanted to see expansions in hospitals and nursing homes. 
They want to see more money directed in agriculture. And they 
do want to have good informational programs that shows them 
how to access those various kinds of programs that we have. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the most important thing 
on the agenda for the opposition as far as they’re concerned, for 
the entire public, is this issue that they raise today versus 
agriculture, economic development, jobs, health, education, 
new technical schools, new universities, new agricultural 
colleges, various kinds of programs for farmers, new job 
creations, paper mills, upgraders, fertilizer plants — all the 
kinds of exciting things that you can build or, for example, 
super . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Final supplementary to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Premier, the public is concerned about your 
government not providing adequate funding to agencies that 
protect the ordinary citizen. Even editorials are saying, “Only a 
short-sighted, narrow-minded and vindictive government would 
fail to take seriously the recommendations to reform that 
Tickell repeatedly has sought.” This is what the editorial in the 
Regina Leader-Post says about your actions. Do you not agree 
that only a government which is indeed vindictive and 
narrow-minded and short-sighted would not look after agencies 
which are established to protect the public against wrongdoing 
or errors of any government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we take seriously all the 
recommendations. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that 
we put them in the right priority. And we have, Mr. Speaker. 
We have looked at and we have spent a great deal of money on 
health and education and agriculture; much more than the 
previous administration. And we have had many editorials that 
said yes, our priorities are accurate, and there have been many 
editorials that say that the opposition was wrong, because they 
didn’t listen and they didn’t respond to people when interest 
rates were 22 per cent or anything else. 
 
So if you want to compare editorials we can compare editorials. 
I say that we have looked at what’s important. The 
Saskatchewan people are saying health, education, agriculture 
and jobs are the four things that we should be building on. They 
say that all across the province. You may be on a different 
agenda but I believe that the people of Saskatchewan say those 
four things are the number one issues. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the  

Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan people 
are also saying that they believe that a government should be 
fair with them. And they do not see that happening when we see 
these kinds of cuts taking place. I ask you, Mr. Minister, do you 
deny suggesting to either the Minister of Finance or to your 
cabinet colleagues during budget reviews this year that the 
Ombudsman’s office have its budget and staff cut because his 
reports were critical of your performance and policies as the 
Minister of Social Services? Do you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, about the only thing I can say 
to that kind of a comment is that desperate men say desperate 
things. And that’s a prime example, a prime example. To 
suggest that I would bring forward to my colleagues the 
recommendation that a certain budget or a certain department, 
for which I have no responsibility, should be cut — that is 
simply a desperate recommendation from a desperate 
opposition party. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I believe it’s very important 
for government to be absolutely fair, fair to everybody in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Certainly I, as Minister of Social 
Services, am concerned that any recommendations which is 
brought forward by the Ombudsman be fairly considered. 
 
And there are many recommendations that the Ombudsman 
brings forward that we respond to, and respond to positively. 
And I want to simply read one to you as an example, so the 
members opposite know what they are suggesting is not, in fact, 
accurate, Mr. Speaker. The Ombudsman says: 
 

This is to advise that I have completed my investigation 
into the above-noted complaint and have closed my file. I 
am pleased that the department reconsidered their decision 
to increase the recovery rate after this issue had been 
discussed by the appeal board. I have closed my file. I 
thank you for your co-operation during my investigation. 

 
This department co-operates on things that we believe are 
reasonable to co-operate on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. For the 
benefit of the member opposite, the Minister of Social Services, 
it’s not the opposition that’s desperately avoiding an election; 
it’s the government members opposite. 
 
Mr. Minister, you were yesterday sent a letter, yesterday 
afternoon, with a copy of a motion which we will be putting 
before the Assembly later today. So you’re familiar with it. 
That motion would allow the Ombudsman to appear before this 
Assembly as a witness to answer questions and to present facts 
from his investigations in your department. 
 
You have said that you were not afraid of a public review of 
your performance. Here is a chance to say to the public that you 
indeed are not desperately hiding something that you should not 
be hiding. Will you support that motion  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

833 
 

and allow the Ombudsman to appear before this Assembly? 
Will you support that motion, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of 
supporting a motion that I do not think is a realistic, worthy 
motion that is in the best interests of the public of 
Saskatchewan. That is why I was elected, Mr. Speaker, to do 
what is in the best interests of the public of Saskatchewan. And 
I have no intention of seeing the taxpayers’ dollars spent 
imprudently or unnecessarily. 
 
And I am of the opinion, Mr. Speaker, based on what I know of 
welfare reform, of how it was long overdue in this province, of 
the kinds of positive things that are being done for welfare 
clients as a result of the education and the training and the job 
preparation experiences that are now offered to them, I have 
absolutely no result of saying that somehow now we need to 
reverse our course. Because the course that we have taken is the 
proper one; the people of Saskatchewan know it. 
 

Oil and Gasoline Prices 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs, and it has to do with her 
government’s inability to force large oil companies to pass on 
the reduction in world oil prices to consumers such as farmers 
and working people. 
 
Following your meetings last week with oil companies, you 
were quoted as being confident that Saskatchewan consumers 
are not being charged too much by the multinational oil 
companies. I wonder if the minister can explain how she square 
that with a statement made yesterday by the president of Shell 
Canada, Jack MacLeod, that his oil company is charging 
consumers at least 4 cents a litre or about 18 cents a gallon 
more than necessary for gasoline, because Shell Canada 
shareholders want a better return on their investment. 
 
How do you square that with the consumers in the province and 
with your previous statement that you’re satisfied with the 
multinationals passing on the cut in the world oil price? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t comment on 
what Shell may or may have said yesterday. I can indicate to the 
member that I did meet with all refiners and told them quite 
frankly that we were not happy with the prices in 
Saskatchewan. And as we can see today compared to two weeks 
ago, the prices have gone down. Mr. Speaker, we’re not in the 
business of regulating prices in Saskatchewan like the members 
opposite would. As far as I know, there’s only one province in 
the country that does it, and that’s Nova Scotia. And I believe 
gas there is selling in the neighbourhood of 60 cents a litre. 
 
We’re not pleased. We want to see those prices come down as 
quickly as possible. And as the Premier has indicated before, 
the prices are coming down. In Estevan three days ago, farm 
diesel was 32 cents a litre; in Preeceville it was 34.7 cents a 
litre. That doesn’t include the generous rebate that this 
government is providing to farmers to reduce their input costs. 
And, Mr. Speaker, if it is warranted again, if these prices should 
happen to rise, I  

will call them in again and tell them bluntly that we’re not 
happy with what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the minister says that she explained 
to the oil companies that she was not happy with their 
performance. I wonder if you’re then saying that the quote in 
the Leader-Post, and I want to quote it to you: 
 

Duncan recently met with officials from Regina Consumer 
Co-operative Refineries, Calgary-based Turbo, Shell, Petro 
Canada, and Esso, and is confident Saskatchewan 
consumers aren’t being charged too much. 

 
I wonder if you can explain to the Assembly whether the story 
you told the oil companies, or the one you told to the public and 
to the press — which one of those stories is accurate. Do you 
think the oil companies are passing on the cut in world oil 
prices? Or do you think they’re ripping off the consumers as is 
being stated by many people in my constituency, for example, 
where they’re seeing oil prices or gas prices at the pumps 
almost double what they are south of the border for fuel that’s 
being exported down there? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can only assure the 
gentleman opposite that if he thinks that Co-op Refineries are 
gouging the consumers of Saskatchewan and the consumers 
within their network, I don’t think that’s true. 
 
A refiner like the Co-op Refineries does not publicly announce 
that they’re going to chew $10 million because of a sudden drop 
in world oil prices. And we have been monitoring for some 
time, and for him to make the statement that he just did, that is 
not true. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, supplementary to the minister who 
goes off in a tangent and is allowed to talk about something that 
doesn’t have anything to do with the question. 
 
I want to ask you clearly: is your opinion that the consumers are 
not being ripped off, as you state in the press, accurate? Or is it, 
as you say today, that they are being ripped off? Which of those 
opinions is the accurate one? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when I see prices 
like 30.9 cents for regular gasoline, I don’t think that’s a rip off. 
And as I said, we had visited with the refineries and told them 
in no uncertain terms we were not happy that prices in 
Saskatchewan were not going down as quickly as we felt they 
were, and we see prices going down every day right across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I wonder if the minister would tell 
the Assembly whether she thinks 41 cents a litre for gasoline in 
Shaunavon and Maple Creek is a rip-off when we’re seeing it at 
30 cents a litre in Regina. Do you think that’s a rip-off? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we met with the 
refineries. We informed them that we were not happy — this 
government was not happy — with the slowness in the 
downward trend of prices of fuel in our province. In  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

834 
 

the last two weeks we have seen those prices move downward, 
and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that consumers are pleased with 
the removal of the gas tax. That wouldn’t have happened under 
the previous administration. Regina today has the lowest gas 
prices in the country; the lowest food prices in the country; 
virtually no inflation in the city of Regina. I think the people 
here are fairly happy. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, you claim to have been a 
fire-breathing dragon when you met with the oil companies 
when it’s patently obvious you were nothing of the such. You 
said to the Leader-Post that you were satisfied with their 
performance, and you said that in the Assembly when you 
reported back to us. Instead of acting so kittenish when you 
meet the oil companies, will you go back to them and do what 
you told us you’d said you’d done, and that is tell them what 
you just told us, and that is you’re not happy with their 
performance. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — If the continued downward price of 
gasoline does not continue in the province, yes, I am prepared 
to meet with them once more. After meeting with them, we did 
see a downward trend in the price of gasoline in the province, 
and we will continue to monitor, as we have for the past year 
and a half, and we’ll take the necessary steps, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that the consumers in Saskatchewan are getting a fair 
shake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, my new question to the other 
lion of the treasury bench, the Minister of Energy, if I may have 
his attention. To the Minister of Energy: and it has to do with 
your government’s push for higher crude oil prices and lower 
taxes for big companies. Your government pushed for the 
elimination of the petroleum and gas revenue tax and promised 
Ottawa that, if they eliminate that tax, your government would 
reduce royalties. You’re clearly on record. 
 
But in testimony before the Canadian Senate’s energy 
committee, the small oil companies have suggested that’s the 
wrong approach. Lambert from Coho Resources — a small 
company, but one listed on The Alberta Stock Exchange — 
stated that such a move would increase the cash flow of the 
majors by 50 per cent, but of the minor oil companies like his 
by about 1 per cent. 
 
In light of those figures, Mr. Minister, can you explain to this 
Assembly why your government wants big oil companies to 
benefit so handsomely and why you won’t do something for 
small oil companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, or Mr. Speaker, we 
clearly recognize the make-up of the Saskatchewan oil patch 
and that it’s predominately the small, independent, almost 
family owned and operated producers — unlike Alberta, for 
example, where it’s the majors. The approach that our 
government has taken on this is to sort of . . . is deal with the 
short-term realities of low world oil prices and use the same 
recipe that we used in years past — consult with those in the 
industry so that we come with a program that will work. 
 
And what we’re after in this province, Mr. Speaker, is to  

maintain jobs out there in the service sector. That will be our 
total focus. And I’ll tell you, when it comes to standing up for 
jobs in the oil patch, we will stand up for them, but not at the 
expense of the consumers or the farmers of this province — not 
at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unlike the NDP, Mr. Speaker, who question who stands up 
against Ottawa . . . The Alberta NDP have now joined their 
colleagues in Ottawa in calling for a minimum oil price, Mr. 
Speaker, which would clearly raise prices to all and does not 
make much sense, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time, certainly. 
 
The removal of the PGRT we see as part of that package to 
helping the cash flow problem . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

Agriculture Land Leasing Policy 
 

Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier in his capacity as Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 
Premier, a certain parcel of land in the Arcola area was leased 
on a long-term basis. Due to circumstances, possession of this 
land is in question and it’s presently before the courts. My 
question to you, sir: is it a new policy of the Department of 
Agriculture to short-term lease these parcels of land while they 
are before the courts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member has 
said, this matter is before the courts and everything is sort of a 
stand pat situation until it’s resolved. So I can’t make any 
further comment with respect to the case because it is before the 
courts. 
 
Mr. Hampton: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
in your capacity as Minister of Agriculture . . . And if I may, a 
new question. Your deputy minister today informed the party 
concerned that, in fact, this land had been short-term leased, the 
persons had paid a deposit, and their cheques have been cashed. 
Now, Mr. Premier, what you’re telling me, and what your 
deputy is telling those persons — which is correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of the 
question and provide the information to the hon. member. 
 

Sale of Prince Albert Pulp Company 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 
privilege. I want to address a question to the minister 
responsible for the Prince Albert Pump Company. I believe it’s 
the Deputy House Leader. I ask, can the minister confirm that 
the final approval has been given by both the Saskatchewan 
Crown Management Board and Weyerhaeuser Canada’s parent 
company to the memorandum of agreement, or of 
understanding, announced in March respecting the sale of the 
Prince Albert Pump Company and the related assets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the initial agreement 
announced some time ago between PAPCO and Weyerhaeuser, 
an announcement, I might add, that was very well received in 
Prince Albert and much of the  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

835 
 

province, was subject to ratification by the U.S. board of 
Weyerhaeuser. That approval has been forthcoming. It has also 
been approved by Crown Management Board. I think that’s 
very, very positive news for Saskatchewan, and particularly for 
the area around Prince Albert, the area involved in the forest 
industry. 
 
In anticipation of the supplementary question by my hon. friend 
from Quill Lakes, the headline in the Leader-Post today is 
clearly misleading. I have taken it up with the Leader-Post. 
They acknowledge the headline, “Papco deal falls through,” is, 
in fact, a false headline and should be that, “Papco deal is going 
forward.” 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, can you confirm 
that the final agreement was based entirely on the terms and 
conditions stated in the original memorandum of understanding, 
or were there, in fact, changes in the terms and conditions 
incorporated in the final agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, so the hon. member 
understands, what was in fact ratified was the memorandum of 
understanding. At this stage, between now and over the next 
few weeks, the lawyers on both sides will be rendering the 
entire agreement, dotting the i’s and crossing the t’s, at which 
time, as we indicated in the initial announcement of the 
Weyerhaeuser project, that we would then be able to move from 
that stage into the building stage. 
 
So with regard to the actual agreement that is in the hands of 
lawyers from both sides, the details are being worked out just as 
they were with the NewGrade project in Regina, and just as 
they are now being done with the ammonia plant, and as they 
are done with all other major projects — whether it’s Key Lake, 
whether it’s any potash advancements or any other type project. 
So that’s the normal course of it’s being done. 
 
I think the message is very clear and very simple. Weyerhaeuser 
is going forward; Weyerhaeuser is good for Saskatchewan; 
Weyerhaeuser is good for the forest; Weyerhaeuser is good for 
Prince Albert. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Wills Act 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. 
Minister of Justice, I move first reading of a Bill, An Act to 
amend The Wills Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Attendance of the Ombudsman Before the Assembly 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day I 
rise to seek leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding a 
very serious problem within the Department of Social Services 
that has been brought to light by the Provincial Ombudsman. 
 

Unfortunately, the disagreement between the Ombudsman and 
the minister are being conducted in the press without an 
opportunity for members to question the Ombudsman, without 
an opportunity for him, an officer of the legislature, to respond 
to allegations made against his report. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, 
if leave is granted, I propose to move a motion along the 
following lines: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to section 19 of The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 
command and compel the attendance before the Assembly 
of the Ombudsman, Mr. David Tickell, to assist the 
Assembly to understand the serious problems he has noted 
in the Department of Social Services. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the Assembly to move that 
motion. 
 
Leave denied. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. On this kind of 
motion, if leave is refused there is no vote. 
 

Attendance of the Ombudsman Before the Continuing 
Select Committee of the Legislature 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 
the day I rise, pursuant to rules 39 and 88 of this Assembly, to 
seek leave to move a motion regarding the very serious 
problems in Social Services noted by the Ombudsman. We’ve 
just seen this arrogant government use its huge majority to 
prevent this issue being discussed before the Assembly with the 
Ombudsman. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, if leave is granted, I 
propose to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 88 and section 19 of 
The Legislative Assembly Act, refer to the Continuing 
Select Committee of the legislature the matter of the 
Ombudsman’s report, the serious problems he has noted in 
the Department of Social Services, and recommend the 
desirability of summoning the Ombudsman to appear 
before the committee. 

 
I therefore seek leave of the Assembly to move a motion along 
these lines. 
 
Leave denied. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask just a 
few questions of the minister on a subject which we have not 
yet had an opportunity to address, and it deals  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

836 
 

with — and I may have the title not quite correct but I think it 
is. There is, and has been in the Department of Health over the 
years, a system called the global budget review system. Is there 
still such a process in the department, Mr. Minister, as I recall it 
to have existed in previous years? Is there a global budget 
review system, and if so, what is its purpose and what does it 
do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the global review is still in place. It 
is a process by where basically the base hospitals, which are the 
six bigger hospitals in the province, sit down with the 
government and, through discussion, address the priorities of 
the hospital and also of the government in regard to the 
operation of those hospitals. A consultative approach; no 
change in it from what previously took place. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, is this done on a cyclical 
basis. Is this done on a cyclical basis, Mr. Minister? As I recall, 
I think it was done on a regular basis every so often, every so 
many years, plus the normal consultations that go on under 
normal circumstances, but is that the way it usually works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s done at various times. There’s no 
established period of so many years and then we’re doing it. 
We’re undergoing one right now. An important component of 
the global budget this year is the $100 million patient care 
program and the placement of staff into the hospitals, not only 
the base hospitals but other hospitals in Saskatchewan. But that 
certainly is part of the global review. It’s going on at the present 
time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that this is 
the first time that a global review has been done in the last four 
years because of the enrichment program which is obviously 
something that has to be considered. But is this the first global 
review — the normal global review — that your government 
and your department has undertaken since 1982? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — This is the first global review since we 
became government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well that’s rather interesting, Mr. 
Minister, because a global review of the base hospitals was due 
in 1982. That was the next regular and normal review of the 
base hospitals that was supposed to have been done. Can you 
explain, Mr. Minister, why the normal global review which was 
due in 1982, when you took office, was not done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think the member opposite will 
realize that — and I can go through this again — I mentioned 
many times, but just to indicate to him, when I came in as 
Minister of Health and saw the priorities and the needs that 
existed in health care in Saskatchewan, we instituted on a 
number of priorities. 
 
The first one was the special care home construction package, a 
five-year package. That was a priority of the Department of 
Health, and I believe has been very well received. And we’re in 
the third year of that program, and there are going to be 1,600 
beds built around the province. 
 

The next initiative, of course, was in the upgrading and 
construction of acute care hospital facilities, the #400 million 
capital project. 
 
The third initiative of the Health department in addressing the 
needs out there that we inherited — and we’ve been through 
this discussion many times — but I think what we are 
discussing today is what we’re doing at this time, is the $100 
million patient care enrichment program. 
 
As the member opposite will realize, a significant portion of 
global review is staffing components and certainly, when we 
said we’re addressing this, I said let’s have a global review of 
the operations of the base hospitals. That’s going on at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So that I have this correct, Mr. Minister, 
so you are confirming, therefore, that you made a conscious 
decision that the global review of 1982 would not be done? 
That was a policy decision, obviously. You’re saying that that’s 
the decision your government made. Am I correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You’re correct in saying that I made a 
conscious decision along with my colleagues that the priority, 
as we saw them when we became government in this province, 
was nursing home construction across this province. We’ve 
constructed, or are in the phase of constructing, 1,600 beds in 
60 communities. That was our number one priority. 
 
There are other priorities such as the introduction of a 
chiropody program. There was a priority update and equip our 
base hospitals — a $300 million program. I remember within 
about five or six months of becoming the minister, the priority 
that was brought to my attention was the sad state of diagnostic 
equipment at St. Paul’s Hospital. We reacted with a million 
dollars to improve that diagnostic equipment. So we looked at 
the issue that was out there and we addressed those with 
five-year plans, some of them coming up immediately, as I say, 
with the diagnostic equipment in St. Paul’s; plans that had been 
promised before, that we introduced, such as chiropody; and 
certainly the most recent, our patient care enrichment program 
of $100 million. 
 
So if you want to say we made a conscious decision, certainly 
we made a conscious decision, and that conscious decision, I 
believe, Mr. Chairman, was in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan health. It was addressing problems that people 
have been crying out for some time. And I believe they have 
been addressed and will addressed more so in the future with 
five-year commitments which have been very well received by 
the health community. 
 
This year I said it’s time we did the global review as we do the 
patient care enrichment program. That is taking place at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, it is interesting how you 
have again fallen into your defensiveness, as you have when 
you find a question which you know you cannot legitimately 
answer because of the errors of the ways of you and your 
government. The construction nursing homes has got nothing to 
do with the global  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

837 
 

review of the base hospitals which was a regular process 
established to identify ongoing problems that may come up as 
the years and the months go by. 
 
The whole component of nursing homes and nursing home 
construction, Mr. Minister, was in the Department of Social 
Services when your government took over. All of the expertise, 
all of the excellent staff that was necessary in order to be able to 
do that work, was already there. When you transferred the 
function of nursing home construction and maintenance and 
grants to the Department of Health, in order that your Health 
budget may look bigger — and that’s why you did it, and 
maybe you will argue that you did it because it’s a better way to 
co-ordinate. Well I will argue that if it’s a better way to 
co-ordinate, then you should establish a central agency that 
dealt with all senior citizens’ programming and problems so 
that it’s not confused and scattered all over the government as it 
is now. 
 
You cannot argue, Mr. Minister, that just because you had a 
so-called priority on nursing homes, which is questionable 
when you look at the waiting lists, that somehow that prevented 
you from going on with the global review that was scheduled to 
take part in 1982, because a simple transfer of those positions 
and that function from the Department of Social Services to the 
Department of Health had nothing to do with the global review. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A little order in here, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, as the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview decides to yell from his seat, it’s difficult to 
be able to make comments and ask questions when that 
continues on the government side of the House. I’m quite 
prepared to continue when he has settled down, so that the 
minister can hear what I have to say. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, all of your arguments on this are incorrect 
and only made in order to defend the mistake you made. Even if 
you did not carry out the global review, Mr. Minister, one of the 
things that the Department of Health should have done — and 
you know that it did not do — is monitor the situation in 
between to find out what cracks were developing in the health 
care system. That monitoring was not done. There was a failure 
and you know it, and some other people know it. 
 
I submit to you, sir, you did not . . . you cancelled the global 
review that was supposed to take place in 1982 for one reason, 
because you knew that if you undertook that global review you 
would be forced to provide increased funding to those hospitals 
and increase staff because problems were beginning to show up. 
And you and the government had decided you were not going to 
provide that funding. And you were not going to provide that 
increased staff, and the result of that has been what you have 
been confronted with in recent months: growing waiting lists, 
understaffing of bedside care, situations in some hospitals that 
some of the nurses who work there every day say have been 
dangerous situations, because you failed, sir, to do this global 
review. You have said it in  

this House. You conscientiously decided not to do it. That was 
the wrong decision. It was motivated by political reasons, and 
not motivated by the need to look after the health care needs of 
our base hospitals. 
 
And so now you’re faced with a problem. You decide when you 
think you’re going to have an election that you’re going 
announce $100 million grant or enrichment funding which the 
hospitals are still wondering where it is, in spite of all your 
consultations. You refuse to indicate in this House how much 
staff have now been allocated under this enriched funding. And 
the reason you do it, sir, is because you know that when that 
news is out, and the final information is given to the hospitals, 
many of them are going to be extremely upset. 
 
I have heard that one of the major base hospitals has been told 
that the increase in their staff component will be 5.5 positions, 
and all of them are not bedside or nursing care positions, as you 
have said they were going to be. And I know you will say, oh 
but we’re going to go back and we’re going renegotiate that. 
Well I say, stop playing your games. And I say the reason 
you’re now in the difficult situation you’re in is because you 
didn’t have that global review, because you were too busy 
negotiating with the oil companies how much money you were 
going to give them. You and your government weren’t 
interested in negotiating with the hospitals under the 
well-established and perfectly good and well-functioning global 
review system. You were not interested in negotiating with the 
hospitals to find out what their problems were because you had 
a different political agenda. That is your government. 
 
And so here we are . . . here we are faced with some crisis 
situations for which no one can be blamed other than yourself 
and your cabinet. You have said in this House, global review 
was not undertaken because you decided you weren’t going to 
do it. And I say no amount of excuses on your part can make up 
or defend that position. You cannot say that your priorities had 
changed, because if you say your priorities were changed to 
some other issues — and they may have been the good issues; I 
will not argue that — but when you decided that those other 
issues had a higher priority than hospital staffing, then you were 
admitting that you are the cause of the problems that hospitals 
are now facing, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I listen with interest to the member 
opposite. Mr. Chairman, over the past three weeks I have 
noticed in this House, every time that we mention the nursing 
home program that this government instituted, it touches a 
nerve on the other side. And rightly it should, because they 
placed the moratorium on nursing home construction, and they 
know they neglected a priority in health care delivery in this 
province. 
 
The member makes much that it was under Social Services. I 
challenge him to go out to any parts of the health care delivery 
program and ask them if they don’t believe that moving the 
special care home construction into Health was not the right 
way to go. Unanimously the people across this province say it 
was. 
 
The member also questions the need for a $300 million capital 
program in acute care hospitals. I want that on  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

838 
 

record. He said, you made a conscious decision to do that. He 
believes that was the wrong decision, from his remarks. I stand 
here in this Chamber, and I say to you and my colleagues and 
the members opposite and the people of Saskatchewan that I do 
not believe that the 300 million capital construction program in 
health care, a great part of it going to acute care facilities, was a 
mistake. It was simply addressing a need that had not been 
addressed in the previous 11 years. 
 
The member likes to let on that there has been no financing 
going into the hospitals. He believes the only way that you can 
improve and address situations of hospitals is with a global 
review. That simply is not correct . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . That simply is not correct. 
 
If the member from Pelly wants to continue to shout from his 
seat, as he is accustomed to do, let him do so. When he is quiet, 
I will answer the question. 
 
Mr. Chairman, for your information and for the information of 
the members opposite, since 1981-82 where there was 
$344,329,540 expended in the hospitals of Saskatchewan, 
compare that to 1986-87 — there hasn’t been a global review, 
but compare these figures — where it is $500,413,690 
expended in the hospitals of Saskatchewan, an increase, Mr. 
Chairman, of 49 per cent — of 49 per cent. 
 
Where the member gets his figure of 5.5 positions from, for one 
of the base hospitals, far be it for me to know. I tell you, I tell 
the member opposite, I tell the members of this Assembly, and I 
tell the people of Saskatchewan that may be watching: whoever 
misinformed that member of that figure, I can tell you, it’s sheer 
nonsense, simply not correct. The member may have been 
subject to bad advice. So be it. 
 
I want to tell you that over the years, irregardless of a global 
review, we have put in initiatives into the hospitals of 
Saskatchewan to address what I believe are types of care; 
they’re in the betterment of Saskatchewan health, and are 
keeping pace with the new technologies and the new deliveries 
of service that we see in our hospitals. 
 
I will cite two, just as examples. Number one, the improvement 
of staffing components in neonatal care. Today, Mr. Chairman, 
we can take premature babies in our neonatal wards, and with 
the type of care they’re given, given these little people who, for 
no fault of their own, have been born prior to the time when 
normal delivery would have taken place. You understand as 
well as anybody else that these little people are born with 
certain aspects of development that need to occur, which 
normally under normal circumstances would occur within the 
womb. 
 
We are capable, in our base hospital and the University Hospital 
and in the General Hospital, of providing an environment in the 
kind of care that those young people, little babies, can develop 
and can mature and develop to the way that they were designed 
to do. I visited many of those. I see that happening and I think 
that is in the best interest of health care, and that’s where we put 
additional staff, without a global review. 

Another area — and I think the member will agree with me, and 
I hope he’ll stand in his place and support what I’m saying, Mr. 
Chairman, you know, and we’ve talked about this. You have 
mutual friends that I have who have undergone heart bypasses 
— situations where 10 years ago these gentlemen that I’m 
referring to, who are perhaps 55, 60 years of age, would have 
succumbed, would have died because of heart failure. 
 
Today we’re able to do bypasses — single, double, triple, up to 
five bypasses. That takes more staff. We have addressed that 
over the years. So for the member to stand in here and say, 
because you haven’t had a global review you have neglected the 
needs of the hospitals, is simply not correct — simply not 
correct. 
 
I’ve cited two examples. I could go on and describe what we’re 
doing presently in the barter system for CAT scans, so that 
people who are requiring operations for tumours may have it 
zeroed in to the exact area where that tumour is. Sophisticated 
technology. Those things are in place. 
 
And in some cases, by the use of a CAT scan, the type of 
exploratory surgery that people were subjected to previously 
may not be necessary. Those are all advances; those are things 
that I believe, Mr. Chairman, are advancing health care in 
Saskatchewan, and those have all been done without a global 
review. 
 
This year, as I’ve said, when we look at a patient care 
improvement program of $100 million — and $100 million in 
my language is a lot of money, Mr. Chairman, a lot of money, a 
heck of a lot of money — in keeping with that we are doing a 
global review of the base hospitals. 
 
I hope, Mr. Chairman, that I’ve indicated to you and to the 
member opposite that there have been considerable 
improvements in the base hospitals over the past four years — 
49 per cent increase in the budgeting, and also, more important 
than that, the development and the keeping pace with new 
technologies, new operating procedures, new methods of saving 
lives that are benefiting all the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I suppose, Mr. Chairman, the fact 
that the minister had to take 15 minutes to answer a 
straightforward question would indicate . . . Was it Shakespeare 
who said, methinks the lady protests too much? Every time the 
minister has gotten up in this House during these estimates and 
has felt the need to make a big speech, that usually has reflected 
that he has been feeling uneasy about what some people are 
thinking about what the actual results have been, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I was interested in one comment you made. You said in 
your comments . . . And you referred to staff allocations under 
your enrichment program. Therefore you must now know . . . 
Previously you said you did not have that information because 
consultations were taking place, but you now have indicated in 
this House that you now have concluded those consultations in 
many of these hospitals and so you have the enrichment staff 
positions available to you. 
 
I want to simply ask you a straightforward question: can  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

839 
 

we now, today, receive the staff allocations under your 
enrichment program for those hospitals in which that has been 
done? And I know it has been done in the base hospitals. Can 
we get that today in that we have not been able to get it in the 
past because you have said that the process was not complete. 
You have now said, this afternoon, the process is complete. It’s 
on the record. And I would like you to tell us if you can give us 
that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly don’t feel 
uneasy about improvements in heart bypasses, neonatal care, 
and in CAT scans. Member opposite may not think those are 
important. I believe those are very, very important to health care 
in this province. The member, because I said that 5.5 increase in 
a base hospital was simply incorrect — simply incorrect — 
surely the member opposite who was at one time a Health 
minister, I believe, and a minister of Finance, must realize, must 
realize in a $100 million program that certainly there would be 
more than 5.5 per cent increase in a base hospital . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 5.5 positions. That even makes it worse. That 
even makes it worse, sir — 5.5 positions. I mean, where is his 
lack of understanding? Surely he must realize, in a $100 million 
program, that a base hospital, one of the six big hospitals in this 
province, would only get 5.5 positions? I mean, that simply is 
incredible. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Chairman, that I told the members in 
this House on numerous occasions that we are working with the 
hospitals to work out the staff enrichment position, what portion 
of the 300 nursing positions that will go into the hospital this 
year — will be allocated to various hospitals. Mr. Chairman, 
you know as well as I do those hospitals are autonomous 
boards, and until those figures are worked out in my 
department, taken to the boards, confirmed, I don’t know what 
the final figure will be. It may well be that the board says, no, 
we don’t want to see that deployment. Go back and rework 
those figures and see if we can put some staff here and some 
staff there and change the pattern. 
 
(1500) 
 
That is the mandate that they’re given. That’s why we have 
boards. I listened with interest to the member’s questions a few 
minutes ago. He said, why don’t you establish a central agency; 
a central agency to control this or that. 
 
That’s where that member and I vary at philosophical views. He 
may believe that the world runs better when a central agency 
directs local people to what a central agency, in all its great 
wisdom, thinks should happen. I disagree with that. I believe 
that the role of the central agency is to divide up the money that 
the people have, as to the best way it can possibly be used, in 
consultation and in co-operation with those local groups. And I 
believe that it is the mandate and the responsibility of those 
local groups, hospital boards, to deploy those dollars, once 
agreed upon, into placing positions in the best possible areas of 
their hospitals to deliver top quality service. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well it’s quite regrettable, Mr.  

Minister, that you have to take things that are said and twist 
them around and put meanings on them that obviously are not 
the intention. 
 
When I talked about a central agency, I was saying to you, sir, 
that senior citizens of Saskatchewan and senior citizens’ 
organizations have been telling us . . . And they’ve been telling 
you, although you do not want to admit it — they’ve been 
telling you through your officials because you don’t have 
enough time to meet with most of them, as is the record that 
you have had. But they are saying, we are finding it very 
difficult to go to one department to deal with one kind of 
program for senior citizens and go to another department to deal 
with another program and go to Health to deal with another 
component of senior citizens’ programming. And so they say, 
why don’t you somehow co-ordinate senior citizens’ 
programming so that they could go to one place, one place in 
government, and be able to get the answers? 
 
There is no need for the kind of confused disorganization that 
presently exists. And you know, Mr. Minister, I will even go so 
far as to say that it wasn’t well enough co-ordinated prior to 
1982. I mean, let’s put aside the partisanship and let’s be honest 
about it. I happen to believe that that kind of a co-ordination 
which senior citizens’ groups and organizations have been 
asking for makes a lot of sense. You have said you don’t agree. 
Well, that’s fine. We’ll agree to disagree because the policies of 
your government and the policies of our party now clearly on 
this issue have been established. You’re saying, scatter it 
around so that there is confusion and no co-ordination of senior 
citizens programming. We say, it should be co-ordinated. And 
if it means establishing an agency or one department — which 
it may be an existing department or it doesn’t have to be a new 
one — but where all senior citizens’ programs can be 
co-ordinated, we say that makes good sense, because senior 
citizens have told us that makes good sense. And we agree with 
them. 
 
When I asked you the question about whether you would table 
the information, you somehow decided that you had to talk 
about information about staffing. You decided that you had to 
go and talk about heart bypasses and CAT scanners, all of 
which had nothing to do, as good as those things might be, with 
the question. 
 
Well, you know and I know and so does the world know out 
there, because people talk to each other, believe it or not, that 
the decisions of your department on allocations of staff 
components under your enrichment program have been made. 
Your officials have indicated to the base hospitals what those 
positions are. 
 
You announced that program in February. We have been here 
through a good part of March. It is now the end of April. That’s 
a three-month period, and give or take a few days because you 
probably announced it not exactly on the 1st of February. Are 
you saying that after three months in which you’ve had an 
opportunity to consult with the hospitals, you’ve still not been 
able to tell them what their allocations on staff enrichment is 
going to be? Are you saying you have not given that 
information? One question. 
 
  



 
April 24, 1986 

840 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well in regards to senior citizens, and he 
made reference to that, I can tell you, senior citizens across this 
province have responded to this government time after time, 
saying, thank you for putting continuing care under Health; 
saying thank you for establishing district co-ordinating 
committees so that they have access to those facilities, be they 
home care, be they acute care hospitals, or be they special care 
homes. 
 
And furthermore, and he may not be aware of it, but my 
colleague, the Minister of Social Services, myself, the minister 
of Justice of the time, put together a seniors’ directory. Senior 
citizens across this province have that directory, indicating 
where they can access various services from this government. 
That has been well received by seniors. 
 
He asked specifically about the tabling of information regarding 
the patient care enrichment. I have told him, and I will repeat 
the answer, that we are in consultation with the hospitals. 
Certainly we are. But before, until the allotment of staff have 
been approved by those boards who run those hospitals, I can’t 
give a firm figure. 
 
It may well be the board will take the administrator’s figures 
and say, no, we don’t agree with those; go back, discuss with 
the department; see if we can put more staff in this area; change 
the staff ratio here; and so on. That’s what hospital boards are 
charged with. That’s the responsibility that is given to them as a 
board member. 
 
And until they have firmed up and approved whatever staffing 
components will go into their hospitals, I couldn’t and shouldn’t 
indicate what those figures are. Because until they have been 
totally adopted, sanctioned by those boards, they are not firm 
figures. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, have none of the hospital 
boards met and considered the decision of your department? 
Are you saying none of the hospital boards have met to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, they haven’t met and considered 
those at this time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Not any of them? They haven’t met and 
they haven’t indicated, Mr. Minister . . . Well, he’s obviously 
preoccupied; I’ll wait so he can hear the question. Is that okay? 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re saying on the record that none of the 
hospitals have met, and none of the hospitals have indicated to 
you whether they are satisfied with the allocation that your 
department has indicated that they are going to be getting. Two 
things for the record: they haven’t met; and none of them have 
indicated that they agree or disagree with the initial allocation 
your department has provided. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s correct. Not at this point. They 
haven’t met to give the final approval to it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. I just wanted to establish that. I 
won’t pursue that any more, other than my discussions with 
hospitals. But I just wanted to make it clear what your answer 
would be. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, let me go back for just a moment and then 
I’m going to be through with this. I’ll go back to the whole 
question that I began on, the issue of the global review, because 
it is of some concern. 
 
The reason why the global budget review system was 
implemented several years ago was so that the total operation of 
the hospitals could be considered together. That’s what it was 
done for, so that some people could sit together from the 
Department of Health and the expertise you have, and the 
perfectly capable people in our hospitals could sit together and 
do a review of the whole hospital operation so that you would 
avoid ad hoc-ery, which you have now carried out in the last 
four years, which may have looked after some crisis situations, 
but neglected other aspects of the hospital operation. And 
because that global review was never carried out, that’s what’s 
happened. 
 
Because you refused to carry out a normal and established 
practice, which made a lot of good sense, and you agree — 
you’ve agreed to it earlier — because you cancelled that global 
review in 1982, your approach has been one of ad hoc-ery. And 
the least you could have done is that you could have had a 
monitoring of the hospitals’ problems in between that period of 
time when you cancelled the global review and the present time. 
You could have had a monitoring. As a matter of fact, because 
this monitoring wasn’t done adequately, I happen to know that 
there was a great deal of embarrassment by some people, and 
that is well-known. 
 
So I simply conclude by saying this, Mr. Minister. When you 
cancelled the global review system which is intended to look 
after the global operation of the hospital so that it operates and 
functions in all of its aspects — when you cancelled that, you 
then undertook an approach of ad hoc-ery, and therefore some 
sectors and some components of the hospital system have been 
breaking down because of your ad hoc approach. 
 
And that’s where your failure has been, and that’s why you 
have some of the problems that are facing you today. And that’s 
why you have a deathbed repentance, $100 million, as you say. 
And I’ll never believe it until I see it, and you refuse to tell us 
exactly what it is — enrichment program — because you knew 
the problems you created. And now as a deathbed repentance 
before an election, you think you’ll save your hide by trying to 
fix up some more of the holes. 
 
One last question and then I won’t ask any more . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I’ll take that back because depending on 
your answer I may have to ask some more. But the question is: 
is this allocation of the enrichment staff positions, plus your 
whole allocation of your present budget for health care in the 
hospitals, is it being done by a complete global review as was 
done before? Is that what you’re doing right now? Is that what 
you’re doing or are you just patching up the holes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I must go back to 
the figures again — because it’s obvious the member opposite 
missed this — that I believe going from 344 million to 500 
million, a 49 per cent increase, certainly  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

841 
 

augurs well over that period of time without the necessity of a 
global review. 
 
He indicated, is a global review going on. I said, and I’ve told 
him time after time, that certainly we’re looking at staff 
enrichments. Those things are taking place now and a complete 
global review is taking place. There will be more following the 
appointment of the staff, or the allocation of these staff. We’re 
in a global review this year. 
 
But I just want to read into the record so that the member 
opposite realizes some of the initiatives that have taken place 
during this period of time. And I’m not going to talk about the 
capital construction. That’s well understood by the people of 
Saskatchewan. But since 1982 there’s been over 400 new 
nursing positions have been allocated by this government to 
hospitals throughout this province. Since 1982, major increases 
with cost implications exceeding 800,000 per year have been 
authorized to expand open-heart surgery in Regina; and 125,000 
for extended operation of the CAT scan unit at the Plains Health 
Centre. That doesn’t even include the new CAT scans that are 
coming into place at a million dollars each — six of them. 
 
A new pediatric intensive care unit has been developed at the 
University Hospital with costs exceeding $700,000 per year; 1.2 
million beginning in ‘85-86 to double the CAT scan capacity in 
Saskatchewan — and that’s more than double — now it is six; 
500,000 additional funding for clinic services fund to provide 
an income supplement to staff positions; 152,000 to provide 
improved pediatric assessment and treatment services in 
Saskatchewan; a developmental assessment unit for high-risk 
infants has been developed at the Regina General Hospital for 
southern Saskatchewan residents. 
 
One that I was personally involved with — and if the members 
want to discuss it I’d be glad to; I think it’s in last year’s 
estimates — where I talked about the provision of apnea 
monitors. So special funding has been provided to the Regina 
General Hospital and the University Hospital for the purchase 
of apnea monitors. 
 
Just so that you understand, Mr. Chairman, what an apnea 
monitor is, it’s a device that if a young child is in danger of 
being left alone and perhaps succumbing to what we call SIDS 
or sudden infant death syndrome, which happens to many 
babies, and we don’t know the reason why, then these monitors 
are . . . The best I can describe them as are kind of electronic 
mattresses, cushions, that the baby rests on, and should the baby 
stop breathing an alarm is sounded. We provide those now on a 
rental basis through the hospitals. Those were not available 
previously. 
 
I could tell you a long, very personal story about that, but it is in 
Hansard. And I can tell you, for parents that have lost a child, 
certainly this is an initiative that they feel very strongly about 
because I’ve had letter after letter from people who have 
accessed these apnea monitors. And a baby who may have 
otherwise died to SIDS is alive and strong and well and kicking 
and going to school and carrying a lunch pail and playing 
hockey and doing all the things young boys should do in this 
province. And without that kind of device, they may have been 
an infant  

mortality. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I just want to respond to 
your argument about adequate funding, and here’s some 
evidence of why the ad hoc approach has worked so badly. 
Because I will just make one reference, and I will read it to you. 
It deals with the Regina General Hospital, and it goes back to 
1985. And I think it’s a good example of what’s been 
happening across the whole province. But in 1985, there was a 
request for financial assistance by the Regina General Hospital 
presented to the city council in Regina. And it is not an 
insignificant amount of money. The proposal, Mr. Minister, by 
the Regina hospital, forced upon them because of your 
government’s inadequate funding, was this, and I read from the 
memorandum presented to the city council at that time: 
 

Regina General Hospital has requested a 1 mill levy on the 
equalized assessment per year from the city of Regina for 
1987-1989. This approximates $440,000 per year, using 
1985 equalized mill values. In addition, Regina General 
Hospital also plans to approach various Regina 
corporations for donations. 

 
And I won’t read the whole thing because in fact it’s too 
lengthy. But it also goes on to say: 
 

Approximately $7 million of new equipment will be 
required by the Regina General, and the bulk of the funds 
will have to come from various fund-raising efforts of the 
Regina General Hospital. 

 
Coupled with that is the fact that the city of Regina, currently, 
at that time, was paying $800 million annually as a hospital 
operations levy. 
 
Now the only reason I raise this, Mr. Minister, at this time, is 
because it points out very clearly why there’s so many people in 
the public — as us — have difficulty believing all your 
government’s boastings about the great work it has done in the 
health care field. And on paper it looks good. But in reality, 
there are failures, the numbers of which cannot be counted. And 
you have just made it very clear that you have done such an 
excellent job of providing funding. If that’s the case, why have 
we now, in our health care system in Saskatchewan, been led to 
this kind of a situation? 
 
I submit to you for this reason — and I will do that when we 
talk with the Minister of Urban Affairs later. We have had in 
Canada the federal government reneging on its commitments 
and its agreements for certain national programs, health of 
which is one of them. What the federal government has done is 
shifted the burden of costs to the provinces, with your quiet 
acquiescence. They have shifted those costs; what you, in turn, 
have done is you’ve taken that shift of the cost and you’ve 
transferred it to the property tax payer, as is evidenced by this. 
And this is not the only place it’s happening. 
 
The reason why some hospitals have been able to  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

842 
 

maintain a reasonably adequate program, and in fact in some 
cases quite a good one in most cases, is because what’s 
happened is that they’ve asked the property tax payer to make 
up your short-fall. That’s what’s happened. 
 
You may talk about the increased funding you have provided, 
but that’s not a good enough argument, because the problem is 
there and so therefore you have not provided enough funding. 
And if you, a government, or your Minister of Finance, the 
former one and the present one, and your Premier, hadn’t 
decided that it was a bigger priority to give the oil companies 
$300 million a year than it was to provide some additional 
funding to the hospitals and do the kind of planning and global 
reviews which would solve the problems, then we wouldn’t 
have this kind of a situation. 
 
There has been a major tax shift. The tax shift comes from the 
federal government to the province, who in turn has loaded it on 
the property tax payer. And you look at any newspaper today or 
over the next several weeks and the past several weeks, you will 
see every day in the newspaper another headline saying this 
community or that municipality has increased the mill rate 
simply because of inadequate funding on your part. 
 
The taxpayers had to make up the difference. Even though you 
may talk about the money your spending — and that’s where 
you’ve gone wrong. And even when you spend your money, 
because you don’t know how to look at the whole program, you 
do it in an ad hoc way, and some parts of the system are 
showing cracks. And now you’ve had a price to pay for it — for 
sure, that’s it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I can hardly see, when 
you fund 100 per cent of capital construction and 100 of 
operating, that that’s ad hoc-ery. I think that is a 
well-established system of financing. 
 
Certainly hospitals indicated to me that they had been 
approached by individuals, by charities, by philanthropists, 
indicating that there were people out in society who felt that 
they would like to be able to contribute to hospitals as a very 
worthwhile way of expending some of their club moneys, some 
of their personal moneys. So we have, since taking over 
government, allowed hospitals to establish foundations. 
 
I think, if you talk to University Hospital, St. Paul’s Hospital, 
and various other ones, hospitals here in the city, you will see 
that the foundation concept is going over quite well. I remember 
not too long ago where the Mitchell family of Saskatoon gave 
$1 million towards University Hospital through the foundation. 
 
So I just have to say to you that I think, with that, it is not a 
shirking of responsibility. It’s certainly allowing individuals out 
there in society who say, I want to help out, I want to give 
something of the money that I have made or that our club has 
made to what we think is a worthwhile institution, an acute care 
hospital — we have, through the formation of foundations, 
facilitated that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to take a few 
minutes to go over some routine questions. As we are  

winding down the Health estimates, I want to do some routine 
questions on your personal staff. If you can give me a list of 
your personal staff and their salaries and any perks that they 
might get, if they have an automobile, if you have that 
information here, if you’d sent it over. I have a couple of other 
questions to ask based on the information you’ll give me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will provide it for you as soon as I can. 
Certainly there are no perks; there are no automobiles or 
anything of that nature. If the page is here, we could send this 
over. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I missed what you said about 
automobiles. Did you say they have . . . They don’t have any 
assigned. Do they have access to the CVA fleet of cars? I would 
imagine they do. If they need a vehicle, what do they do? Do 
they use their personal car and you pay them mileage if they’re 
going out of town to do some work, or would they use the CVA 
vehicle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Very rarely it is required, but if they need 
to use a car to go to a government function with me that they 
would have to drive, they have access to a CVA poor car. But it 
is very seldom it is ever used. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wanted you to tell me, as well, on the 
issue of executive aircraft, how does that work? I believe 
there’s been a change in policy and that the department now 
pays directly to the Central Vehicle Agency the cost that the 
Minister of Health would use. Have you got that number with 
you, what your department paid for the use of the executive 
aircraft in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can provide that for you. It isn’t all 
completed for this year. Perhaps on the use of executive air, it’s 
better to ask the Minister of Supply and Service. But basically 
the policy is that the Department of Health will pick up the tab 
for myself and whoever I would authorize to fly with me. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I will be asking the minister on the 
overall. But what I’m talking about here is your spending 
estimates, is the amount that you would pay for air travel and 
use of the executive aircraft, and that number, if you could get it 
for me. I would also like the list of trips that you’re paying for, 
and who else is on the flight, so I could have that from your 
department. And I’m just wanting now not the complete list 
from CVA, but as it would apply to your department. Because 
this would be, I believe, in the first subvote under general 
administration that that money would be paid out. And if you 
could give me the commitment that you would get it for me, 
let’s say, a reasonable time, two weeks, then we could maybe 
go on to another topic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I will give you the costs of my travel 
and the number of people that travelled with me, and I will 
provide that to you. I should be able to have that in two weeks. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has indicated that he will 
give the number of trips, the number of people. But what I want 
— and you will know why I want it — is the individuals who 
rode with you. And those are legitimate,  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

843 
 

and I don’t want to get into a harangue about another minister 
and his travel with the executive aircraft. But I would like the 
minister to realize before we get into a harangue that, if he 
refuses to give that list, then he understands why he won’t give 
it. 
 
And I’m sure that there’s no reason why, if you’re taking your 
executive assistants with you — perfectly legitimate; 
absolutely, perfectly legitimate. If you’re flying to a conference 
in Saskatoon and your family go along — perfectly, absolutely 
legitimate; that if it’s at no expense to the taxpayers, there’s 
nothing wrong with that. And the only problem that you would 
have, and I don’t believe the minister has that problem, would 
be if it’s being used inappropriately. And I would like the 
names of those people who went with you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, I think, when you get into 
Supply and Services estimates you’ll be able to find all that 
information out. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, the Minister of 
Supply and Services never has it when we come to his 
estimates. And every year I’ve asked him that question, and he 
doesn’t give it to me in estimates. Every year he doesn’t give it 
to me in estimates, and that’s why I’m trying to get if from you. 
Because I think that you give out information a little better than 
the member from Meadow Lake, because he’s very secretive 
about what he gives out. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve always given it to us before. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Pardon? Well that’s what I’m saying, but 
I’m talking about the minister who I have been dealing with. 
Well if the members all want to yell at the same time, Mr. 
Chairman, it’s going to take us a long time to get finished. And 
this massive majority continues to do this, yell and holler from 
their seats so we can’t work, and I . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
(1530) 
 
Well the member from Maple Creek is yelling that we lie. Well 
I . . . besides . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . you didn’t. Well I 
heard you say it, and I’m sure that the chairman did. But I say 
it’s unbecoming of members to yell from their seats and now 
swear and now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I challenge the 
member from Maple Creek to say that one out loud. I’ll bet she 
won’t, because there’s an old former Prime Minister who got in 
trouble saying those kinds of words. 
 
Well the hollering keeps going on, but we’ll try to carry on in 
spite of all the noise, Mr. Chairman. And I want to ask the 
minister if he can give us a complete list of who was on the 
aircraft that you paid for. That’s a perfectly legitimate question. 
And to say that somebody else is going to answer that for you 
only leads one to believe why you would not answer it and 
depend on another minister to tell us who is on the aircraft that 
you paid for. And I was hoping that estimates would get done 
quickly. But this is an important issue, and I’ll tell you we’re 
not going to be moving very quickly if we can’t get this answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, as I’ve said, I will give  

the number of flights I’ve taken, the number of people that have 
accompanied me on that flight. That is tradition in this House 
that that be given. It was the same information that the members 
opposite gave us when we were in opposition, and I’m quite 
willing to supply that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, if it is the 
information that we gave you when we were in government, it 
was because that’s what you asked for. I am asking for the 
people who were with you on the flights, and we’ll get into it 
then. If you’re not willing to give the names, then we’ll get into 
it about the member from Wilkie and reasons why we’re 
concerned about it. And I’ll tell you that we’ll get into it for a 
few hours, because we have a minister, or had a minister, who 
was using the aircraft improperly. You know that. You know he 
got his fingers burnt and is no longer a resident of the province 
and has moved to Alberta, and one would wonder about . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. You know full well, the member 
from Shaunavon, that that has nothing at all to do with the 
estimates of Health at hand, and I would ask you to refrain from 
going into areas that are outside the realm of Health. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Using the executive aircraft in the 
Department of Health, and the minister’s use of aircraft, has 
everything to do with Health estimates . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Please be seated. I tend to 
agree wholly with the member from Shaunavon that the use of 
aircraft by the Minister of Health is within the purview of these 
estimates, but reference to use of aircraft by another minister, 
other than the one being questioned in estimates, is not in order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, it’s an interesting opinion that the 
chairman takes, that use of the aircraft by ministers isn’t an 
issue with the public. But I . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member from Shaunavon full 
well knows what I stated — when I stated that the use of an 
aircraft by the minister in question during his estimates is 
within the realm of this committee. And that is what I stated, 
and that’s what Hansard will show. And I also indicated that 
use of aircraft by other ministers and other departments that are 
not at the time being taken up in estimates are out of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, we’re going to take some time to 
go into detail if this is how we’re going to operate in this 
committee. I’ll say this is the reason that we’ve been here for 
almost three weeks, because of cover-up and trying to sweep 
under the rug important information. And the minister continues 
on trying to hide answers from the committee. 
 
Now why, Mr. Chairman, would a minister not tell you who 
was on the aircraft with him? Why wouldn’t he want to tell it? 
Mr. Chairman will be suspicious, I’m sure, and if he isn’t, I 
question why he wouldn’t be, when a minister would not give a 
list to the public of who was on the aircraft with him. Do you 
think the public who bought the aircraft for you to use are 
impressed when you say — when we ask on their behalf, who is 
using the aircraft? You say: I don’t have to tell you? To the 
public of  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

844 
 

Saskatchewan the Minister of Health says: I don’t have to tell 
you who went with me. Well I say that it’s important that you 
do, because let me tell you that there have been instances in the 
past where people have not told the whole story about the use of 
the executive aircraft and got their fingers burnt, and I . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Please be seated. I’ve already 
indicated that any references outside of the estimates of Health, 
in terms of aircraft, are out of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A point of order, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, arguing by analogy is scarcely a new tactic. It’s as 
old as Aristotle, if not a good deal older than that. 
 
I listened to the minister with some interest. What the minister 
said is, his argument was going to be it has been given by other 
ministers, why not you. That’s a perfectly relevant argument. 
And I think, though members of the committee and the public 
can make up their own minds, I think it’s a rational one. How 
on earth can that argument, which is the one my colleague was 
making, be out of order? I really ask you for a ruling. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I really find it rather 
unusual that all of a sudden, although as my colleague from 
Regina Centre has indicated that in the process of debate and in 
the well-honoured tradition and rules of debate one is able to 
make a point and ask a question by using examples from other 
aspects. And that’s what is happening here, Mr. Chairman. 
 
My colleague, the member from Shaunavon, has ask a question 
about travel on government aircraft by the minister, and he has 
used the example of another such incident of travel to support 
his argument that this minister has an obligation to provide the 
answers. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Chairman, what is wrong with using that kind an 
argument to support his position and his question? I submit that 
that is allowed under the rules. It always has been, and I think it 
should be still, otherwise we are rewriting the rules, and we are 
not mandated in this committee to rewrite the rules. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Chairman, I believe the practice of this 
House over the 11 years I have been here is that the flying 
portion is usually government services or the responsible 
department, but if a minister so wishes to answer about his own 
flying, that has always been accepted. But the purview that the 
members are going to is a new area that has never been allowed 
before. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the point of order, I would just like to 
explain the feeling that we have about why this point of order is 
important, because it severely curtails what an opposition can 
do if you can’t relate from one department to the other. 
 
For example, if in the Department of Health, as we have in the 
past when a transfer was occurring . . . Let’s say if nursing 
home funding from Social Services to Health — and you will 
remember the debate that went on at that time, and we were 
making the point that when nursing homes were transferred to 
Health — we referred to Social Services many times and how 
much money was coming  

out of the department of Social Services and moved into Health. 
And at no time did any chairman say, you can’t talk about 
Social Service’s budget while we’re talking about Health. There 
was never a comment made. 
 
I think it’s interesting that you would take the opinion that in 
talking about the member from Wilkie and his dismissal from 
cabinet because of wrongful use of the executive aircraft . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s what he’s doing. He resigned 
from cabinet over the issue of use of the executive aircraft — 
the issue of the use of executive aircraft, that you would refuse 
to allow us to make that analogy. That simply doesn’t make any 
sense, and the committee can’t function if we can’t refer to 
moneys and things that happen in other departments, and you’re 
going to stick strictly to the issue that you can only mention 
health in Health estimates. 
 
Well I’ll say that we have a difficult time. And I think that it’s 
totally proper for us, when we’re asking the Minister of Health 
about travel on executive aircraft, to ask him for the list of 
people who were with him. Because if this were the issue, that 
would mean that comparing . . . The minister who used to be 
the minister of transport or the Highways minister, the member 
from Wilkie, and the reasons that he was stepped down from 
cabinet, were properly dealt with in this Assembly. We were 
able to talk about it. And we can make the analogy of what will 
happen if ministers aren’t accountable for the use of executive 
aircraft and what would happen if this minister is allowed to 
hide this information. 
 
That’s what he’s trying to do. He’s saying to the public, clearly, 
he’s saying clearly to the public that he’s not going to give the 
information about who was on the aircraft with him when he 
used it. 
 
And I think he’s going down a wrong track. I think he’s taking 
his lines, not from his deputy, not from the people that are paid 
to advise him, but he’s listening to other cabinet colleagues on 
this one. I think that’s what’s happening. 
 
I think that we’re in a difficult spot if I can’t make the 
comparison between the former minister of Highways; 
inappropriate use of executive aircraft and his subsequent 
stepping out of cabinet, and making the analogy with the 
Minister of Health and why he should be giving the list. 
 
Why in the world would you try to stop that process from 
happening? Well I’ll tell you, I think I know. I think we have a 
massive majority government into the fifth year of its mandate, 
and they’re afraid to let the people . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. You are speaking to a point of 
order and nothing else. If you wish, continue. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the point of order was what we can 
discuss in this committee. And what I’m making the point is 
that I should be able to talk about a former minister of 
Highways who inappropriately used an executive aircraft, by 
his own admission . . . And I respect the man for admitting that; 
I respect him for admitting that and stepping out of cabinet. 
And now we have a minister who refuses to give us information 
on the use of the executive aircraft. 
  



 
April 24, 1986 

845 
 

I say to you that we should be allowed to do that. And that’s 
why I’m supporting the point of order made by my colleague, 
the member from Regina Centre, because the minister has said 
here that he’s not going to give us that list. He’s not going to 
give us the list. He’s not going to tell us if it were — who 
knows? — it may be some Conservative president who is riding 
on the aircraft with him. I’m not saying that, but why doesn’t he 
give us the list? Why wouldn’t he give us the list? I mean, the 
public will be suspicious, as they have every right to be. 
 
Who was on the aircraft with him? That’s the question. And if 
there is no one except executive assistants, and if there is no one 
except his family when it’s on a legitimate trip, no one is going 
to argue; no one is going to argue. 
 
All we want is a list of who was paid for by the Department of 
Health . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. You are now stretching beyond the 
precepts of the point of order and going into questioning of the 
estimates. I will now take a moment or two to determine your 
arguments, and I will give you a ruling on the point of order. 
I’m sorry. Member from Kindersley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, I think the ruling that 
you made that is being challenged by the members opposite is 
as follows: you made the ruling that when questioning in the 
Department of Health estimates you have to stick to Department 
of Health issues. This is what you’ve indicated. This has been a 
long-standing rule and it’s a discretionary call by the chairman 
as to whether or not it’s Health-related or into something else 
related. And that becomes a discretionary call, obviously of the 
Chair. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, he can speak. You can’t cut us off. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are you impugning I would? Are you 
impugning that I would? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wish to comment what was said by the 
member from Kindersley. We’ve always, since time 
immemorial, got information with respect to ministers’ 
expenses. That has not ever been in the Department of Health 
estimates; it’s always been in Executive Council or somewhere 
else. We have always got it. 
 
This is the first year it has ever been off limits, if that’s indeed 
what it is. Well that’s your argument. That’s your argument. 
Your argument is that because the money isn’t spent . . . 
because the money doesn’t appear in the Health estimates, it is 
therefore off limits. We’ve always got this information. There’s 
nothing new about it. 
 
I won’t repeat myself, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
argument itself, but it was merely an argument that this is 
information which is in the public interest to get. That’s all his 
argument was; nothing more than that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, the way this has always 
been dealt with in the House in the eight years that I have been 
here — in the eight years that I have been here — is to deal 
with it when it comes up in Supply and Services with regard to 
CVA, and you provide that information. That has been provided 
when they were in  

office, when the opposition were government, and it’s been 
provided that way when we were in government. And that’s 
always been the case. 
 
The point of order raised by your ruling, Mr. Chairman, was 
this: they said you have no right to tell them that they can go off 
into other fields. Well certainly the Chair has the right to bring 
members back into line to deal with the question of Health 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — On this point of order, Mr. Chairman, the 
member opposite has just said to you that you as a chairman, or 
anyone else as a chairman, can say to the members of this 
Legislative Assembly what they can or cannot ask . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s what you said. That’s what 
the member from Kindersley just said, and he protests now. 
 
This is not the function and the role of the chairperson. The 
function and the role of the chairman is simply, Mr. Chairman, 
to uphold the rules of this House. For the member from 
Kindersley’s argument, if we were to uphold that argument, it’s 
like saying that when you’re considering the estimates of the 
Department of Health, you can talk about . . . you cannot talk 
about the policies of the Department of Finance which provide 
the funding to the Department of Health. That’s what the nature 
of this point of order is. 
 
The questions that are being asked here are perfectly in order, 
because by asking the questions, we are using evidence that has 
come up . . . that has come to light on previous occasions in this 
House to support the questions we’re asking. And I’m sure, Mr. 
Chairman, if you would ask your Clerk and your Assistant 
Clerk to follow through on that, they will tell you that we are 
perfectly in order. 
 
Any opposition or even members, private members on the 
government side, are perfectly in order to use those kinds of 
analogies in order to support questions which are asked, which 
the minister may or may not choose to answer. 
 
We perfectly agree, as we’ve said before, that he may choose 
not to answer them. He will have to face the consequences of 
that and so will his colleagues, the consequences of refusing to 
answer questions which are legitimate and which the public has 
a right to know the answers to. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Chairman, not to lengthen the 
discussion, but I would suggest that 11 years of being in this 
building and watching this question over eight years when I was 
in opposition, and the replies from the gentlemen that are now 
in the opposition, the statement and the policy of this House 
became that under government services you could ask about all 
flying. It became also that only did the minister answer when he 
flew and when he flew . . . And the policy of the previous 
government was, you didn’t give names, you gave — there 
were so many passengers. The precedent has been set in 11 
years. Now the members on the other side wish to change the 
precedent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

846 
 

And all I’m saying to the point of order, Mr. Chairman, is to ask 
the question on this estimate, on the Minister of Health — how 
much he flies and the amount of bodies that were in the aircraft 
with him, has been the precedent and the history. To ask more 
than that has never been allowed before in precedent. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I do believe that both sides of the House 
have had ample opportunity and latitude in discussing this point 
of order. I will read through the rule book and in a few 
moments I will give my ruling on that matter. 
 
I have determined as my role as chairman that there is merit to 
the point of order if and however it pertains to the ministry at 
hand. The ministry at hand this afternoon in the committee of 
the whole is the estimates of the Minister of Health. Analogies 
to another minister and the types of activities that that minister 
had involved himself in does not pertain to the Health estimates. 
 
At the same time, I will remind the members of a ruling and a 
caution that I did make in this House two days previously 
regarding rule 494, which I know that you are all aware of, 
pertaining to what can and should not be discussed during 
estimates of a particular minister. Therefore, I find the point of 
order not valid. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well I’m going to challenge that ruling. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. Regarding my ruling 
and anticipating your question regarding the challenge, I would 
ask the member from Regina Centre to please take note of rule 
471, item (1) in Beauchesne’s: 
 

The Chairman maintains order in the Committee of the 
Whole, deciding all questions of order subject to an appeal 
to the Speaker. No debate (no debate) is permitted on any 
decision. 

 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m amazed that any chairman was able to 
find a ruling to keep order. There’s been no order in this House 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I would hope that the member from 
Regina Centre is not impugning the role of the chairman to 
bring order back to this House. I for one take my position 
seriously and my position of neutrality seriously as a chairman, 
and I make a point of learning and looking up the rules. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wasn’t suggesting that you didn’t take 
your job seriously. What I was suggesting is there hasn’t been 
order in this committee during this session of the legislature, 
Mr. Chairman. I challenge that ruling. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Mr. Speaker, during consideration of Health 
estimates, a point of order was raised by the member of 
Shaunavon to the effect that questions regarding the travel by 
the former minister of Highways should be acceptable. 
 
I ruled the question out of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m not sure that this is a debatable  

motion. One moment, please. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Mr. Speaker, if I may be permitted to make a 
correction, during the time of consternation I inadvertently 
wrote down the wrong member’s name who raised the point of 
order, and I would like to correct that now. The member who 
raised the point of order, Mr. Speaker, was the member from 
Regina Centre, rather than the member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — There is no debate on this question. The only 
question before the Assembly is: shall the ruling of the Chair be 
sustained. 
 
Ruling sustained on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 26 
 

Birkbeck Klein 
McLeod  Currie 
Andrew  Martens 
Taylor  Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Duncan  McLaren 
Katzman  Young 
Pickering  Hopfner 
Folk  Weiman 
Smith (Swift Current) Rybchuk 
Myers  Caswell 
Hepworth  Baker 
Dirks  Sauder 
Embury  Gerich  
 

Nays — 7 
 

Blakeney Lusney 
Tchorzewski  Shillington 
Thompson  Yew 
Lingenfelter  
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
wonder if the minister has reconsidered and whether he will 
now give us a complete list of people who were on the flights 
with him that were paid for out of the estimates of the 
Department of Health. I understand you will give us the trips 
and the flights, where they were to and from, the number of 
people. And what I want is who was with you on each of those 
flights. 
 
If you could prepare a list for me and agree to send them. I 
know you don’t have them with you because you have told me 
that. But if you would give me the commitment to give them 
within two weeks, and I think that’s perfectly reasonable, Mr. 
Chairman, and I don’t expect him to have all of that right here, 
but I wonder if you could give us the list with the names. 
  



 
April 24, 1986 

847 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, as I said previously, I will 
provide the member, in keeping with tradition of this House, I’ll 
provide him with the number of miles travelled, the cost, and 
the number of people that accompanied me. And just to indicate 
to you that we are keeping with tradition, I would refer all 
members to page 1982 of Hansard, April 8, 1981, and I quote 
from the debate at that time from Mr. Thatcher: 
 

As you provide us with that updated list to February 1981, 
I certainly don’t want to trouble you and send you back in 
the intervening years. Perhaps you could provide us with 
the names and the updated list of not only the individual 
who booked the flight but the names of the people who 
accompanied him on the flight. 

 
Response by the Hon. Mr. Robbins: 
 

No, that’s not government policy. It’s just the number 
recorded on the flight. 

 
So in keeping with tradition of this House, I will provide the 
same information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister will know full well that 
what we are asking for here is the flights out of his department, 
the flights that were taken by people out of his department. And 
what he is telling us very clearly that he’s not going to give 
them to us. 
 
And what I’m saying is that, for a government who is talking 
about opening up and freedom of information, this is an 
interesting approach to take. And the case they refer to is the 
same government as they say didn’t give out information. 
We’re going to do the same thing, is what he’s saying. That’s 
the analogy they’re making. We’re going to do the same thing 
as you did. You were bad. You didn’t give information. We’re 
going to do the same thing. That’s what they’re saying to the 
committee, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that with the experiences that 
we have had in the past with executive aircraft, that there is a 
suspicion out there of what cabinet ministers are using it for. 
It’s in the public’s mind. And I say to you that we would like to 
have that list that would include the names of the people who 
were with you, but you’ve refused to that. You’ve refused to do 
it, and let the record stand that the minister here is stalling us 
and stonewalling on information that the public thinks they 
should have. And we will leave it at that. It’s one of the reasons 
we’ve been on Health estimates for almost three weeks because 
it’s very difficult to get information out of this minister. And I 
would like it if you would give me the list of your 
out-of-province trips, if you would give me the out-of-province 
trips that you have made, and who accompanied you on each of 
those international and out-of-province trips that you have made 
in the past year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ll provide you with that information. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if you could as well  

indicate what the salary of your top officials, a list that is 
traditional, I think you agree, to give me a list, names and titles 
of your officials — who are traditionally given — the deputy, 
ADM, and whether you will give me that commitment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ll provide that information for you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has sent a list of his staff 
across and you have here a list that I will read out: a ministerial 
adviser, $4,000 a month or 48,000 a year; a ministerial assistant 
2, $3,179 a month or $39,000; ministerial assistant 2, for 2,670 
a month or 32,000; and a ministerial assistant B, 1,894 a month 
or 22,000 a year; and then two ministerial assistants A, one 
1,514 a month and one 1,611 a month — for a total of 14,868 a 
month or a total of $178,000 a year for personal staff. I wonder 
if the minister can indicate what that number was last year for 
that staff. Does this include all of your executive assistants or 
do you have some that would be in the department as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s my executive assistants. There’s 
one less than last year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can the minister tell me what kind of pay 
increases . . . Have they had a pay increase of any type since 
January 1 of 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ll provide that to you. There has been 
an increase for some; some have not had an increase. I’ll 
provide that to you, though. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if you could give that to us now. 
I have some questions that I want to follow up on on pay 
increases. Can you give me, for each of the individuals you’ve 
listed here, what the pay increase was. I know this was 
traditional in the House last year. That information was given 
on each of the executive assistants and secretaries, and I wonder 
if you will give it to us now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll have to ask for a photocopy of the 
paper I gave you so that we can work it out. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I had wanted to ask a question too on the 
minister’s own salary,. Can you give me, in the last year, what 
is the salary now of a minister and what were your total 
expenses? Do you have that handy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I believe that’s in Public Accounts. I 
don’t have it at the tip of my fingers. I think if you would check 
Public Accounts, you will see that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister will know that there are 
some who feel he’s getting paid too much, but I do realize that 
. . . I believe that cabinet ministers have not had an increase in 
the past year, since ’82. And that’s not the point I want to make 
right now. But if you would get that for me, and what your 
expenses were for the past year, we can move along here. 
 
I want to say as well that in the committee, the one point that I 
would make that we appreciate is being able to deal with all the 
points under subvote 1 because we have had an opportunity to 
cover off a good number of these  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

848 
 

already — northern health services and dental plans and 
construction, which has now moved out, but we had our go at 
that. And I think without very much time being spent, we may 
have a couple of questions as we go down. Mr. Chairman, we 
are ready to move off of that subvote 1. 
 
Just before we move off, there’s one small item, and that is on 
other expenses. Can you tell me what the increase has been 
there? If you look at personal services, that has stayed relatively 
the same. But there has been a relatively big percentage 
increase in the other expenses. Can you tell me in general what 
those are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s a new computer accounting system, 
government-wide. Our portion from Health is paid for under the 
admin subvote. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Who would that money have been paid 
to? Does it go to a private company or who would that go to? Is 
that a central . . . Would that go into the provincial computer 
operation or what is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mainly to SaskCOMP is what I’m 
informed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Would you give me a breakdown of that 
portion of the increase. I know you may not have that with you 
today, but if you would send that to me, of what the proportion 
would be. SaskCOMP would get some of it, but obviously you 
would be paying some to some other computer company. And 
obviously, if you’re just setting it up, some of it may be newly 
purchased equipment. If you make a commitment to send that to 
us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will give you a complete detail of our 
expenditures in the other category under admin services, 
subvote 1. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, just one question, Mr. 
Minister. Your department will have an advertising budget. Is 
that to be found under this subvote, or number 4? If it’s another 
one I won’t ask here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Under subvote 4. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
(1615) 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is the 
item that I was looking for. Mr. Minister, can you tell us how 
much you have budgeted in here for advertising of all forms 
that the department will be doing in the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Approximately $400,000. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And can you give me a breakdown  

of what this will be spent for? Is it a program similar to Aware, 
or educational programs of various kinds or promoting 
programs of the government? Could you give me an idea — or 
if you have it there send over the paper and we won’t take the 
time of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I do have some figures here. The Safe 
Grad, we expect to spend about 85,000 on that; about 140,000 
on Christmas alcohol; about 40,000 on the non-smoking 
program; and the other components may be advertisements for 
access for seniors, things that we were talking about a little 
earlier; maybe some other life-style type of advertising. We 
haven’t got it all put together at this point in time. But to give 
you a general idea, I suppose it would be basically life-style and 
some for seniors. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, is this the subvote under 
which you would pay any expenditures incurred because of 
polling that your department may be planning to take? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, as I explained to you previously, say 
if we want to do a tracking on Safe Grad, and the impact, it 
would come in this subvote. I explained to you how we had 
tracked the Christmas advertising — the alcohol advertising — 
previously. That would come under this subvote. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you tell me how much has been 
allocated for those purposes in this budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I couldn’t. That would be part, as I 
say, of the remaining balance where I said seniors, other 
life-style things, and so on. We haven’t allocated a specific 
amount for tracking. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me, what is the 
name of the polling organization, or company, or agency that 
you will be using? Is it the same one as you have used in the 
past, or have you changed, or are you planning to change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, we have no commitments to anyone 
for this year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — But you may very well be doing polling. 
When you decide the kind of polling you will be doing to assess 
the impact of your advertising program, or whatever, will you 
name a polling agency, or will you be issuing a tender? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I suppose, like we do in many other 
things, I’ll look for whoever can give us the best deal. We’ll 
explore all kinds of companies and see what delivery of service 
they’ll give us and what it will cost. At this point in time we 
haven’t entered into any type of investigation of that nature. 
Until then, I can’t say who it will be with, but I can tell you that 
we’ll be looking for the one that we can get the best results for 
the cheapest amount of money. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well that’s fair enough. If you do not 
have any particular polling that you have decided to do, then 
that’s okay. But I guess you’re telling me, therefore, because 
you’re going to be looking for the most  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

849 
 

economical agency or the agency that will do it for the best 
price and give you the most value for your dollar, did I hear you 
say, therefore, that you’re going to issue tenders so that 
everybody will have an equal opportunity at it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s rather hypothetical because I haven’t 
decided whether I’m doing it yet, or not. So how would I say 
when I’m issuing a tender? I can tell you the way I do business: 
I look around for who’s going to give me the best deal, who can 
provide the best service, and who can do it the cheapest. And 
I’ll do that, and I think that’s what one should be doing. 
 
So to say, are you going to tender — I don’t even know if I’m 
going to do any tracking at this point in time. I have some 
money set aside in case we do. But I can assure you, and I can 
assure the member opposite, that whoever I select to do it, or 
my department selects to do it, we will be driving a hard deal 
with them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m asking you a question 
on government policy as it applies to your department. It’s got 
nothing to do with what you decide to do on a whim or 
whatever reason you may decide to do it later. And surely you 
must know what your government’s policy is. When you do 
polling, do you or do you not have tenders and give every 
polling agency in the province — let’s us just stay within the 
province — an opportunity to get an equal crack at all? If all 
you’re saying is that you will go out and you will ask certain 
people, what you’re saying is that you will ask maybe the Ken 
Waschuk firm, which happens to be a high profile 
Conservative, to give you a bid or to tell you that this is the 
price he’s going to give you, and then you may decide on that 
one simple discussion. 
 
Well if the member from Meadow Lake wants to interrupt, I 
shall wait until he settles down, Mr. Chairman. I can’t hear 
myself ask the question because the member from Meadow 
Lake yells across the floor, and when he settles down, I’ll ask 
the question. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, if all you do is meet with some friend of the 
Conservative government and say, what kind of deal will you 
give me when we want to do this polling, for whatever reason 
you may do the polling . . . It may be legitimate, it may be not. 
I’m not going to question that. Then you’re not really driving 
any kind of a bargain on behalf of the taxpayer, which is paying 
big taxes, to get the programs of the Department of Health 
under way. I mean, it’s a question of policy. It’s not a question 
of what you might or might not do. Are you saying that you do 
not issue tenders for these kinds of projects but you just simply 
pick somebody on whatever terms you decide? And I know you 
will say it’s because it’s the most economical. But if that’s what 
you say, that doesn’t give everybody an equal opportunity to get 
at it. 
 
And that’s what the public is concerned about and I think it’s a 
legitimate thing for me or my colleagues to raise. People want 
to be treated fairly. Business people want to be treated fairly, 
whether they’re architects or construction people or whether 
they’re polling agencies or advertising agencies. I mean it’s a 
question of fairness. Everybody should have an equal 
opportunity to offer the kind of business deal that they can give 
you. Nothing is  

unfair about that. 
 
I guess you’re saying, therefore, you’re not prepared to say that 
your government has a policy of issuing tenders for these kinds 
of contracts. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister will see the number of 
person-years has increased from 15.4 to 17.5. You had 
explained that a Michael McCafferty, I believe, was the name 
had been transferred into this area. Would that be one of the 
new positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I have some non-permanent staff in 
there. And as I indicated earlier, the other position is Michael 
McCafferty. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — There’s one other position. Can you tell 
me, is that position now filled and if it is, who’s in that 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I said, those were non-permanent 
secretarial positions. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us what firms you 
had doing the advertising work for you last year and the amount 
of advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the firms I had were Roberts and 
Poole and Dome. I don’t have the figures here, but I will 
provide them for them as quickly as I can. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — What was the total amount, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I just indicated I don’t have the figures 
here. As quickly as I can get them, I will provide them for you. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Those were the only two firms that you used 
for any of the advertising within the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Did Brigdens photographics or Brown and 
Associates Advertising do any work for you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think Brigdens is our printing company, 
and I think Bridgens did some printing for us, but they’re not an 
advertising company. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — How about Brown and Associates Advertising 
Limited? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Continue on with some questions. We’ll 
check into that for you. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Could you check all of those then, Mr. 
Chairman, and provide the information for us, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I will do that for you. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Item 6 
  



 
April 24, 1986 

850 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The Minister, can you . . . is this where 
the community clinics in Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Regina, and 
others, would be included in the budgets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, they’re not under that subvote. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just indicate to me which one they are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Saskatchewan hospital services subvote. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Item 7 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister will know — and I don’t 
want to take a great deal of time; we’re not intending to get into 
a long debate here — but you will know our concern about the 
nine-month waiting period that many seniors and other people 
are having to put up with in this area. And that time period is 
growing and has been growing for the four-year period. And I 
would just say to you that it’s impossible to make a program 
work when you have senior citizens who have to wait nine 
months to get their hearing analysed and assessed, and then to 
get hearing aids. And I would just say to you and encourage you 
to make every attempt that you can to bring this up to speed, 
because it’s just not proper that our seniors would have to wait 
that long. 
 
This plan in the past has worked much better than it is now. 
And I don’t want to ask a lot of questions or to get into a big 
debate, but just to reiterate that anything you can do in this area 
will be gratefully appreciated. And I can’t for the life of me 
understand why it’s taken so long to turn that waiting period 
around and get it down to a proper length of time. It simply 
isn’t right that they would have to wait nine months to have 
their hearing impairments assessed and then to get their hearing 
aids. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, as I 
indicated earlier in my estimates that we are recruiting extra 
audiologists. We’re using nurses as a screening; it’s a point of 
entry. The member knows that we had a fire. The waiting lists 
were coming down; the fire in the SHAP area set us back a bit 
on the waiting list. But I think within the next few months we’ll 
see some initiatives that will start to decrease that waiting list. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
(1630) 
 
Item 9 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well here again I just want to make the 
point that it’s disturbing to the people, especially out in the rural 
areas, to see these cut-backs in the dental plan program. 
 
And here again we have discussed this already, but a number of 
times now with you as minister we have seen cut-backs in a 
program that everyone had believed was  

firmly in place. And I say to you, one of the first things you did 
was to exclude the four-year-olds from the dental program, and 
since that time you have systematically gone about a process of 
getting people, young people, to quit using the dental program. 
And the way that you’re doing it is not right. What you’re doing 
is making them wait so long for dental check-ups that the 
parents are going back to using the private dentists. 
 
And I hear this when I go around to the various schools and 
when I’m travelling around my constituency, that the children 
are having to wait longer and longer periods of time for dental 
check-ups. And if you look at the number of children enrolled 
in the dental plan for the last number of years, you’ll see a trend 
that is starting. And that is that less and less are using the dental 
program and more are using the private dentists, and that’s 
because the service has been curtailed. And here again we see a 
staff cut of 18 in that area, and this isn’t the first time you’ve 
had staff cuts in the dental plan. 
 
And I find it unfortunate that you would choose children’s teeth 
as the place to cut back — at a time when we have money for 
Peter Pocklington and money for everyone, money for 
international travel, money for polling in your department — 
that you would choose children’s teeth as an area to cut back, 
and say to the people in the province that this is one area that is 
expendable. 
 
And I just make the point that, if anything can be done to 
increase staffing in that area rather than cut back, that’s what we 
would be doing, and that’s a commitment that we would make 
to the people of the province: that as soon as you people have 
the election and we’re back in there, the dental plan will be put 
back to the . . . on the pedestal it was back in the 1970s; and that 
the cut-backs that you’ve instituted in this area would quickly 
come to an end. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly there’s no attempt to decrease 
the dental services to the people of Saskatchewan. The referral 
rate of the students has been constant over time. No one’s going 
to hit the street employed in the dental plan. The majority of 
those positions are vacant positions, that you see are deletions. 
But I indicate to you that dental health of the children of 
Saskatchewan is at a very good standard and as good as it ever 
was. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Items 10 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 13 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister would explain 
here on the staff reduction. I notice the asterisk would indicate 
that a portion of this is included in the vote for Supply and 
Services. In terms of numbers of staff, how many will be 
transferred and how many are actual cuts in that area of mental 
health services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Basically, that deletion or transfer breaks 
down as the following: 24.8 person-years go to Supply and 
Services; 11 psychiatrist positions transferred to contract on 
their request; and there’s 2.8 person-years  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

851 
 

in the net change and those were just some temporary, 
short-term type of positions. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — This contract by their request: what is the 
issue there? Can you give a little explanation of what has taken 
place there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There is two ways that we hire 
psychiatrists. One is under salary and the other is under 
contract, and being members of the medical profession, they 
prefer the contract type of arrangement. So these are 11 that 
have elected to go the contract route. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister, I wonder if he would give 
me a list of the 28 positions that are being transferred to Supply 
and Services. If you’ve got that with you, can you give that to 
me? I would just like to see which ones they are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will provide that to you. I can assure 
you that they’re all physical plant and grounds type people. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If you can give me a commitment — 
what, a couple of weeks? — will you give me that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Sure. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The reason that I want that list is because 
there is a — and it may only be a rumour — but there’s a 
rumour around that what is happening here is we’re transferring 
28 people out of Health to another department where it’s more 
legitimate to be laying them off. Now I’m not believing that 
rumour yet, but when I travel around the province — North 
Battleford, Prince Albert — this is what they’re telling me. Be 
leery of these birds who will be transferring people out of 
Health to Supply and Services and then laying them off as staff 
out of Supply and Services, because the politics of laying them 
off when they’re in the Department of Health isn’t great. 
 
Now I will give you the benefit of the doubt, but we will be 
keeping track of those positions. I appreciate the chairman 
allowing me to talk about Supply and Services here, because I 
think it was an important point that I wanted to make. Thank 
you. 
 
Item 13 agreed to. 
 
Item 14 agreed to. 
 
Item 15 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the minister indicated the 
community clinics were involved in this. Can you give me an 
indication of the increase in funding for the coming year in each 
of the community clinic operations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will provide that to you. We’re on the 
wrong subvote at this time but we’ll work on it for you. It’s 
item 23, subvote 29. I think we’re in administration SHSP now. 
So we go down to the next subvote 
 
Item 15 agreed to. 

Item 16 agreed to. 
 
Item 17 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, I just want to . . . On 17 and 18 there 
may not be a connection, or there may be. But can you tell me 
whether the reduction in one vote has anything to do with the 
increase in the other? Is there staff being transferred from 
continuing care to Wolseley? I don’t think that’s the case, but if 
it isn’t, what positions are being cut back out of the continuing 
care administration? Can you indicate that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No transfer from continuing care to 
Lakeside. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Could you indicate then the reduction of 
four in continuing care administration? Can you tell me what 
positions those would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have one research officer that 
transferred to the drug plan. We deleted an accounting clerk. So 
that’s two positions. And then there was 1.5 non-permanent 
positions that have been deleted. So that gives you the deletions 
in continuing care. 
 
Item 17 agreed to. 
 
Item 18 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can the minister indicate who the 
director or administrator is at the Lakeside home in Wolseley? I 
don’t think there’s been any change, but can you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Same as it was last year — Sandra 
Hextall. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And, Mr. Minister, has there been an 
increase in her salary since January 1st of 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s the same increase as the general 
public service increase. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And can you indicate what that increase 
was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Same as everyone else, in the 
neighbourhood of 3 per cent. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that was — I think you 
responded to whether there was an increase in this particular 
year. Was there an increase in 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The increases have been the same as 
anyone else in the public service. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So this position is in the regular public 
service agreement provisions. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s out of scope, but the same raises, the 
same ground rules as all the rest of my officials. 
 
Item 18 agreed to. 
  



 
April 24, 1986 

852 
 

Items 19 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 22 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, this is the point that the 
minister said that he would have that information on the 
increases to the community clinics in the various places in the 
province, if you would give those to us now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I understand they’re undergoing the same 
global review as the hospitals to see what their programs are 
and to ascertain what their global assessment would be. So 
there’s been no decision at this point in time. It’s under a global 
review process. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — There’s one issue on the Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse Commission that I would just like to ask about, and 
it has to do with an air base that is being considered near 
Yorkton as purchased by the provincial government and used as 
some sort of an abuse centre. My colleague from Yorkton, if 
you could just answer — or from Pelly — would like to ask a 
couple of questions on that, if there’s anything you can tell us 
about that to enlighten us on the issue of if there are any plans 
in the works for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’d be pleased to. The property 
management Crown is looking at taking over the White Spruce, 
I believe it is, air base which is located about 8 miles out of 
Yorkton. There has been no decision made as to the use of the 
facilities that will be there, just simply that the new property 
management corporation will be taking it over and will be 
looking at whatever positive uses it can be put to use for. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, under the Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse Commission, do you fund some privately run 
alcohol treatment centres? Under this subvote, do you fund or 
provide funding to privately operated alcohol treatment centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — All board operated facilities, if that 
answers your question for you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you explain what you mean by 
board operated? Are they set up by individuals who then have a 
board, or are they non-profit organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They’re all non-profit. I’m informed that 
some are individuals who have formed advisory boards, so that 
they have that advisory board to help them operate it. But 
they’re all non-profit. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In the case of an individual who will take 
the initiative to set a treatment centre up and then ask some 
people to be an advisory board, how does the salary of people 
involved determine — for example, this individual obviously 
would be getting a salary. How is that determined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We go through a line by line budget 
review with the commission. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is there such a treatment centre in  

Indian Head or in the vicinity of Indian Head? And what is it 
and who are the principals in it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There’s nothing operating at Indian Head 
at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Has there been in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. 
 
Item 22 agreed to. 
 
Item 23 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — One other short question on this. When 
you say it’s a global number for community clinics, what 
exactly are you saying, that all of them — you put a number in 
there and that it isn’t broken down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They each have a global budget. They’re 
each independent from each other and each have a global 
budget review. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I guess my question was: on that 
global budget that you had last year, what is your estimate for 
an increase in that global budget for this year for each of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We won’t know that until we’ve finished 
our discussions with them and I think we’re in those discussions 
at this time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I understand how negotiations carry 
on — it carries on for nurses and for your hospitals. But there is 
an overall number written into your estimate for each of those 
areas. And I’m not asking for your final number. What I’m 
asking is for an estimate of what you have estimated when you 
were planning the budget for the community clinics. And I will 
accept it as an estimate. I don’t want to hold you on any of these 
numbers to the dime because I very clearly understand how 
negotiations take place and it may be different. But the overall 
negotiating . . . And maybe here, Mr. Minister, you would like 
to give me the number for all the community clinics put into 
one package and that would be acceptable as well. But what are 
you estimating that increase to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I hope you understand, and I think 
you do from your comments, that it would be an estimate, but I 
would estimate in the neighbourhood of 5 per cent. 
 
Item 23 agreed to. 
 
Items 24 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 31 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just a moment. Under grants to special 
care facilities, I wonder what increase will there be to an 
individual nursing home — and here I’m not naming one — but 
what kind of an increase in direct grants to a nursing home are 
you planning for the coming year? You will know that in the 
nursing homes there are many things that are fixed. Is there a 
formula that you tie it to the power rates and staff increases in 
salary and that  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

853 
 

sort of thing, or what is the formula that you base this on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, estimated figure, they take the 
labour settlements and add about 3 per cent for overhead. 
 
Item 31 agreed to. 
 
Item 32 agreed to. 
 
Item 33 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, have 
you now concluded the negotiations with the pharmaceutical 
association, and has a new fee schedule been settled? And if so, 
has the formula changed, or the proportion of payment from 
government and from the consumer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have concluded the agreement 
temporarily. The pharmaceutical association are ratifying it at 
this time. So I couldn’t indicate to you what’s in it until 
ratification is completed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We had a discussion on this earlier. Can 
you tell me if the concern I had raised with you about senior 
citizens who have been able to get, in some cases, some 
discount, are being protected in this proposal? I’m not going to 
ask you details of the proposed agreement, but in the proposed 
agreement is there going to be some method by which senior 
citizens, who used to get a discount, now may lose it because of 
some proposal where pharmacists would be penalized if they 
discounted? Are those senior citizens being protected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We don’t feel that the agreement is going 
to affect discounts negatively in any way. 
 
Item 33 agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Health Capital Fund — Nil Vote 
 

Mr. Chairman: — The next item before the committee is the 
Health capital fund, subvotes nil. I’m just giving you the 
opportunity to ask any questions if you have any. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I find it a shame that there’s no 
money for capital expenditures in the Health budget. The 
minister will explain how it will be moved somewhere else, but 
I think that anyone reading the book will see that there’s been a 
drastic change in construction grants here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would just say, Mr. Chairman, anyone 
reading the book, please turn to page 134, and they’ll see 75 
million under the property management Crown. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Patient Care Fund — Vote 66 
 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

Vote 66 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 
Health Capital Fund — Vote 62 

 
Vote 62 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Mr. Minister, would you like to thank you 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d 
like to thank my officials for the support they gave me during 
this rather long and tedious set of estimates, and thank them 
very much for their . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just would like to say to the staff as 
well, that we appreciate their attempt to pass on information to 
us. It’s a difficult job, and it has been relatively long, but we 
appreciate the information and also look forward to getting the 
information we’ve been promised. I’m sure the minister will 
make sure that happens. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


