


















































May 28, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 28, 1986 
  
 
 

1565 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Hopfner from the Standing Committee 
on Crown Corporations presents the Sixth Report of the said 
committee, which is as follows:  
 
Your committee has completed its consideration of the reports of 
the following Crown corporations outstanding from the respective 
financial years of 1983 and 1984:  
 
Crown Management Board of Saskatchewan (CIC), 1983 & 1984; 
Agricultural Development Corporation, 1984; Municipal 
Financing Corporation, 1984; Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance, 984; Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 1984. 
 
Your committee has completed consideration of the 1985 reports 
of the following Crown corporations:  
 
Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation, Saskatchewan 
Minerals, Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. 
 
Your committee has held 11 meetings since its last report to the 
legislature which was concurred in on June 19, 1985, including 
seven meetings during this current legislative session. 
 
Your committee has twenty 1985 reports of corporations to 
consider in addition to the reports of the Saskatchewan Power 
corporation for 1984, and the Saskatchewan Crown Corporations 
Pension Funds for 1983. 
 
Legislation passed by this Assembly in 1985 has changed that 
status of Saskoil from a Crown corporation to a publicly-owned 
corporation registered under The Saskatchewan Business 
Corporations Act with shares being traded on the stock exchange. 
There is no longer any statutory requirement for Saskoil to table 
an annual report in the Legislative Assembly and, as a result, no 
reference exists that permits your committee to review the internal 
operation of the corporation. However, since the Crown's shares in 
Saskoil are held by Crown Management Board, your committee 
can avail itself of the opportunities to consider the government's 
financial involvement in Saskoil. 
 
Your committee elected a new Chairman on April 24, 1986, the 
member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, to oversee the operation of 
your committee. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member from Athabasca, Mr. Thompson:  
 
That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to 
you today, and to the members of the Assembly, 15 grade 8 
students that are seated in the Speaker's gallery. And these 
students attend Benson elementary school, located in my 
constituency here in Regina. They are accompanied today by Mrs. 
Mitchell and Dr. Ochitwa. And they have had the opportunity to 
tour the Legislative Building, and I'm sure that they will find their 
experience here this afternoon in question period to be very 
educational. 
 
I look forward to the opportunity of meeting with them for 
pictures and some refreshments after question period, and I would 
ask all members to joint with me in welcoming these students 
from Benson elementary school. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 
you, and through you to the Assembly, some 43 students from 
grade 5 and 6 from my constituency in Esterhazy. They come 
from the Esterhazy East Elementary School. They're seated in the 
west gallery. With them today are their teachers Bob Unchulenko 
and Walter Gorkoff, and their bus driver this afternoon is Sharon 
Gelowitz. I hope you enjoy the proceedings in the Chamber this 
afternoon, and I hope you enjoyed your tour and the rest of your 
tour for the day, and a safe trip home. 
 
I'll be happy to meet with you at 3 o'clock for pictures on the stair 
way out in the rotunda, and I'd like all the members to help me to 
welcome them to this legislation. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for me 
today to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, 17 grade 5 and 6 students from Coderre Elementary 
School in the village of Coderre, Saskatchewan, which is in my 
constituency. 
 
They are located in the east gallery today. Their teacher that is 
accompanying them is Carol Friesen, and they have chaperons, 
Judy Tremblay, Peggy Tremblay, Chris Patoine, and Vicki 
Desnoyers, and their bus driver is along, Mr. Jim Smith. 
 
I will be meeting with them after question period for pictures and 
drinks. I hope that your tour of the legislature today has been of 
great value to you and something which you will carry on into 
later life, and also the things which you watch here today will give 
you a better insight into how your government in Saskatchewan 
works, and how we, as MLAs try to do the things which you, as 
taxpayers in this province, like. 
 
I'd like all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1566 
 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Taxing of Livestock Tax Credits by Federal Government 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the 
Minister of Finance, and can you confirm, Mr. Minister, that your 
government has lost yet another round of battle with the Mulroney 
government in Ottawa, and that both the livestock investment tax 
credit and the livestock facilities tax credit will be considered as 
taxable benefits by the federal government. 
 
Can you confirm that this is Mulroney's position, and what does 
your government propose to do to make that decision palatable for 
farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I gather the hon. member found this out 
by reading the newspaper because it was taxable income a year 
ago and came about a year ago as a result of . . . I'm sorry, it was 
always deemed to be a reimbursement inducement under section 
12 of the Income Tax Act in last taxation years. so I give to the 
hon. member, we have made representation to the Government of 
Canada for over the last year now to urge that these provisions not 
be taxable. The federal government has stood by its ruling under 
section 12(1)(x) of the federal Income Tax Act that they are an 
inducement and are taxable. So we've made the representations for 
some considerable period of time. I'm a little surprised you just 
figured it out. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You know with the position that the federal 
government is doing nothing wrong, if you look at . . . In the case 
of a farmer with a $100,000 building, according to the Leader-Post 
report, the provincial credit would be $15,000. But instead of 
allowing the farmer to claim depreciation on the 100,000, as it 
would have been before the tax credit, the federal government will 
now reduce the amount by $15,000. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister: — these provincial tax credits 
were supposed to be the impetus for Saskatchewan hog producers 
to expand their herds. But how can these tax credits be a major 
incentive if every dollar of benefit is going to be taxed by the 
Mulroney government in Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I suppose we're going to have some 
difficulty of trying to find out which side of the fence you're on. 
Last year you were against the initiative, period. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well it's a waste of money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That's now . . . Sure. Now you're against it. 
Now you figure it should be tax deductible. Let me remind the 
hon. member that this was in place in the previous taxation year. 
 
Secondly, that I believe the number was over some 5,000 farmers 
— 97 per cent were farmers — had taken advantage of it last year 
knowing the tax provisions. So for you to stand up and say people 
won't take advantage of it, obviously you've been wrong for the 
last year and  

one-half. Secondly, you were opposed to it; now you figure it 
should be taxable. Obviously the people in your riding are having 
a great deal of difficulty trying to figure which side of the fence 
you're on and which position you're taking. But certainly this is not 
new. I suppose they are all out there surprised it took you a year to 
figure it out. 
 
Thirdly, it's very interesting that the farmers are still taking 
advantage of the provision, notwithstanding the tax rulings. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You know, final supplement, Mr. Speaker. And I'd 
like to ask this one of the Premier. You like to brag about your 
special relationship with Brian. If there is a special relationship, 
why can't you talk to the Prime Minister and convince him that 
this kind of action by the federal government is not in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan or Saskatchewan taxpayers? Nine and a 
half million dollars transferred to the federal treasury is what it is. 
And if that's the best you can do, why don't you talk to your friend, 
Brian, and come up with a solution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
mentions $9.5 million with respect to this tax provision. Given the 
relationship that we have with the Prime Minister, we've picked up 
about a billion and a half in terms of changes in legislation and 
cash coming to western Canada and the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We asked him to take the tax off farm fuel, and he did. We asked 
him to take the capital gains tax off farm land, and he did. We 
asked for help in drought or in flood, and he's made the 
contribution. We've also asked him to freeze the freight rates and 
freeze the elevator tariffs, and he's done that. We asked him to stop 
the beef imports when they're coming in. So, Mr. Speaker, I can 
give a list here for a dozen or more things that are worth hundreds 
of millions of dollars to the people of Saskatchewan, and you 
asked about a $9 million issue that's a year and a half old. As the 
Minister of Finance said, we don't know what side of the fence 
you're on. 
 
So I said I will continue to make the representation. And I suspect 
I would be as successful as anybody sitting on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, and certainly much more successful than 
anybody sitting on that. 
 

Repeal of Tax on Used Vehicles 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Minister of Revenue and Financial Services. It concerns the Bill 
introduced last spring to amend The Education and Health Tax 
Act, Bill 76, which extended the 5 per cent provincial sales tax to 
used vehicles. 
 
Nine months later your government admitted that the tax was a 
mistake and that it was unfair, and you withdrew it. You withdrew 
it by a press release from the Premier's office. Since your 
government introduced this tax through legislation, will you, Mr. 
Minister, be introducing an amendment to The Education and 
Health Tax Act to repeal this provision of Bill 76 which you 
enacted at the last session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government responded to the wishes of the people,  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1567 
 

and we're very proud of doing that. And we have responded to the 
wishes of the people in taxation in many, many ways by reducing 
or eliminating the tax on gasoline recently, by eliminating the tax 
on clothing under $300. 
 
We've provided many measures through the Minister of Finance to 
provide an allowance for people to reduce their taxation. And 
certainly, as it comes to taxation, we are quite prepared to defend 
our record in taxation against your record, and particularly your 
record in refunding money to people, to widows and orphans, 
under succession duty in which you collected $28 million at a time 
of death, a time of bereavement within a family — when you 
refunded not one penny, not one nickel. When you forced farmers 
to sell off parts of their farm in order to pay that tax; small 
business to sell their family business, their livelihood, to pay that 
tax, and we will defend our record of taxation with the people 
anywhere in this province, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, with a minister who is 
unwilling to answer a simple question as to whether you're going 
to take a tax off the books, but has to go back 10 or 15 years, it's 
not surprising that this government is totally afraid to call an 
election, has run away from an election . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — . . because it is having to look back . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. order! If the 
member has a question, I'll take the question, but the member is 
making statements rather than asking questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am making a statement in 
answer to the debate of the hon. member, which was equally out 
of order — equally out of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the member have a question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I have a question. The question is this, 
and it's the same as the first one, same as the first time, and it's 
this: — do you propose to bring in legislation to take that sales tax 
on used cars and trucks off the books, or do you intend to leave it 
on the books so you can reimpose it by a simple statement from 
the Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member talks about 
reimposing taxes, and I would challenge him that when he was in 
North Battleford talking to the council up there, he indicated to 
that council that he believed in a sales tax and that a NDP 
government in this province would either reimpose the sales tax, 
raise the sales tax, or both. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province know full well our 
record on taxation: — no tax on power bills, no tax on utilities, no 
tax on clothing. They have not had to sell their farming business to 
pay a death tax and, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will find 
out in the near future . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member is not 
answering the question but rather covering a lot of other topics. 
That's why I asked for order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask one other 
question. Is it your intention to leave that law on the books which 
will allow you to reintroduce that tax at any time? That is a fairly 
simple question. A lot of people are wondering whether you're 
going to reintroduce the tax. They're wondering why you aren't 
taking it off. Will you be introducing legislation which will take 
this tax off the books, and if so, when may we expect it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A lot of people are 
wondering if they will be reintroducing taxes if they ever form the 
government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, if the NDP opposition will be 
quiet for a moment, I'll be happy to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be seeing legislation in this House in the 
very near future to repeal that particular amendment. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it's well-known in the general public that that tax has not 
been paid for a good long time in this province since the Premier 
announced that it would be removed. And that is very consistent 
with lower and lower taxation of a number of different 
commodities, and at all levels across this province, because of the 
actions of this government — very much in contrast to their 
actions. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — We all know, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP ran the 
highest tax administration in the history of this province. 
 
My question to the minister is: — are there any more surprises for 
the people of Saskatchewan with respect to the 5 per cent sales tax 
before we go to the polls, and can we expect a reduction in that 
sales tax as your government committed to prior to the 1982 
election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, thank you. The member is quite 
accurate when he says that the NDP were the highest taxing 
administration in the history of the province. We've tried to correct 
that, as the member well knows. As the member well knows, 
we've tried to correct that, and we've had major success in 
correcting that and lowering the overall tax burden to the people of 
the province. And anything that we will be doing in the future to 
reduce the level of taxation to the people across the province will 
be announced in due course, and I'm sure you'll be quite happy 
with it. 
 

Hiring Practices of the Public Service Commission 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — New question, Mr. Speaker, and it's to the 
minister in charge of the Public Service commission. It's come to 
my attention recently through several  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1568 
 
 

constituents that the hiring practices of your government, from the 
janitor right through to the chairman of the board, are based on a 
colour-coding scheme. A lady who, in fact, applied for a job with 
your dental program, after acceptance by the department was 
informed that her application was turn down because her son, of 
all things, was an NDPer. 
 
The first question I ask you is: Mr. Minister, how many Koskies 
are left working for your government, and is this practice of firing 
people who do not, in fact, believe in your own philosophies; does 
it run rampant through your government, and do you support it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No, Mr. Speaker, I believe in a very 
professional approach to the hiring of people to work for the civil 
service here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Supplementary to the question. I would like to 
remind you that with respect to job applications, whether it was 
anywhere within the civil service . . . I would like to suggest to 
you that the question was asked: — what is the political 
philosophy of the applicant. And without question, I have 
answered that question many times saying that it doesn't really 
matter. I believe the job is what is important, and I want that 
individual working whether they are an NDP, a WCC, or a 
conservative. Does your government still colour-code all 
applicants? I think you, in fact, know what I am talking about, Mr. 
Minister. And if that is the case, do you agree with it, and has it 
happened recently in the department of dental services in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a substantial 
difference, I believe, between the hiring practices today and those 
of the former administration. And I did bring to the attention of the 
members of the Assembly . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I did bring to the attention of the members of 
the Assembly some time back, Mr. Speaker, a good example of 
six or seven members of the NDP member from Quill Lakes that 
were hired under the former NDP administration. That is not the 
practice of this government. 
 
We believe, I believe, that there should be a professional approach 
to the hiring of those people who want to work in the civil service 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, and I'm not particularly 
concerned what political stripe they come from. What is important 
is that the people of Saskatchewan are served competently, 
professionally, and efficiently. That is what I believe; that is the 
practice of the Public Service Commission, Mr. Speaker, under 
my direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Within the structure of job applications, Mr. 
Minister, what's Harvey Rothecker's function? And does he 
determine these people are colour-coded properly to hire these 
individuals within your public service? 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I was not able to hear the 
question from the member opposite because of the noise coming 
from the NDP benches. If he would like to repeat the question, I'll 
attempt to respond to it. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Simple question: — what is the role of Harvey 
Rothecker, a member of Executive Council, in determining who 
works for your Public Service commission in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not responsible for 
members who work for Executive Council. I'm not familiar with 
the particular responsibilities of the individual that the member 
opposite has referred to. There are literally thousands of people 
who work for the civil service here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I don't know their particular responsibilities or 
duties as individuals. 
 
So as I indicated that member does not work for my particular 
Public Service Commission that I'm responsible for. I don't know 
which particular department he may or may not be working for. 
 

Refund of Tax on Used Vehicles 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address my 
question to the Minister of Revenue and Financial Services on the 
same issue that my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, was 
raising, and that is the unfairness of the used vehicle tax. I want to 
ask you, Mr. Minister, have you been receiving a number of letters 
similar to what we have been receiving of concerned citizens in 
respect to the unfairness of this tax? And may I just quote in part 
from a couple of letters, Mr. Speaker, a letter from Martensville 
which reads, in part:  
 

Taking the tax off a few months after it was introduced 
represents a change of rules in the middle of the game, 
something which is universally recognized as being unfair. Had 
we know the tax would be lifted we naturally would have 
waited to buy a vehicle. 
 

Another family from Prince Albert, Mr. Minister, writes:  
 

So, Mr. Devine, all I can say to you is if you can't see your way 
clear to correct your mistake and pay back the $860 tax we paid 
unfairly, then I will never be able to support your government, 
and there are many, many more that feel the same way. 

 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, can the minister explain to these people 
why he thinks that he has treated these people fairly in respect to 
the non-repayment of the tax which was unfair in the first place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. I'm going to ask for order in the 
House. There's just so much commotion that you can't be heard 
here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you. I would encourage the  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1569 
 

member to table those letters. Unfortunately, I just went through 
my dossier here, and I don't have a letter with me that I received in 
my office this morning from an individual who said: — frankly, I 
paid tax when I bought a used vehicle, and I don't want it back. I 
think this is a politically motivated foofraw caused by the 
opposition, he said. And he said, I recognize that tax dollars from 
that source go into the general revenue, and they pay for schools 
and hospitals and a number of other things around the province. 
 
And he just basically aid that he thought that was fair and 
reasonable, and that he expected to live under the tax régime of the 
day, and he was quite prepared to do that. And I've received a 
number of those letters . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Table that letter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I'll be happy to table that letter, the member 
from Shaunavon says. I'll be happy to table that letter. If I had it 
here with me today, I'd table it today. But I will make this 
undertaking. I will table it tomorrow, and I'm prepared to table my 
letters. I don't know if they're prepared to table theirs, because 
mine are legitimate, Mr. Speaker, and they don't come from NDP 
candidates around the province, they don't come from NDP 
organizers around the province, and they don't come from highly 
placed NDP family members around the province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, I want to ask you about another letter which was sent to 
our Premier by a retired couple in Moose Jaw, and I read, in part. 
And they've asked us to draw it to the attention of the legislature, 
the unfairness of the tax . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I said new 
question, not supplementary. 
 
Here is an elderly couple, and they say in their letter:  
 

After saving for many years for an almost new car to start our 
retirement years, we are burdened with yet another tax. After 
great deliberation, our car was purchased and the sales tax was 
paid, if somewhat grudgingly. A few weeks later this same tax 
was removed. Now we are faced with yet another decision and 
more deliberation in this household. Do we keep voting for this 
government? Will they do the right thing and refund the tax, or 
must we look to another party to give our vote to at the next 
election? 

 
Mr. Minister, I ask you: will your government do the right thing to 
these people, or will you continue to compound the unfairness. 
Will you, in fact, refund this unfair tax that they had to pay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if we're going to use the 
question period here every day to read letters back and forth, 
tomorrow I will bring the file of letters that I've received from 
widows and orphans who paid an unfair succession duty, a death 
tax administered by that government, and I will begin reading 
them back into the record. 
 
I have received letters from people who tell me: we had to  

sell our farm, parts of our farm, to pay succession duty, and that 
sale meant that it was no longer a viable unit. I have received 
letters from people who said: — we had to sell part or our entire 
small business which had been in our family for two or three 
generations to pay succession duty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was $28 million worth of letters received from 
people who had to pay that unfair tax. And, Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to eliminate and lower taxes, whether they're income 
taxes which have been lowered, as my colleague from Regina 
South outlined very, very well yesterday; whether it's removal of 
tax on clothing; whether it's removal of tax on gas; whether it's 
removal of tax on utility bills, or any of a number of a litany of tax 
reductions and tax equities that we can point to on this side of the 
House that those members opposite never even dreamed of, 
because all that they could think to do was tax you till you could 
hardly even survive in this province. And their only vision is them, 
with a bagful of money, walking around being able to purchase 
ever more Crown corporations to put big government ever more in 
control. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Crude Oil Seepage into Lake Athabasca 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question 
to the Minister of the Environment, and it deals with the major oil 
spill on Lake Athabasca near Uranium City. 
 
In view of the extremely hot weather that we've been having in 
northern Saskatchewan, and the high winds, could the minister 
indicate that the slick from the crude oil spill has now been blown 
from the docks at Bushell Bay and out into the main lake where it 
poses a threat to the commercial fishing industry. Can the minister 
give us an explanation as to how this happened when you assured 
the Assembly just a few days ago that the clean-up was under way 
and would be completed soon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I take the alleged facts 
from the member opposite not at face value. I will check those 
facts and bring back an update on that problem tomorrow. 
 
When we went through this debate previously, we have found that 
member opposite's facts were not facts. And so I will check what 
he has alleged today, and I will bring back an answer tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, when you bring 
that answer back, can you also tell the Assembly how much oil is 
yet to be cleaned up and when you expect the clean-up to be 
completed? Also, does your department see any threat to the 
nearby community of Camsell Portage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, I am not at all sure 
that the facts alleged today are in fact the facts, so I will check 
with my department today and I will bring back an answer 
tomorrow. 
 

Lack of Answers to Questions on the Order Paper 
 
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1570 
 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question is directed to the House 
Leader, and it deals with the fact that we are now on day 50 of this 
session and still the government has failed to answer a number of 
questions that have been on the order paper for almost 50 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the House Leader can tell the 
Saskatchewan government when your government will finally be 
answering the following questions, the ones that have been on the 
order paper for a couple of years: — the government's former 
arrangement with the former PC candidate, one Terry Leier, an 
individual you may know; the money paid out to various law firms 
by government departments and Crown corporations. 
 
Another question that has been there for some time, the 
out-of-province travel expenses of cabinet ministers, such as the 
Premier and the former minister of Economic Development and 
Trade. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you inform us when we might expect 
an answer to those and other questions that have been on the order 
paper? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I'm going from memory, Mr. Speaker, but 
I think that's sometimes dangerous. But I think, obviously, 
everybody will be aware that the opposition ran out of questions 
so he had to dig back for one and recycle it. 
 
The fact is, that question, Mr. Speaker, was asked of my deputy 
some time ago, and he answered in the following way, I believe. I 
think he said that there was something like 302, or thereabouts, 
questions addressed to this government in written form or by way 
of return in the four years since 1982 when we took office. All but 
19 I'm told, and there may be even less than that now, were 
answered to that date. 
 
Now, I apologize . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . None of them 
were ever passed either, Mr. Speaker, they were questions . . . The 
member for Regina North West is talking about questions that for 
the most part died on the order paper, so I don't know how he can 
legitimately complain about that. Had he been sitting in the House 
on private members' day so he could have moved those questions 
into an order for return, naturally we would have answered them. 
But he wasn't here then, Mr. Speaker; he's not here a whole lot 
these days, Mr. Speaker, and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Death of Member for Kinistino 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
would, with leave of the House, like to rise and acknowledge the 
untimely passing of one of the members of our legislature. 
 
I am profoundly saddened by the tragic death of Mr. Ben Boutin, 
who was the member of the legislature for Kinistino. 
 

Ben was a young man, 33 years old, going about his routine work 
as a farmer. His accident could have happened to any one of us 
that work with large machinery. Ben spent his last four years 
working for the people of Kinistino as a member of the legislature, 
and he left his mark on Saskatchewan. 
 
I remember his nomination well, Mr. Speaker. I didn't know that 
we would have very many people turn up at this particular 
nomination. And Ben Boutin decided to seek the position and run, 
and there was about 500 people showed up, and most of them 
were his relatives. 
 
He was a very, very strong advocate of our senior citizens and our 
farmers, and worked hard on their behalf. He made a valuable 
contribution to our caucus, particularly on agricultural policy 
because he was intimately involved in the farming and agricultural 
scene. I grew to rely on his advice about rural people and about 
seniors, and I relied on him not only as a member of the 
legislature, but indeed as a friend. 
 
Ben was a straight-shooter. He was a very compassionate 
individual and spoke for what he believed in. He was a kind of 
individual that wore his heart on his sleeve. He had a great love for 
life and a great love for his wife and his children, and for his 
friends, and obviously for the people of Saskatchewan and the 
people of the area of Kinistino. 
 
But his first priority, Mr. speaker, was his family and his farm, and 
he had decided not to seek re-election to devote more time to those 
priorities. And all I would like to say today, Mr. Speaker, is that on 
behalf of the government, I wish to extend my deepest sympathy 
to his wife Lucie, to their five children, and to all his family, and 
say that we sincerely share in their sorrow. 
 
Formal condolence motions will be made tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
And for those that may want to attend the funeral, it's Friday 
morning at 10 a.m. in Domremy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I know I and other Hon. 
Members will want to say something further on the occasion of 
the formal condolences. But on this first opportunity, I would like 
to join with the Premier in recognizing the work and in mourning 
the passing of the member for Kinistino, Ben Boutin. 
 
It's always a matter of a good deal of sadness when a sitting 
member of the legislature passes from our midst. But in this case I 
think it's particularly unfortunate, particularly untimely, that a 
person of Ben Boutin's age — still in his early 30s — is killed, and 
therefore leaves his family, a young family, without the guidance 
of a husband and a father. 
 
He was, as I indicated, a young man whose political career was 
short and had not had a full opportunity to make his mark. He had 
indicated, I think, that he was not proposing to run at the next 
election, but held his options open to run at a subsequent one when 
his farm was fully established and when his family was somewhat 
older. 
 
His death was untimely in the extreme. My colleagues and I join 
with the Premier in extending sympathy to Mrs.  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1571 
 

Boutin, to the five children, and to all other members of the Boutin 
family. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day and 
with leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Economic Development and Trade:  
 

That when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, May 29, 1986, 
it do stand adjourned until Monday, June 2, 1986. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 8 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Before we begin the estimates for the 
Department of Education I would ask the minister to please 
introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 
immediate right today I have the deputy minister of Saskatchewan 
Education, Dr. Rod Wickstrom; and to his right I have Mr. Jack 
Lloyd who is the executive director of finance and administration; 
and seated behind me I have the two associate deputies, Mr. Brian 
Ward and Mr. Steven Pillar. And other officials will be joining us 
as is required. 
 
(1445) 
 
Before getting into some questions from my hon. colleagues 
across the way, Mr. Chairman. I would simply like to say that it 
has been an extremely busy and satisfying year in Education. And 
we look forward to another busy year as we progress into the 
second year of the education development fund and some of the 
exciting things that we haven't been involved in, including seeking 
solutions for various problems that always seem to crop up with 
us. 
 
With that, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to any questions that the 
opposition may have. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number 
of questions that I will want to pursue with the minister during the 
consideration of these estimates, dealing with funding for 
education, the questions of dealing with the core curriculum, the 
Directions report, the state of . . or the methods employed by the 
government in negotiations with teachers for teachers' salaries and 
working conditions, and so on. 
 

But I want to begin this afternoon, Madam Minister, with a 
question which I asked in the House yesterday in question period, 
and it has to do with the teachers' superannuation commission and 
the teachers' superannuation fund. 
  
I note that in the estimates there is a provision where the 
Department of Education funds the administration of the teachers' 
superannuation fund. And therefore, Madam Minister, you do 
have some particular responsibility in this field. But as well as 
that, you have a specific responsibility, and I understand that, 
because you are the Minister of Education. You deal not only with 
school boards, but you deal with teachers as well. 
 
And it has come to my attention, in growing numbers, that there is 
some concern about recent changes that have been brought about 
by the government with the teachers' superannuation commission, 
regulations as well as a change in policy as it applies to what you 
do with earnings of the teachers' superannuation fund. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell me if there has been a change 
recently, particularly with the initiation of this budget for this 
coming fiscal year, or this fiscal year? Has there been a change in 
a policy as to the utilization of excess earnings in the teachers' 
superannuation fund? 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell me if there has been a change 
recently, particularly with the initiation of this budget for this 
coming fiscal year, or this fiscal year? Has there been a change in 
a policy as to the utilization of excess earnings in the teachers' 
superannuation fund? And in excess earnings, I mean earnings 
above 7 per cent. Has there been a change in that policy which 
now makes it different than it was last year, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well simply, no, Mr. Chairman, I'm familiar 
with the member from Regina North East question. yesterday the 
Acting Minister of Education was kind enough to take it. And he 
also stated that there had been no change in policy. And I will state 
it very clearly again: — there is no change in policy. 
 
I would however like to point out to the member, as I read through 
Hansard, and some of the statements that he had to say in regards 
to the question, some of it is simply not true. You did state that this 
government had changed the policy this year by not budgeting or 
showing a budgeted figure in terms of excess earnings over that 7 
per cent. 
 
Well when I go back and look at the figures, I want to remind the 
member, who through those times had an opportunity as minister 
of Finance and as a minister of Education then, that for example in 
1978 the fund was earning 9 per cent, and you contributed 6 per 
cent. By the year 1981, that fund was earning on interest, 10.67, 
and you contributed 7 per cent. 
 

So to stand in this House yesterday and to say there is a precedent 
being set is totally false, totally. There is no precedent in this. The 
moneys have been put in, and as you allude to the 7 per cent, I also 
want to point out to you that over and above that 7 per cent it is 
not unusual to find further dollars put in through capital gains from 
the fund. For example, when we became government in '82-83, 25 
million was put in on the capital gains portion that was over and 
above the 7 per cent of the interest earned; 1985 was 21.5; the two 
years before that was 16 million. So to come back to the very 
simple answer to your question: — no, the policy has not changed, 
and in fact we had made a commitment as we go along to try and 
get to a point 
where that unfunded liability would be much more manageable. 



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1572 
 
 

And I think we've done reasonably well in four years. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, are you saying that in this 
fiscal year you are not taking 100 per cent of the excess earnings, 
about 70 per cent, out of the teachers' superannuation fund and 
applying it to existing payments for existing superannuation 
pensions? Are you saying you're not taking 100 per cent of the 
excess earnings in this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we are recognizing the 
excess earnings. What doesn't show up in the book . and if the 
member had been listening he would have heard me say the word 
"capital gains," and that is what is not budgeted in the figures. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, either I'm not making my 
question clear or you're not answering the question. The 
superannuation fund has earnings because it is invested, 
obviously. Those earnings over 7 per cent, are you saying that 
you're not taking the earnings above 7 per cent — the excess 
earnings above 7 per cent —out of the fund and using them to pay 
for superannuates' pensions, existing superannuates' pensions? 
Now that was my simple question. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I can only repeat my previous answer. Yes, 
we do recognize those excess earnings. What you are not seeing or 
recognizing is the capital gains. And for example, in the fiscal year 
'85-86 there was $21.5 million extra that was gained through what 
the superannuation calls capital gains. That was over and above 
the earnings. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you explain, minister, what you mean 
by the words you use, "we recognize excess earnings." What do 
you mean by that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well this particular topic, Mr. Chairman, 
could very well take a long time because I don't pretend to be an 
expert in terms of pension plans, and I would doubt if the member 
opposite is either. 
 
We have not taken any moneys out, as you have alluded to. The 
moneys have not been taken out; they have remained within the 
fund. What you find this year, with the changing interest rate 
markets and investment markets, is a lowering. For an example — 
and I gave you one of the years previous — the year 1981, interest 
rates were running around 10 per cent. Now you credited at that 
time — and I say you, because you were in power — credited the 
account with 7 per cent. I might very well ask you the same 
question today: — what on earth did you do with the extra 3.67 
per cent? 
 
It's a fair question. It's a fair question. If you want to make this a 
straight political issue, then we can approach it that way. And I 
will simply say that you are misconstruing the actual facts and the 
actual figures in looking for a political issue, my good friend, that 
isn't there. 
 
Now you're talking about how to invest moneys, how they're put 
back in — revenues, expenditures, market values, interest rates, 
investments, the whole ball game. If  

you want to talk that, we'll talk that. If you want to talk to the 
straight politics of it, well I guess that's your prerogative, if that's 
what you choose to do with such an issue. 
 
As I said before, there's been no money taken out of it as was 
suggested in this House yesterday. And in fact we have more, over 
the last four years, more than put in the minimum requirement. 
And I will go over those figures again: — in '82-83, we put in an 
extra 25 million; in 1983-84, 16.9 million; '84-85 was 16.8 
million; '85-86 was 21.5 million. 
 
Now the issue this year is because we did not budget any kind of 
an amount in terms of capital gains in the blue book. And there 
were some reasons for that; interest rates have come down. We 
don't know if there's going to be a whole lot over that 7 per cent. 
You could very well find at the end of the year that the 
investments were better than what they initially thought when the 
budget was drawn up. But at this point in time, what we have in 
there is the minimum requirement. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, you may want to think 
only in terms of opposition members raising these issues as a 
matter of politics. I want to tell you that the teachers of this 
province are extremely concerned about what you have done in 
this year with the teachers' superannuation fund. And I would 
hope that you would not stand up in the House and simply say, 
when teachers become concerned about education or about a 
superannuation fund to which they contribute, that somehow 
they're getting political. You may want to think that, Madam 
Minister. I don't think that. 
 
As a matter of fact, last night in this city of Regina there was a 
meeting, a regular general meeting, of the teachers who happen to 
work, in this case, for the separate school system. And there was a 
long debate. I wasn't at the meeting, but I spoke to people who 
were. There was a long debate about changes you have made to 
what you do with excess earnings in the teachers' superannuation 
fund. As a matter of fact, a resolution of some firmness, I might 
add, was passed expressing concern and asking that something be 
done by the council and the executive of the STF with regard to 
this issue. 
 
Just to bring it into focus, Madam Minister, I will read you what 
the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation has reported to the 
councillors, the presidents, the chairmen of the LINC (Local 
Implementation and Negotiation Committee) committees, and the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation staff reps. And then when I 
have finished reading it to you, Madam Minister, I want to ask you 
whether you would want to say whether this is an accurate 
assessment by the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, or whether 
it is in error. 
 
And it states the following:  
 

Recent changes in government policy related to allocating 
interest earnings to the superannuation fund has caused the 
federation to raise some concern with the Minister of Finance. 
 
The government has the legislative responsibility  

  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1573 
 

to provide the following minimal support: (1) guarantee the 
superannuation payroll; (2) match teacher contributions (and 
that only began in 1980); (3) maintain the minimum fund 
balance, which is the total of all teacher contributions, together 
with the credited interest, and all government contributions, 
together with credited interest. Interest is currently credited at 
the rate of 7 per cent and provided in the 1979 provincial 
collective bargaining agreement (and that's probably the play on 
words that you're trying to make here). 

 
And then it goes on to say:  
 

In recent years the provincial support has usually exceeded the 
legislative minimum support required by adding the interest 
earnings in excess of 7 per cent to the fund. 
 

(1500) 
 
As a matter of fact, you may correct me on this, but I think last 
year it was something like 64 per cent of the excess was retained 
in the fund. And then it goes on to say:  
 

We are concerned with the government's decision to only fund 
the minimum requirements for 1986 - 87, when in fact estimates 
for '86-87 indicate earnings of the fund well in excess of the 7 
per cent minimum allocation required. 

 
Madam Minister, is this an accurate statement by the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I'm well aware of the 
concern that teachers have had for many, many years over the 
unfunded liability. I'm also aware of the resolutions, one coming 
out of STF council. I am not aware of a particular resolution that 
may have come out of a meeting last night. 
 
The statement is inaccurate, Mr. Member from Regina North East, 
in terms of the first statement on the policy being changed. That is 
not true. The policy has not changed. I've given you the figures 
dating right back to 1978 and the next two years up to 1980 when 
the agreement was more formalized. And at that time the policy 
was one of the minimum requirements. And I have given you the 
interest earned and interest credited in your years of power, plus 
into '82 - 83, to show that in fact that policy has not changed. 
 
The policy is also one of, when you can and if it's possible and you 
have received back more than what you budgeted for, you may 
very well, in a good year, put more money into that unfunded 
liability than you did the year before, or maybe the next year. This 
year, with interest rates coming down, you will probably see a 
lesser amount than what you saw last year and the year before. I 
don't think that's difficult to understand. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, can you tell me what the 
policy was last year? Can you tell me how much of the excess 
earnings were retained in the fund last year? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Last year the figure was $21.4 million 
retained. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, we're going to be here a 
long time if you continue to refuse to answer the questions, and 
that's what you're doing here today. Now I wish you would get to 
the topic here and answer the questions rather than talking around 
them. The question is: — how much of the excess earnings was 
$21 million? How much, in percentage terms, of the excess 
earnings were retained in the fund? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — First of all, let's not get into a lecturing 
point, and don't patronize me with your teacher attitude in here. 
Okay? This is not a class-room. This is not a class-room, and I'm 
not the student. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the figure would work out to $21.4 million, almost 
21.5. It would be 52.1 million over 21.4. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So you're saying that some of the excess 
earnings — and according to the Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation, about 64 per cent of the excess earnings were retained 
in the superannuation fund last year. Am I correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It's a little over 60 per cent. But the main 
point of it all is that the policy hasn't changed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's not the point. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, that precisely is the point because you 
levied in this House an accusation that the policy had been 
changed. And I'm telling you today, no, the policy has not been 
changed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, how much of the excess 
earnings are you going to retain in the fund this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That is going to depend on what happens 
over the year in terms of interest rates. The blue book is an 
estimate. You could conceivably end up with some, but we have 
not estimated that that, in fact, is going to happen on the capital 
gains — the capital gains. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, will you listen to this 
then? There was a letter that was sent to the Hon. Gary Lane, the 
Minister of Finance, dated May 2, 1986 — not so long ago — and 
I'm sure you read it. And it states in the letter:  
 

Your government has moved from a position of retaining 
approximately 64 per cent of the excess interest earnings in the 
superannuation fund to the current '87 - 87 position of retaining 
none of the excess earnings in the fund. 

 
Further to that letter, there was a meeting that was held with the 
Minister of Finance, initiated by the Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation, in which the Minister of Finance agreed that that 
indeed is what was happening. 
 
How can you stand up, Madam Minister, and deny that 100 per 
cent of the excess earnings are not going to be  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1574 
 
 

removed from the fund when your own Minister of Finance has 
stated that it's going to be removed for this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we are in fact 
recognizing 100 per cent of the earnings. We are recognizing that. 
The figure is $44 million. That's the budget for this year. Like, I . . 
the capital gains is what we seem to be able to not to understand, 
between the member from Regina North East and myself. You 
could conceivably end up with a substantial amount earned over 
the year under your capital gains that you had not budgeted for. Is 
that understandable? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, it's now 44 million. Well, 
I'm glad to know that I wasn't wrong when I raised the question 
yesterday, and from the information I had, it was 30 million, I 
thought. But certainly it is, in your own words . . . well, isn't it 44 
million? Isn't that what you just said? Please correct me if I'm 
wrong. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, first of all, are you not talking about 
another year? And does it not say in your Estimates book under 
the year 1986-87, is there not a figure mid-way down that says 
$44.128 million? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, what you have said 
here today really confirms — although you have been trying to 
avoid it in your way — confirms what the concern is out there. 
The teachers' superannuation fund has had a very large unfunded 
liability. We're all aware of that. It's something that existed, not 
only in that fund, but a lot of superannuation funds that were 
initiated in an era 50 or 60 years ago when circumstances 
economically, when the rates of inflation, when the whole 
demographic projections were different than they are now. 
 
The members opposite keep chirping from their seats. I want to 
tell the member opposite that the teachers' superannuation plan 
started a long time before even the past NDP government was in 
power. And those plans across Canada, I might add, those plans 
across Canada worked on the premise and on the belief that as 
people superannuated, there would be enough new, younger 
working people in that profession, or part of that working group, 
that would be able to make contributions to the plan and, 
therefore, be able to sustain the payments that would have to be 
made to superannuates. 
 
The reality of it is that all that has changed. We had years of rates 
of inflation that no one thought would ever be possible 50 years 
ago — 30 years ago. And so that has skewered that logic and those 
actuarial projections that were made when these plans were 
established. And so what has had to happen is that some of these 
plans, and the way that they are organized, have had to change. 
And in 1980 that change was made. And it happened to have been 
made when the New Democratic Party was in power. I'm not 
suggesting that it wouldn't have been made if some other party had 
been in power. The fact is, at that point in time somebody had to 
finally take the bull by the horns and do something about it. 
 
And so now we have a plan in which there are not only 
contributions by teachers, or, in other plans, by other  

employees, but we have a plan to which the government even 
contributes a matching amount — as it should be; the employer 
should contribute. I wish more of the private plans were as good as 
this one. 
 
Now when we here have an opportunity to do something about the 
unfunded liability, and that is by retaining the excess earnings in 
the fund so that they could be part of even your so-called capital 
gain — if that's the term you want to use — so that it could 
accumulate in the fund and earn more revenue, you are turning the 
clock back, and you are saying, no, we're not going to do anything 
about this funded liability because the Minister of Finance has a 
little problem. The Minister of Finance, and the minister before 
him, on behalf of this cabinet, decided that they were going to 
bring this province into a debt and a deficit situation which, 
equally, no one thought was ever going to be possible. 
 
Now that they're faced with this problem, they're prepared to take 
any kinds of moneys that they can lay their hands on to help their 
cause. So instead of trying to do something about this unfunded 
liability, you have decided in this fiscal year, in this budget which 
we are considering, not to retain any excess earnings of the 
superannuation fund in the plan, and I say to you, Madam 
Minister, that's wrong. 
 
And the past may have had other kinds of examples where things 
were done differently; that's not the point. The point is you are the 
government today, and you are the minister today, and you are 
responsible today. And this action, I submit to you, is 
irresponsible. And so do 11,000 teachers say to you, it's 
irresponsible; and I might add, so do the trustees of this province 
say it's irresponsible because the trustees of this province say it's 
irresponsible because the trustees, too, are concerned about the 
unfunded liability. 
 
Now I ask you Madam Minister: — in light of the fact that we 
have this unfunded liability in the teacher's superannuation fund, 
why would you not consider — and I'm not . . . you personally, 
I'm talking about your government — why would you not 
consider it prudent to leave the excess money that is earned, and 
by that we mean anything over 7 per cent in the fund in this year, 
and into the future, so that you could do something with the 
funded liability. Would you not consider that to be a prudent 
move? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, I want to go on 
record as saying that this is not a step backwards. And to stand 
here today and hear the member from Regina North East indicate 
that this is a step backwards is hypocritical; there's no other word 
for it. 
 
And let me go over again why I say that. I mean, I'm actually . . . I 
can't believe my ears. And I'm also rather disappointed that he 
ignores. Yes, he's right; we've only just begun. Let's hope he sticks 
around for the finish. He says this is a step backwards. And he 
says, it's not you personally; it's your government. Well we're one 
and the same. 
 
(1515) 
 
In 1978 the government of the day decided after many,  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1575 
 

many, many years to do something about a very serious unfunded 
liability with teacher's pensions. I'm sure at that time the member 
was concerned because he was . . . did in fact come from a 
teaching profession. I also know the trustees were also concerned 
because I came from that background, and we were concerned 
about the security of pension plans for the teachers. The unfunded 
liability portion in my mind at that time did, in fact, not represent a 
secure pension for teachers that had served their time in the school 
system. So by the time it came to 1980 they were, in fact, ready to 
sit down and talk about how government was going to address the 
unfunded liability portion. And two things happened, Mr. 
Chairman, at that time. 
 
First of all the government of the day went to the bargaining table 
and they bargained and they negotiated and they came up with 
what was called an annuity plan for the teachers. And in fact, that 
had to be one of the phases in order to address the unfunded 
liability portion for the future. 
 
Now there was, as I recall, great discussion around the province in 
'78 and '79 leading up to that final decision in 1980. For at that 
time the teachers — and some still are today — were on what was 
called the formula plan. And in fact it was probably considered 
one of the best in North America, but it did not recognize some 
realities in terms of society, what was happening with pensions — 
the unfunded liability portions of them. So therefore, the 
government of the day took it to the negotiating table and 
somehow were successful in negotiating with the teachers to 
accept the annuity plan. 
 
Now it's interesting to note in 1986 and 1986 . . I've heard 
rumblings from the member opposite that oh, they think they 
would like to go back to the formula plan. Well they change it one 
year, and five years later they're saying let's do something else 
with it. 
 
However, what they did in 1980 did, in fact, put into place some 
possible solutions in addressing the unfunded liability. And one 
was that there was a guarantee put in of minimum amounts of 
money — a guarantee for minimum amounts to be added to the 
fund as it went along, so it simply wasn't a pay-out every year. 
There was some extra going in there, and that eventually they 
would get to a point where they would be caught up with it. Now 
besides that minimum there was also an understanding that where 
possible they would, in fact, put more in. 
 
Now what's interesting to me today is the member from Regina 
North East stands in here and says, why haven't you done it. And 
I've given him the figures. When he was minister of Finance, the 
NDP — Blakeney's government — was earning 10 per cent, 9 per 
cent, and putting in 6 per cent. And now he says to me, why didn't 
you put in more than the seven — that we've changed the policy. 
Well the policy has not changed. 
 
I will say, Mr. Chairman, that it is wise when and where possible 
that the government does, in fact, pay attention to that unfunded 
liability, and when and where possible put in any kinds of capital 
gains that they may, in fact, have in a particular year out of the 
fund. 
 

Mr. Chairman, we have done that in the last four years. And we 
did that in a four-year period when the economy was sluggish, 
slow. There was great demand on the social side of government 
programs. And yet we found 25 million, 16, 16 and another 21 of 
capital gains to put into that unfunded liability portion, in a time 
when money was not in excess. 
 
Now if I compare that to the four years previous to that when 
supposedly we lived in very affluent times, where was the money 
going? Well I can only assume, and I would say to the member 
from Regina North East, you know, maybe the extra 3 per cent 
between the 10 and 7 in 1980 helped to buy a uranium mine or a 
potash mine or the good Lord only knows what else may have 
been bought with it, and not a dime going into the unfunded 
liability portion with it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we will continue to remain committed to 
guaranteeing, abiding by the legislation that is in place, and 
working toward some solutions in terms of that unfunded liability 
portion that sooner or later down the road will have to be met. It 
can't be met all at once; it's too big. We're talking something over a 
billion dollars. The member isn't going to fix that in one year, nor 
is he going to fix it in four years. And he knows that, because he's 
been minister of Finance. So if he would just quit playing some 
games and get down to some good, honest questions, I would be 
more than pleased to deal with them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, just to correct the minister, 
who said that only 6 per cent was left in the fund in certain 
previous years. I don't know how that's possible when the 
legislative requirement is 7 per cent. Certainly I think the minister 
would not suggest that somehow that legislative requirement was 
broken, because she knows very well that was not the case. 
 
I guess I'm not going to pursue this further at this time, Madam 
Minister. But I do want to say this: — that the reason why the 
teachers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Do I have the floor, Mr. 
Chairman, or does the member from Saskatoon Mayfair have the 
floor? Thank you very much. 
 
The reason that the teachers are concerned, and trustees are 
becoming concerned as well, is because of the attitude of this 
government and the uncertainty about what the government will 
do from day to day and year to year. Because the government does 
not have any particular scheme about where it is heading at any 
particular time. We've had the announcement of five-year plans 
that lasted exactly five months. Now we have the case where last 
year in the fund was retained 64 per cent of the excess earnings, 
and this year it is being proposed by the Minister of Finance not to 
retain any of the excess earnings. And I don't make that argument. 
I only say what the Minister of Finance said. And if the Minister 
of Finance means something else, I wish he would issue a 
statement so that those people who are worried about this could 
understand that he has changed his mind, or that he made a 
mistake, or whatever the situation is, and clarify the issue and 
clarify the whole question, if that's the case. 
 
I'm not even going to ask you the question: — I will only  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1576 
 
 

suggest to you, Madam Minister, that you should suggest to your 
Minister of Finance to clear this up, and instead of leaving people 
who have, in all sincerity, come to meet with him to raise this 
issue, leaving them with really quite unsatisfactory answers, state 
to them that indeed excess earnings in the fund will be retained 
this year. 
 
There is no one that raised more of an issue about the whole 
question of unfunded liability than the Conservative Party. The 
member from Rosthern led the fray. And I respect his concern. 
But having raised those issues time and time again, surely it is then 
only reasonable for us to be able to expect a government to 
deliver, at least in some small measure, on those concerns. And 
yes, last year you did, you retained 64 per cent; this year, 
according to the Minister of Finance you're not going to, because 
you're not going to retain any. That's why the concern is out there. 
 
And I suppose over the years people have not been awfully 
concerned about it because, as I indicated earlier, it is a 
requirement of the government — funded by the taxpayer I might 
add — to meet the pension payments that superannuates get. 
That's an obligation of the government. But when this kind of 
flip-flopping takes place, I'm sure that people who are 
superannuates, and who may be superannuates, or will be 
superannuates in the future, become concerned even to the extent 
that they're not sure that any government who would flip-flop 
around to this extent might not change that obligation in some 
way. That's quite a legitimate concern. And that's why there are 
meetings behind held around the province in which resolutions are 
being passed which are asking the Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation to press the government to change this policy. That's 
one of the issues. 
 
The other issue is the desire by teachers — and I agree with you 
that in the negotiations there was a new pension plan, 
superannuation plan that initiated. It was agreed to by teachers and 
the government of the day and the trustees of the day, as it should 
be. That's the way pension plans should change, through the 
negotiation process in this particular place. That's what the 
legislation provides for. 
 
I don't think it's unfair of teachers now to say: — look, we'd like to 
re-negotiate, and we'd like to go back to the formula plan. Now 
that should be settled at the bargaining table, and all it takes is a 
willingness of the government to discuss that particular question. I 
don't expect us to negotiate here in the Chamber, obviously. I'm 
not a negotiator, and neither are you, Minister. 
 
But I want to ask you: — is your government prepared to 
negotiate changes to the superannuation plan based on the 
concerns that are being expressed by the teachers? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, he's right. For obvious reasons we're 
not going to negotiate in the House. While the member admits to 
not being a negotiator, he can only speak for himself, and I would 
remind him of that. 
 
I . . Flip-flop — that's amazing. Two minutes ago you talked about 
government not knowing where it's going, and no long-term plans; 
and flip-flop . . . (inaudible  

interjection) . . . Flip-flop, the member from Quill Lakes says. 
That's about the only intelligible thing he's said in a week's time. 
 
You want to talk about who is looking through rose-coloured 
glasses. I will give the Regina member some direction. There's 
been no flip-flop by this government as there is by the member 
from Regina North East, and we know precisely where we want to 
go with education and take education, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We know when we came into power we made a commitment to 
increase the provincial share of operating grants, and we've stuck 
to that. And we have also, my good friend, stuck to the legal 
obligation on the teachers' superannuation fund — a point which 
you fail to recognize in this House. If the member wants to know 
further which direction we're going, I think the education 
development fund has clearly spelled that out. And that is not a 
short term, my friend. That is five-year, good, long-term planning. 
And I would suspect that the member perhaps will not like to get 
into it. I can only hope that he will, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, can you . . . I'm still on 
the superannuation, but I want to ask you a different question, 
although not totally unrelated. 
 
Have there been changes recently, like say in the last year or two 
years, to the superannuation — either legislation, at a time when I 
was not in the House, or regulations — which have changed the 
eligibility provisions for new people who happen to be working in 
the teaching force or the department or what not? Have there been 
changes in regulations? And if so, can I get a copy? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I will be pleased to supply the member with 
a copy of the regulations. I'm pleased to also inform him that in 
fact there are some changes, and that is the clean 30 year and out, 
which teachers have waited for for a long time. And any other 
changes in regulations to do with that will be housekeeping. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm not talking about people who are able to 
superannuate when — ; I'm asking you for eligibility. And can you 
describe it to me? Because you have your officials with you, 
obviously, and I would suspect they would have the regulations 
with them. Can you tell me whether any change has been made in 
the regulations which would make it possible for someone coming 
into the teaching field to be able to qualify superannuation, having 
taught for as little as a day? Or is that not a new provision? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I'm not sure what you're referring to in 
terms of the one day, but I can only think that it is on the 
department employees. And that is a policy change by the 
commission as opposed to changes in the regulation. There is still, 
I think, a criterion there that states, on that particular area, that the 
department employee still has to have taught for 10 years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'm sorry. I missed the last . . . (inaudible) 
. . . 
 
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1577 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, the department employee — you say, 
the one day; but they must have taught, I believe, for 10 years 
previous to that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you tell me how the policy now is 
different from what it was previously, and can you tell me when 
the policy change came about? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — it was changed in January of this year, and 
that is only for participation and reciprocal agreements. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm not arguing with the change. I simply 
want to be able to get the facts about what it is, Madam Minister. 
Can you tell me what the change was? I asked that earlier, and you 
didn't get around to it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We don't have a copy of the specific policy 
here, but I would be glad to send you one. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm prepared to wait for it later. But I would 
like now for you to consult with your officials and see if they 
could at least advise you as to what the policy change is. That 
shouldn't be too difficult, I would think. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It is simply one of . . . for anybody other 
than department employees, it's one year. And under the new 
policy change of January it was one day, for department 
employees. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And what was the previous policy before 
the change of January 1st? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It was also one year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So you've changed the requirement from 
one year to one day. Am I correct in that, or did I miss something? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, I think the something that you missed, 
I clearly told you that this was a policy change by the commission 
as opposed to regulation. The commission has the authority to 
make policy, and they did so in this case. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You didn't answer the question, Madam 
Minister. The question was: — has the change now been from one 
year to one day? That's what my question was. I didn't ask you 
whether the commission makes that change. I asked you whether 
the change has been from one year to one day and, if so, why? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The commission has considered that time 
with the department, the service with the department, to be similar 
to that with the division, and therefore the change. 
 
There's been other changes over the past, okay? It's gone from 20 
days to 60 days to one year. And remember that a teacher must 
still have taught for 10 years in Saskatchewan previous to 
becoming an employee for the Department of Education in order 
to qualify under that policy. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can a teacher come to Saskatchewan and 
teach for one day and qualify for  

superannuation, with the reciprocal agreements and everything? 
Can a teacher do that, a class-room teacher? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman. This applies for an 
employee in the department that has previously taught 10 years in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, I may want to come back 
to this later. I want to ask you some questions with regard to 
operating grants for school boards and other related items. 
 
But before I do that, and it would certainly speed up the workings 
of the committee if you would provide us with a list of the 
operating grants that are committed to school divisions in this 
fiscal year, for this coming school term. I notice that in last 
estimate considerations in the last session there was a prolonged 
debate about this, and at that time you indicated in your responses 
that the reason you couldn't give them is that it was too early in the 
estimates. Well we are much later in the estimates this year than 
we were last year, so I assume we can get that information. 
 
Certainly I know you would be able to provide me with 
information on the list of the operating grants for 1985 - 86 
because that's already done. But I would like that provided, if you 
will, and I would hope that you and your officials would have 
been prepared for that question, because I'm sure you should have 
anticipated that that would be asked, because it's been asked every 
year now for the last four years. 
 
Can you provide us, Madam Minister, with information — 
computer print-out sheets or whatever you use— that gives us 
what operating grants are being provided to school divisions in 
this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the member's quite right 
when he talks about the discussion in previous years, and I want 
the member to know why, because he was not in this House at that 
particular time. Estimates for Education in the past two years have 
been done very early in the session. And often I went through 
estimates before the mill rate was set and when the very estimated 
figures were given to school boards. 
 
I will supply him today with a copy of the operating grants for this 
year, and I also want to remind him — and he will well remember 
from being minister of Education — that some of these could still 
be subject to change over the next couple of months. But the mill 
rates have been set, and I'll be happy to give them to him. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It took three years to get you to do this. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the member says for three years I 
refused to do this. That's not true. I didn't have those kinds of 
finalized figures to give before the end of May or the first part of 
June. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate 
the information. I'm kind of glad we had an election . . . a 
by-election in Regina North East; it seems to have changed the 
co-operation that exists in the 
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1578 
 
 

consideration of Education estimates. But putting that aside, I'm 
grateful that you're able to provide them to us. 
 
I want to remind you that I, too, used to be a minister of Education 
and that we always provided to the opposition — the member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley can testify to that — provided the 
opposition with information so that the members of the opposition, 
particularly the critic, were able to have access to it. And that's 
only normal and natural do, on the same understanding as you 
have asked of me, and that is to appreciate the fact that some of 
them may be estimates. I know, I fully appreciate that things 
change over time and there are recalculations and so on. But the 
mill rates have now been set throughout Saskatchewan. I might 
add that in some cases those mill rates are not exactly small 
increases in the total tax dollar that Saskatchewan property owners 
have to pay in order to carry out the cost of education, because 
your government has pulled back on its share of the funding for 
education purposes. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's not serious. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well the member for Saskatoon Sutherland 
says not serious. Well, we'll get into that for a little while, and then 
if he hangs around to listen he may learn something. 
 
Madam Minister, can I ask you a simple question about the 
percentage of educational expenditure covered by school grants 
from your department. Can you tell me what percentage of 
education expenditures you will be covering by operating grants in 
this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the provincial percentage 
share is running at approximately 54 per cent this year, as it was 
last year. The member made a comment that, you know, I think he 
was alluding to cut-backs in education, and that simply is not true. 
He knows full well that there was an increase on the operating 
grant this year. What he may not know, because he was not in this 
House last year, was some changes that we made to some factors 
in the operating grant, one being debt retirement, is no longer 
recognized in the operating grant and, in fact, is being picked up 
100 per cent by the provincial government which impacts very 
greatly on school board budgets for those that are into capital 
projects. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — When you say that the provincial portion of 
operating grants is 54 per cent, is that — are you talking about 
recognized expenditures or school division expenditures? Is this 
54 per cent of recognized — so-called recognized, and I'm sure 
you know what I'm talking about because of the way the formula 
works — is it recognized expenditures or actual school board 
expenditures? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I am talking about actual school division 
expenditures. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, in 1985 what percentage 
of educational expenditures was covered by school grants, both 
the actual school board expenditures and the recognized 
expenditures? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, 1985 — and both these 
years are estimated figures — 1985 was approximately 53.9, 54 
per cent; in 1986 we are looking at approximately 54.8. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm sorry. I guess you didn't get my full 
question. I said: — can you tell me what percentage you covered 
of school board expenditures, as a total; and recognized 
expenditures, those which your department recognizes, in the 
calculation of the formula? Those are two distinctly different 
expenditures. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have those 
calculations and have not done them. But I would suggest that it 
would be considerably higher if you did that on the other. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On what other? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — On the recognized expenditures. It would be 
higher than the percentage on the school division expenditure. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You're saying, Madam Minister, that grants 
as a percentage of school board expenditures, you don't have. Is 
that what you're saying? For 1985, I mean 1985 . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well I gave you that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, you gave me the . . I'm sorry. You say 
you don't have the recognized expenditures. Okay, give me the 
percentage that your department paid in the last fiscal year, in 
operating grants, of recognized expenditure. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that's what we don't 
calculate. I'm not sure what you misunderstood, what I said before. 
But we did not calculate a percentage of the recognized school 
expenditure. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well it's a strange development that I hear 
taking place. Madam Minister, when you calculate the operating 
grants, you have, in the foundation grant formula, certain 
recognized expenditures that you recognize for school boards. 
Then on the basis of those recognized expenditures, you apply 
your formula and you provide the operating grant. You cannot be 
here and not have the recognized expenditures and still have been 
able to calculate the amount of the operating grant. 
 
Now I ask you, Madam Minister, what percentage . . Sorry. I'll 
wait. Okay. What percentage of recognized expenditures did the 
provincial Department of Education pay for in operating grants in 
the last fiscal year? Recognized expenditures. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We have only done our calculations on the 
school division expenditures. And I can only tell you that a guess 
would be on the recognized expenditures because they are smaller 
than the real — okay? - that your figure would actually . . . your 
percentage could be approximately 10 per cent higher. 
 
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1579 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you tell me, minister, why you would 
not have the recognized expenditures which your department had 
to have to calculate operating grants? Why you would not have 
that figure with you here today for the last fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the recognized 
expenditures are simply a method of distribution, and in terms of 
the impact, I mean, we do those calculations based on the actual 
expenditures, the school board expenditures, which to us are more 
real than the other. And therefore we just didn't feel the need to 
have those, that the main issue is the provision share of the 
expenditures, the operating. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now there's some information that either 
you are not providing or you do not have, Madam Minister. Since 
you don't have the information, I will give it to you because I 
bothered to do my research and do some work on it — in fact, did 
talk to people who are involved with this thing. 
 
Madam Minister, in 1981 grants as a percentage of board 
expenditures were 51 per cent. Grants as a percentage of 
recognized expenditures were 53.6 per cent. And I remind you that 
along with that, in 1981, there was what was called a property 
improvement grant which was really intended to rebate education 
tax dollars to property owners. Property owners paid an education 
property tax. The provincial government said in that day, starting 
in the early '70s, that that tax burden is onerous and, therefore, you 
will get an education property tax rebate. When you calculate the 
property improvement grant into the amount of the operating 
grant, the provincial government in 1981, and in 1982, I might 
add, paid for a little over 70 per cent of the cost of education. That 
was the last full term of the New Democratic Party government in 
Saskatchewan — 70 per cent. 
 
Now let me tell you what's changed, and I'll remove the property 
improvement grant from my further figures because now they are 
in the term of your government. In 1981, not considering even the 
property improvement grant, the grants as a percentage of board 
expenditures were 51 per cent. In 1982 they were 49.9 per cent. In 
1983 they were 48.9 per cent. In 1984 they had gone down again 
to 48.6 per cent. And in 1985 there was a modest increase because 
somebody suggested, I suppose, there might be an election. But 
maybe it wasn't; maybe you people were serious. It went to 47.3 
per cent. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, how can you say that your government 
has such a strong commitment to education when since 1981 there 
has been a consistent decrease in the percentage of education costs 
that the government has picked up, from 51 per cent in 1981 — 
and if you add the property improvement grant, actually over 70 
per cent — to 47.3 per cent in 1985. And you say it's higher in 
1986, and I won't argue because I don't have that information; only 
you have it. 
 
How can you argue that your government has had a sincere 
commitment to education when you've actually reduced the 
percentage of funding that you provide for the total cost of 
education in Saskatchewan? And I have not pulled these figures 
out of the air, Madam Minister;  

they're documented. And all you have to do is either go to your 
department or go to the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, and I'm sure they'd be quite willing to give them to 
you. And I know very well that they probably have. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the member wants to get into a whole 
lot of areas, and we've got all day, so we might as well do it. 
 
First of all, I'm not sure where he gets his figures from. Perhaps he 
would like to send me a copy of the figures that he has done, as I 
have done for him. That to me would seem fair ball in terms of 
access to information in this House. The member knows full well 
that that increase has been gradually going up, and I have only to 
remind him to look at what has happened with mill rates over the 
last three years, or if he wants we can take four years, and let's 
compare it to the four years previous to that. And that is a very 
telling sign. 
 
Now if he has forgotten, Mr. Chairman, let's refresh his memory. 
Last year, overall in the province, there was a one mill decrease 
overall; that's average. Most of them, most school divisions held at 
zero. We had some that went up for various reasons. They perhaps 
had a declining student population, therefore lost some grant 
money. They might have been into a capital project and had to 
raise five mills for their down payment on it. This year we are 
looking at approximately 2 per cent, perhaps a little more per cent 
increase on the mill rate. That's 2 per cent, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now let's compare to the last budget that they did, and the 
taxpayers across the province saw a 16.5 per cent change — 16.5 
per cent. The year before that was 13 per cent, and the year before 
that was a 10.9 per cent increase. And the member from Regina 
North East really believes that he can stand here in this House with 
a degree of credibility and tell us that there hasn't been a 
commitment to education. I invite the member to be a little bit 
more realistic and do his homework in a more open manner than 
in fact what he has done. 
 
He asks how we could possibly say we've had a commitment to 
education. He brings in the property tax. I would like that good 
member from Regina North East, a school teacher, to stand in this 
House and tell me what the property tax rebate did for the 
class-rooms in Regina, and the children. Tell me the impact that it 
had on the education system, how it brought the system up to date. 
Did it allow computer literacy, perhaps basic library resource 
centres? Well I doubt that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The only thing that did — the only thing that did was allow that 
member to stand in this House as a government member away 
back and say to the good people of Saskatchewan, look what I'm 
doing for you; I'm mailing you back $200, and then the school 
board is going to up your mill rate by 16 per cent to pay for it. But 
that's just ludicrous, and he loses sight of the argument. 
 
Well the member from Pelly sits and thinks by the seat of his 
pants, and he says that they up it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
How much? Better than I, eh? Well for some good reasons, 
perhaps he would like to wear my  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1580 
 
 

skirt for a while. 
 
Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, yes, the 
member from Assiniboia is correct. I am, indeed, generous. That 
was a very kind remark; I could have said much worse. 
 
The commitment to education has been strong, and it will 
continue. It will continue, Mr. Chairman, because society can't 
ignore the needs of our youth who are going to be the leaders of 
tomorrow. It is pure and simple. We only have to look around at 
some of the problems in terms of youth unemployment, the 
difficulties that our youth are facing in the future, and we know 
that that sound education system is a very key component to a 
healthy Saskatchewan economy and quality of life. And there's no 
getting around it. And, quite frankly, the property tax 
improvement grant has nothing to do with the quality of education 
for that student, and I would ask the member how he can support 
an argument that it does. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, let me tell you what 
your policies of education have brought about, and your kind of 
funding has brought about, in the city of Regina. And I could 
extrapolate that across the province, because it's not only here. 
 
We have seen increased numbers of students in class-rooms so 
that there are much heavier class-room loads than there were. 
There are kindergarten classes that have handicapped students in 
them that number as high as 24, since your government has come 
into power, and with your tremendous commitment to education. 
There are more split class-rooms now than there were with two 
and even three grades in each class-room, Madam Minister, 
because of your commitment to education. 
 
And none of those members opposite can deny that if they have 
been in touch with their constituencies at all and have bothered to 
visit their schools lately. They will know. They will know that in 
many of the schools that are in their constituencies there are 
class-rooms that have as many as 30 and more students in them, 
and one teacher; that there are class-rooms in which there are two 
and, in some cases, three grades. 
 
Now it seems to me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, 
do I have the floor or does the member from Meadow Lake and 
Sutherland have the floor as they yell from their seats? 
 
Thank you. As long as they will allow me to proceed. It seems to 
me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .I take it all back. Well, the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale, who has not been here for 
three weeks, finally arrives and saying something from her seat. 
Now isn't that . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. There is a . . perhaps the 
level of noise is rising to the point where the debate cannot carry 
on in a proper manner. I would like to ask the members to please 
calm down a bit. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm glad that 
you have addressed the level of noise that is rising on the side of 
the government benches, because that's certainly the case. 
 

And let me tell you, Mr. Chairman, why it is rising. The level of 
noise is rising because we now are on a subject that's very 
sensitive to these Conservative members. They know that 
everywhere across Saskatchewan the public and the property 
owners are concerned about the removal and the cancellation of 
the property improvement grant by this government. 
 
Because the property improvement grant was a tax rebate on 
education which brought about the provincial government paying 
over 70 per cent of the cost of education. And what we have seen 
since this government took office, in spite of the fact that it's 
increased taxes in many areas, is a reduction of the provincial 
share of the costs of education. 
 
In 1981 over 70 per cent was the provincial share. In 1986, 
because of the cancellation of the property improvement grant and 
because of the operating grants not keeping up with the growing 
costs of education, the provincial share of operating grants — the 
minister says — is 54 per cent. Strange that the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association says that, as part of board 
expenditures, it in 1985 was only 47.3 per cent. 
 
(1600) 
 
That's why, Mr. Chairman, the members opposite decide that they 
have to make a lot of noise, hoping that they can detract the debate 
and the questions in this House. But since the former chairman 
brought them to order, I think, if they will stay that way, we can 
proceed with what we have to explore here this afternoon. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, if you have had such a great commitment 
to education, why has there been an increase in the number of 
student sin class-rooms — in some cases, very large increases? 
Why has there been a development of more split class-rooms in 
our schools? Why have there been closures of schools, not only in 
Regina but in other places? Why have there been cuts in learning 
assistance programs, and in remedial programs, and band 
programs, and certain course options that used to be available in 
some high schools? That's what's happened in the last four, now 
going onto five, years — because of your commitment to 
education. 
 
Now I want to say to the loud member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake, who continues to talk from his seat and will not stop, that in 
my view — and the member from Indian Head-Wolseley will 
agree, as a teacher — that if there is anywhere in which it is 
important to spend an adequate dollar in education, it's in the field 
of learning assistance which is helping students who have 
particular problems be it with mathematics or reading skills or 
whatever, or remedial programs on those kinds of needs. 
 
We have witnessed, in the last three years, cuts in those programs. 
That, Mr. Chairman, is not proof of a strong commitment of 
education. 
 
I say one more time that the percentage of the cost of education 
which is borne by the provincial government has dropped from 70 
per cent — and I'll use the minister's figure is she wishes. I don't 
believe it, but she says 54 per  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1581 
 

cent. Well even using her figure, a drop of the provincial share of 
education from 70 per cent to 54 per cent is a very substantial 
drop. That is not, in my view, a commitment to education. 
 
Well at the same time, what's happened? Well the taxes have gone 
up, and she talks about an average increase of 1 mill last year. 
Well how in the world can any minister stand up in the House and 
totally ignore the fact that property taxpayers before last year 
received $230 if they owned a house, in a rebate on their property 
taxes, and then the government cancels that property tax rebate, 
and somehow that's not a tax increase. I submit to you, Mr. 
Chairman, that if you calculate on an average home the value of 
the property improvement grant, you will find that the tax increase 
last year was at least 9 per cent on that alone — 9 mills on that 
alone. I'm not sure if I'm accurate on that; it could very likely be 
more, but that was a tax increase. 
 
So don't stand up in the House, Madam Minister, and try to 
suggest that the mill rate last year increased by 1 per cent, because 
if you're doing that, you're ignoring the cancellation of the 
property improvement grant which was the largest property tax 
increase in the history of this province. Even the former minister 
of Education has chosen to admit that. 
 
Now the reason I say, Madam Minister, that I am sceptical about 
the statistics you provide is, I mean, all the evidence is there. In 
1982 - 1983, and I'll go back that far, operating grants by the 
Department of Education, through the minister were announced 
. . . were actually $900,000 short of what they were announced 
that they would be. And in 1984 - 85 the same kind of thing 
happened. As a matter of fact, I believe in 1984 - 85 there was an 
underexpenditure of something like a million dollars — I'm not 
sure whether in operating or the total department expenditures. So 
figures which you give us in these estimates, I think it's fair 
enough that we would question. 
 
Now let me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, now the member 
from Weyburn decides to chirp in his seat. 
 
Madam Minister, let me tell you this, that if you take into account 
what's happened with the inflation factor and the amount of grants 
that you have provided, that last year in 1985 and 1986 there was a 
reduction — if you subtract the inflation from the amount of grant 
increase you provided — there was reduction of operating that you 
provided to school boards of something in the area of the year 
before of 16.8 per cent. Because you provided last year, increase 
in school operating grants, 5.6 per cent. And when you take into 
account inflation, that was not a very big increase. Because the 
inflation was something like about that level; as a matter of fact, 
consumer price index showed that it was 4.4 per cent. So you 
haven't even kept pace with the rate of inflation. 
 
Madam Minister, how can you justify . . . or how can you support 
your claim that your commitment to education has been so great 
when the percentage of costs that the government has picked up 
has dropped from 70 per cent to something in the area of 50 per 
cent? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — If I did my mathematics like you did,  

I'd hate to think where my cheque-book and my budget book 
would be. I can't believe it, Mr. Chairman, I can only hope he's not 
a math teacher that used to teach our students. If he is, we're in 
trouble, I can tell you that. 
 
You know, he talks about the budget and the commitment. I invite 
the member to go back and read his STF Bulletins, and he will see 
headlines like: — Education spending up; STF likes budget. I 
mean, that's his own professional organization. And then I invite 
him to pick up newspapers around the province, and the trustees 
association and the LEADS (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors, and Superintendents) organization. I 
mean, people aren't blind, and they're not stupid, but they do have 
a very high degree of cynicism. And I'll tell you, it's no wonder 
when I see the slick politics that this member from Regina North 
East does with figures. 
 
Let's go back to the provincial commitment, Mr. Chairman. I want 
to deal specifically with a question he raised on pupil/teacher ratio. 
You know, much of what the member says is true — of what he 
says. It's what he doesn't say that is also true that makes a broader 
statement than the information that he has given the public or the 
House. 
 
Yes it's true, in the city of Regina, for example, perhaps the city of 
Saskatoon, probably Prince Albert, perhaps Swift Current, that in 
fact the pupil/teacher ratio has gone up. But it is not true to stand 
in this House and blatantly say in a very broad statement that all 
the classrooms' pupil/teacher ratio has gone up with 25, 30 
students. That's not true. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn't give you a number. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, you did. Now, for the member's 
benefit, for 1985 the pupil/teacher ratio on the average for the 
province — and those are the figures that the department deals 
with, an the member well knows it because he was minister of 
Education many years ago — the pupil/teacher ratio stands at 
16.9. And I ask the member, if he would pay attention, to make 
note of that. And why I want him to make note of it is because it's 
down — 1984, it was 17.1. And he says, up — a very broad 
statement. He doesn't even recognize some of the reasons as to 
why it's probably up in the city of Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
First of all, Mr. Chairman, I think it's good news that 
Saskatchewan's population has reached the 1 million mark and 
over. I think that's very good news. I also think it's very good news 
that the overall labour force is up much higher. In the last year and 
a half, 17,000 new jobs and people into the market-place, into the 
work-force. Now that's over and above. Obviously some of those 
people are families with children in school, Mr. Chairman, but he 
doesn't recognize any of that. He doesn't give the whole story. 
 
And let's look at Regina systems as a very good example of some 
of the pressures on the class-room and some very difficult 
decisions that principals, teachers, and the school board has had to 
make. There's been the question of special education. There's more 
services and there's  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1582 
 
 

better diagnostic techniques for identifying students that will be 
having some problems. And more children are requiring those and 
being slotted into them. 
 
French immersions, the demand in Regina on French immersion is 
creating some real difficulties in terms of how many class-rooms, 
where the schools are going to be, how they're going to staffed, 
and what happens when you set up a French immersion school. 
And then you have another school somewhere else that possibly 
the enrolment is down, and then the board faces a very difficult 
decision in saying, well, are we going to close this, perhaps with 
100 students, perhaps with less than 100 students. All those factors 
come into play. 
 
There's also the issue of the closure of schools. How many schools 
have been closed, he says. Well, Mr. speaker, he knows I don't 
close schools. We have duly elected local government people, 
school trustees, that are responsible for education at the local level. 
And I might add, Mr. Chairman, that's a better place to keep it than 
to bring it into this arena with some slick politician to be in charge 
based on political expediency. This government does not agree 
with what the member is suggesting, and that's precisely what he's 
suggests and where he would take it. 
 
I want to come back to the mere suggestion — and I call it mere 
because that's all it deserves — that in fact under the NDP, 
because there was property rebates, that they were paying 70 per 
cent of school board operating costs. Once again, Mr. Chairman, 
that rebate had absolutely nothing to do with the operating grant 
for the school board. And for him to stand there and say that it 
does, is not true. 
 
The 54 per cent that I gave him earlier, that is the provincial share 
on the operating grant. We are dealing with the operating grant. If 
he wants the overall picture, that's a different story because capital 
grants come into that portion. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, don't talk about on 
one side costs and then talk about grants. I'm talking about costs. 
And surely you would not suggest that when the property owner 
pays education tax and then gets a rebate because of revenues that 
only provincial governments can collect, whether it's from 
resources or other sources, that somehow that rebate is not a 
contribution to the cost that the taxpayers had to bear for the cost 
of education. I mean, anyone who would suggest that that is not a 
contribution to the cost that the taxpayer has to bear really does 
not understand anything about property taxes. 
 
The property improvement grant was a rebate on property taxes, 
on education property taxes, and so, therefore, it was a 
contribution to the cost of education. Now, when that is factored 
in, the province paid for 70 per cent of the cost of education. It 
was a good program. But the members opposite, in a desperate 
attempt to shift the burden of the cost of education from a bigger 
portion by the provincial government to the property owner, 
removed the property improvement grant. It removed the property 
improvement grant. 
 
And every day, and I do not in any way exaggerate this,  

Mr. Chairman, I have citizens who tell me and who tell people on 
the street, who are out there canvassing in my constituency, that 
they think and believe that the removal of the property 
improvement grant was wrong. And we say, as the New 
Democratic Party, that if we form the next government, at the will 
of the people, they will have property tax relief reinstated. The 
minister has made it clear to this House — and she is not alone, 
but other have — that it is not the policy of this government to do 
that. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now I want to just respond to one statistic which the minister gave 
dealing with employment, because we're talking here about 
education, and we're talking here, therefore, about some students 
who are just coming into the work-force. Well let me just give the 
minister and other members of the committee some information as 
provided by Statistics Canada. And Statistics Canada reports the 
following, as it applies to employment: — between the ages of 15 
and 24 . . . employment for people between the ages of 15 and 24 
in Saskatchewan in 1981, it was 110,000; in 1985 it was 103,000 
— a decrease in employment of people between the ages of 15 
and 24 of 7,000. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I believe that when the minister 
was speaking she was talking about employment as it relates to the 
number of students coming into the system. I don't think it was a 
broad statement, and therefore I will not allow a broad statement 
on employment while we are under this estimate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I won't argue with Mr. Chairman. I wrote 
down here the minister referred to 17,000 jobs created. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are you challenging my ruling? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, I'm not challenging your ruling. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — All right. Get on with the estimates; get on 
with the estimates, and I will not accept any employment statistics. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He was only talking about what the 
minister said. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I'm not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member for Regina North East has the floor and if he wants to 
remain on the topic, that is fine. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to 
the minister's . . . with regard — and I will not talk about anything 
except what the minister said — but with regard to the minister's 
comment about the creation of 17,000 jobs, I want to say that there 
are students who are coming out of our schools who are finding 
that those illusionary jobs are not there for them. We have 
graduates coming out of our high school system . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. You're still trying to get into a 
broader statement on employment than what is acceptable. And I 
demand that you get back on the estimates and get off of 
employment. 
 
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1583 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I, at this point, won't argue 
with you, except to say that we have graduates that are coming out 
of our high schools this year. I have been to a graduation 
ceremony; I will be to others. All members opposite in their 
constituencies have been invited, and I hope that they attend the 
graduation ceremonies and activities. Those students who are 
coming out of those schools should not have to look around and 
see a decrease in the number of jobs available . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. You continue to insist on getting 
in the broader aspect, and if you having nothing further to add to 
this debate, well, then I'll go to another questioner. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — On a point of order. Just in defence of the 
member from Regina North East, I think education does involve 
employment as it . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — A point of order in not debatable. The debate 
continues. What is your point of order then? 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — In order to make a point of order, I've got to 
outline some background. But the member from Regina North 
East just pointed out that going into the work-force there are fewer 
jobs available . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — You are debating the point of order, and I 
ruled the point of order is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'm just outlining some background. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. The debate continues. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On a point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Have you a new point of order? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I have the same point of order, but I have 
to outline a little background in order to let the Chair know exactly 
what the argument . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Your light is off, your light is 
off. The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, let me attempt to get the 
minister back to the subject here. Madam Minister, in your 
response you made reference to mill rates. I want to also make 
reference to mill rates and property tax increases. Above and 
beyond the $230 that every home owner had his property tax 
increased last year, this year again there are property tax increases 
that people have had to suffer because of your underfunding, in 
spite of the fact that you have increased taxes on everyone in 
Saskatchewan, particularly ordinary people, working people, 
people of middle incomes. 
 
Let's take a look at . . . "The Catholic school taxes increase by 
three mills," Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. "The average ratepayer will 
pay an additional $37 on an average three-bedroom bungalow." 
Now when you add to that a similar kind of increase of municipal 
taxes, that's an  

increase this year alone of between 50 and $60 on the home. 
That's on top of the $230 which you increased property taxes by 
last year. 
 
Let's look at another one. 
 

1986 mill rate set. Hiking local taxes. The average home owner 
in Prince Albert who supports the public school system will see 
his property taxes increase (and listen to this) between 77 and 
$84 this year (and I hope that the members from Prince Albert 
are listening) while separate school supporters can expect an 
increase of more than $100. 

 
That's on top of the $230 you increased property taxes last year by 
removing the property improvement grant, resulting in an increase 
in that city on an average home of $330 on property taxes in two 
years, brought about by your policies of your government. 
 
There's another one here, "Catholic board raises tax rate. School . " 
This is in Prince Albert again and it refers to this tax increase 
which I referred to, plus what's happening in liability insurance, 
which we will get into yet in these estimates, and I will want to 
know what kind of efforts you've made to try to assist school 
boards in the problems that they face, where their insurance rates 
have gone up from 100 per cent to 1400 per cent. 
 

Regina's taxes to rise by 3.8 per cent. A typical bungalow with 
an assessed value of $12,200, civic taxes will increase by about 
$27. 

 
And then there's education tax of similar amounts on top of that. 
 
Now here's another one. And this is from The Estevan Mercury. 
 

Rural board raises school taxes 3 mills. Rising costs, including a 
proposed 100 per cent increase in liability insurance premiums, 
have forced the Estevan rural school division board to hike its 
annual tax assessment rate by 3 mills. 

 
Here's another one from the same area. 
 

Estevan separate school supporters could face hefty tax 
increases this year if the board does not slash its projected 
$169,113 budget deficit. The increase would bring the board's 
overall tax rate to 71.5 mills. 

 
And guess what, Madam Minister, they attribute this need for a tax 
increase to? Not sufficient grants, operating grants, from the 
provincial government. That's what they attribute these tax 
increases to. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, this list goes on and on, and I know that 
you will want to argue, oh, but that's not so bad when you consider 
the past history. Well I want to remind you once more that it is bad 
because you cannot ignore the fact that last year, besides the mill 
rate increases, everyone who owned a home in Saskatchewan had 
his property taxes increased by $230 when you removed the  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1584 
 
 

property improvement grant. 
 
Now don't you agree, Madam Minister, that the property 
improvement grant removal was a tax increase on property? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I don't at all agree that that is 
a tax increase on property. And I'm going to explain why, and it 
may very well take me the remaining 35 minutes to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, the member is absolutely right. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's an absolute misnomer to say it's 
anything but a tax. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Would the member like the floor? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I sit here today and I listen to the member for 
Regina North East, as I sit when he has the floor, and I hear him 
talk about the property tax rebate. And I hear him use the words 
"property home improvement." And he says it's all going into 
education when it was still on. 
 
And I remind myself of what I used to hear under the NDP 
government, and this was in the days when there was a municipal 
minister that covered both urban and rural. And that minister 
would be out in the countryside of Saskatchewan and in the towns 
and the cities, and he would be talking about how the property 
improvement grant was a rebate for improvements on the home. 
That's what he would say one day. The next day he would talk that 
it is to make up for municipal taxes levied by the rural 
municipality or the city council. At the same time the good 
minister of Education of the day, the member from Regina North 
East, was running around the province and he was saying, this is a 
rebate for the portion of your taxes that go to education. So there 
we have two ministers, both out, and both saying different things 
as to what it was for. 
 
And somewhere in between all that we have the good premier of 
the day talking about the home improvement grant — like what 
was it for? It was not, Mr. Chairman, for the quality of education; 
it was not. And for a teacher to stand in this Assembly and say that 
it is, I mean, that's totally wrong. And I suggest he either get a new 
pair of glasses or he do a few other things to clear his vision and 
his understanding of what the people of this province are all about. 
 
Mr. Chairman, when I go back to the days of the NDP and I look 
at the emphasis on education . . . and I'll tell you what the 
emphasis was. In all of Canada, Mr. Chairman, we stood number 8 
—number 8 in all of Canada — on how much we spent on our 
children in the school system. Now I don't think, if I were a 
teacher, that I would be particularly proud of that fact. I don't 
know, as a parent, if I would be. I know when I had children in the 
school system I had some concerns. 
 
Now I think the member from Regina North East is going to have 
to decide if he wants a commitment to education. Or what's he 
trying to do, buy a vote? It's not easy to take back property 
improvement grants or anything else, but when we did so, we said 
there's a reason why. And the moneys have to start going to 
education and health, into those areas that have been neglected and 
underfunded. I  

mean, we have a massive system that we are going to have to look 
at in terms of continuing care nursing homes. Schools are no 
different, and the programs that have to be put in to meet them. 
 
So he wants to talk about tax. He wants to talk about it as a tax. 
No, I don't agree with that statement. 
 
He uses Saskatoon and Estevan. And let's talk about Saskatoon 
and Estevan. yes, he's right; they increased it 3 per cent this year. 
Now that's not bad — 3 per cent. He neglected to tell you there 
was no increase last year —none. But he didn't tell you that. The 
mill rate, my good friend, you did not tell this Assembly that 
information. I deal with Estevan. You know, he's concerned about, 
what was it, a 3 mill increase? Something like that. He says it's 
very high. He uses words like slashed, budgets being slashed. 
 
I want to remind him, in 1975 from '76 there was a 7 mill increase 
in Estevan. And the following year to that there was a 9 mill 
increase. And if that wasn't enough, the next year after that it went 
up by 8 mills; and the following year, another 9. And that was all 
in his term of government. He also, in telling about Estevan, did 
not tell you, Mr. Chairman, that the mill rate last year in Estevan, 
on schools, went down by one — minus one. 
 
So why doesn't the member be honest— he knows the system 
better than what he's letting on— and stand in this House and tell 
the whole story. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I'm quite prepared to tell the whole 
story, Mr. Chairman. And here is the whole story. Last year there 
was a tax increase on property; there was the usual mill rate 
increase that school boards and municipalities were forced to 
apply because of insufficient provincial funding. Municipalities' 
grants were frozen to zero. School board operating grants 
increased; I grant you that. But the government at the same time 
removed the property improvement grant which last year, if you 
will think of the facts, Madam Minister, increased property taxes 
by $230 per home. Now that is a tax increase. 
 
You referred to the tax mill rate increases in 1977. Well I want 
you to think about this: — that in 1977 there was a property 
improvement grant, and there was an increase in the property 
improvement grant, which helped to alleviate the impact of that 
mill rate increase. 
 
Property taxpayers don't have that any more because your 
government cancelled it. In your attempt to try to shore up your 
growing deficit, you cancelled the property improvement grant to 
try to put money into your treasury, and therefore transferred more 
and more of the costs of education on property owners. And you 
can't deny, therefore, that there has not been a tax increase when 
you removed the property improvement grant. 
 
Madam Minister, let me ask you a specific question, and then I 
will let somebody else get in. How many school boards, Madam 
Minister, this year, are getting . . .I'll wait till I have your attention. 
 
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1585 
 

Thank you. How many school boards, Madam Minister, this year 
have lower grants in operating that they are expecting to get, than 
they received last year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — There are approximately 20 for this budget 
year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — One more, please. Can you . . . And you 
don't have to give it to me right now, but if your staff can put it 
together for me later today, before 5, or tomorrow. Can you give 
me a list of those school boards or school divisions which are 
getting a reduction in operating grant this year over last year? And 
I don't need it right now, but will you undertake to give it to me? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can undertake it. But 
you have the 1985 list from last year, and the 1986, which I just 
sent across the floor. And it's all there. 
 
If you are having some difficulty in putting those two together, I 
can undertake to assist you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — This is a super-sensitive minister, Mr. 
Chairman. She continues to treat this committee as if it was some 
staff of hers, and I'm not making any implication on her staff; I 
don't know how she treats her staff. 
 
I asked you a simple question, Madam Minister, and I ask for your 
co-operation. I don't have the grants for last year. I wasn't here. I'm 
asking you a straightforward question. Will you give me the list of 
names of the school boards or school divisions that this year will 
get less in operating grants than they received last year? And will 
you at the same time undertake, since you are going to be so 
co-operative, to give me the amount of the reduction in their 
operating grant? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we can undertake to 
do that. I still suggest, and it has nothing to do with sensitivity . . . 
You know, when you give information to the opposition, you 
assume that they are going to use it. And yes, after estimates are 
done and the staff has some time, we'll gladly put it together for 
you, if that's what you require. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, I don't think it's good 
enough for you to say that you will give it to us after the estimates 
are done. I don't think that's a very complicated procedure. I 
suspect that that information is available at hand. It would just take 
a few minutes to put it together. I'm not asking for you to give it to 
me today. But in order that we can proceed with these estimates 
tomorrow when we get back to them, I would like you to give me 
the undertaking that you can give that to me tomorrow. 
 
You have the staff. I don't have the staff. That's why we have a 
committee of the legislature to consider estimates. So I don't know 
why we want to argue about this. I'm asking you simply the 
question; you've given me the undertaking; I accept it. Now can 
you make sure that I have it tomorrow so that we can continue 
with this subject? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Whatever the member wishes. 
 
Mrs Caswell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My concerns 
today are essentially on a seemingly narrow field, the social 
studies curriculum for grades 7 to 9, but at the same time it deals 
with the broader issues that has been going on in the debate in 
Saskatchewan for many, many years. 
 
People are very concerned that while we have what is called 
public school education, that the Department of Education, 
through it bureaucracy, is putting its own stamp on the students of 
Saskatchewan that may reflect views and values inconsistent with 
parents. And I think this is very indicative of the social studies 
curriculum. And I wish to draw attention to this curriculum 
because there has been many parents throughout Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about general trends. And I believe education 
exists to help parents, that parents are not the people who send 
their children to schools and then the school is to be the boss as to 
what happens in that family's life. 
 
Also there are teachers in Mount Royal High School, a high 
school in my riding, who are very concerned about this particular 
curricula, and there is also professors at the university, particularly 
in the history department as well as in other fields, that are 
concerned about the curriculum. 
 
The main concerns of this curriculum seem to be that it doesn't 
take history seriously, that the history component is reduced in our 
schools, and people are concerned in its place is a type of what 
you might call inductive education that lends itself to a 
propaganda possibilities in the social sciences. Also I think one 
reason we have to be very concerned, it's not a grade 7 to 9 
curriculum, but it is really the beginning. And I'm quoting here 
from Saskatchewan Education Chronicle Supplement, program 
development branch, September 1984: —  
 

All courses in the social studies in the 1 to 12 program will 
undergo change. A three-phase plan beginning in 1983 and 
continuing to 1990 is in place. Phases will overlap since the 
commencement of each phase is not dependent on the 
completion of the previous one. 

 
Could you verify that the intent is to expand the social studies 
curriculum philosophy started in grade 7 to 9, to continue to 
grades 1 to 12? Is this the continued policy of the Department of 
Education as stated in the September 1984 program development 
branch memo? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the member is quite right in 
terms of the debate that's been going on on, particularly social 
studies, over a number of years. 
 
To take her last question first, perhaps without a lot of comments, 
the entire direction has not been changed in terms of the policy. 
However, there have been some significant changes, and when I 
say the entire direction, I mean that what was being done was not 
scrapped and something else coming into place. 
 
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1586 
 
 

We met with various teachers, including some of the people that 
the member has talked about, the university people in Saskatoon, 
and various teachers at the high school. One of the main concerns 
coming from the teachers in the university was the lack of 
recognition, as they saw it, on history content, and that was a very 
major concern. And I might add it was also a concern of a fair 
number of parents around the province. 
 
There were other concerns to do with the curriculum when it was 
put out in the pilot project and came about through approximately 
200 — I believe it's about 200 — pilot teachers. And the changes 
have been ongoing with it. 
 
I think, you know, some of the concerns that have been raised in 
terms of the parent being able to direct — and perhaps the whole 
issue of the teaching of morals and values, or the whole issue of 
values clarification, fits into that category. And that is where I 
received many concerns from parents, and criticisms towards the 
pilot projects that were going on. 
 
Yes, there have been some fairly significant changes, and they 
have all been based on consultation. We've been trying to work a 
little closer with some of the people in Saskatoon, the university 
people. I believe that their initial complaint was fairly legitimate in 
terms of they were feeling rather an isolation and a lack of 
consultation. So I would trust that answers the member's question. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I see. I thank you for the answer. We are 
concerned, and I am concerned, that the entire direction has not 
changed, because the essential criticisms I am getting are not fine 
tuning. People are not saying, well instead of discussing the 
positive and negative aspect of Cuba, shouldn't we discuss the 
positive and negative aspects of Afghanistan? They're not saying 
that. They are saying that the general trend is what they object to. 
 
And I think that when I . . .You rightly have analysed the issues, 
but I think it's getting to the point that we need to have some sense 
that these issues are being directed — although I'm sure I 
appreciate you understanding what those issues are. 
 
Here's a Star-Phoenix article on January 26, 1985. The title is 
"Social studies proposal out in left field." We all have our biases, 
and I don't necessarily see the Star-Phoenix as exactly a right-wing 
paper when it says that the social studies proposal is in left field. I 
get kind of worried about how far left it is. 
 
I think that those concerns that Jenny Morton addressed in her 
article have not been met. And just talking to professors at the 
university this week, they are still saying the same things and they 
are continuing to mount an offence against the trend. 
 
(1645) 
 
I hear comments such as this:  
 

My first major criticism of the proposed curriculum is that it is 
essentially utilitarian and materialistic. The curriculum presents 
a very  

materialistic, almost Marxist, view of history. 
 
Now keep this in mind, I'm not quoting from the Caswell 
campaign report. This is from university professors who are not 
noted again as representing a large right-wing fanatic segment in 
our population, although I don't want to stereotype any of them. 
But I think when an academic says, "almost Marxist view of 
history," I can understand why parents are upset about what they 
see as a socialist propaganda in these classes. And I want to know 
why you think the entire direction, or why you support the 
direction of this curriculum, and why you think it's worth 
preserving and just fine tuning. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, I support a 
revision — and let's make that clear — a revision to some of the 
past social studies materials. I believe some of it is very good, and 
that must be retained. But there was also some that needed 
reviewing and revising in order to bring some things up to date. 
 
Many changes have been made, and I'm not sure which professor 
the member from Westmount is referring to when she talks about 
the University of Saskatchewan, but one of the most vocal critics 
was a professor by the name of Professor Hayden, who is now 
working with the department, and has been for several weeks in 
terms of getting some of his viewpoints and concerns addressed. 
It's been a very open consultation process. And that will continue. 
 
In terms of the article in the Star-Phoenix, I'm well aware of it. 
And I would suggest, since that time, there were some specific 
changes made in some areas. I'm not going to pretend that it's easy 
to catch every sentence, every word, every . . What do they call it? 
. . . lesson in going through the curriculum. 
 
I do, however, believe that the mechanism that is put into place, 
with the number of teachers and others that are having some input 
into this curriculum, is a very good process and should remain in 
place. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I asked, the other day, a professor . . . And 
incidentally, I've very pleased that you are talking with Professor 
Hayden. I encourage you to continue that process. I'll just stop 
while the member from Regina Centre talks about the weather. 
 
Okay. When I hear an aim such as the major aims of the proposed 
social studies, social science program, are to inform students about 
their own society and its relationship to other societies, and to 
enhance personal understanding and self-esteem, and when I 
consistently in the end, reading here in The Individual in society, 
grade 8 curricula, recognize and understand conflicts of 
communication problems, complicating choices, decisions, or 
relationships, I appreciate . . . And it goes on and on. The 
emphasis on self. The emphasis on analysing and exposing 
yourself to peer pressure, to discussion, I think many people 
would see as an invasion of privacy. And it is a type of education 
that people want to get away from because they want, instead, the 
students to have facts and to have a sequential . . . a sequence of 
western civilization, not sitting around discussing: — what are my 
values, what are the values of the other people in the  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1587 
 

class? 
 
And they tend to think this major thrust for such concepts as 
self-esteem, self-identify — the emphasis on self, especially in 
grade 8 — would be considered by some as needlessly 
narcissistic, an invasion of privacy in many respects, and turns the 
class-room into a clinician rather than a place where we acquire 
knowledge. 
 
What are the kinds of changes that you have made so far, that you 
are continuing with, that you think it justifies this thrust? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would be glad to 
send some material to the member that outlines some of the 
specific changes. You know the greatest criticism, in terms of 
where the emphasis is on, had to do with the lack of historical 
content. I don't have any difficulty with the idea of students in 
grade 8 needing to be able to talk about the students and their 
society. And I think there's a lot of history that you bring into that 
when you are talking about the society that you are living in today. 
 
I think one of the major factors on this particular curriculum is the 
fact that we have moved into what is classified as the "information 
age." And students have to begin to be able to take more 
information and, in a very critical way, analyse it and put it 
through faster than what you and I ever did when we were 
younger than what we are today. 
 
I think, you know, the concern is valid in terms of how much time 
is spent and how deep ones goes with a student in talking about 
their values and the self-esteem and that type of thing. 
 
But I think regardless of what course you had — and I would only 
point out that the Keegstra affair in Alberta would back me on 
that, and what happened in that. No matter what course you have, 
there is a teacher in the class-room, and most teachers take the 
material with a great deal of respect for the values that are outside 
of that, in the home, the community or wherever they may be, and 
to apply the curriculum accordingly. 
 
I guess, you know, you are always going to have a degree of 
movement that a teacher can go in terms of interpretation of 
curriculum, and this is perhaps the area that lends itself to a 
broader interpretation than what some parents would like. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I think that when we talk about a need for 
history and the education explosion, I think that, first of all, history 
has not changed. We might have a few more chapters as we go 
along. And so, you know, I get very sceptical about revising 
history. I can understand it in the science book, but I'm very 
sceptical about revised history. That's what they do in Russia when 
it doesn't fit their political needs. 
 
When I see here psychological needs, Maslow's Hierarchy of 
Needs: — "discuss what Maslow's hierarchy is; how it relates to 
self-concept." This psychological needs . . . 
 

Determine how the family and others help to meet  

psychological needs. Describe important events which have 
occurred during his or her lifetime which have related to his or 
her development. 
 

That at best could be a waste of time. And I tend to think that this 
kind of debate or discussion in school is loaded with ideological 
presuppositions. I have . . . And I'm sure many teachers would 
have a great difficulty teaching this curriculum if they had a small 
"c" conservative philosophy in life. 
 
For example, the value of interdependence and one world 
government is replete through this course. It is assumed that that's 
the direction where people are going. It is assumed that is a good 
and a positive. Now some people may accept that, and it is one of 
many political views in society. It is certainly not one that all 
teachers and parents hold and want to transmit to their students at 
the expense of knowing who Radisson and Croseilliers was, and 
John Cabot. 
 
Have you considered the implications of turning history into a 
psychological course, and one which . . . almost to the point of the 
students aren't even learning psychology? But in fact they're 
expected to expose themselves and their private lives in a very 
debatable Maslow theory. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I want to say you 
do not revise history. You revise materials and curricula, but you 
do not revise history. One . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What's your trouble? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . (inaudible) . . . a snit all of a sudden. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, you're quite right, the member from 
Regina Centre — now she's in a snit, he says. I am quite tired . . . 
Let me have the floor; I'm on my feet. One week you mimic 
chickens; the next week you mimic women. The member . . . I 
would hope that is not an indication . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
yes, and would the hon. members please allow the minister to 
speak? She's being interrupted constantly. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I would hope that's not an indication of 
where the member from Quill Lakes puts the esteem of women. 
However, given the number of women in the opposition, I would 
say that is exactly where he has it — exactly. 
 
One of the things that came up in the review, from parents, was 
that they wanted more Canadian content and Saskatchewan 
material; they wanted students to learn more about Saskatchewan. 
And that was overwhelmingly the majority in terms of the revision 
of materials for the grade 7 to 9 social studies. 
 
Now obviously one of the difficulties in revising of  
  



 
May 28, 1986 

 

1588 
 
 

material has been to keep all the history in that was in the 
previous. And the other thing that came through the review, Mr. 
Chairman, was that it was the concepts, as we move on in time, 
that one has to start dealing with in terms of history, besides some 
facts and figures. I mean, you obviously need a focal point and 
you need a base to take your education and knowledge from and 
begin to move from that point, and that's what history is. Now 
there's a pretty good saying around that you don't know where 
you're going to if you don't know where you came from. And 
that's the historical factor with it. 
 
I do not believe that the entire course is what the member seems to 
have the perception of. However, that does not say that I am not 
without concern with it. And that's why the constant review. The 
professor from the University of Saskatchewan, and others, are 
involved. And I would like to say to the member: — it is more 
than simply talking; they have been involved, including running a 
pilot project with the Saskatoon Catholic School Board. 
 
So it is simply not a matter of talking. And some of those concerns 
are being addressed, and we'll continue to do so as we move along 
with it. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 
 


