


















































May 2, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 2, 1986 
 

1045 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Distribution of InfoCentre Network Materials 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct a 
question to the Minister of Supply and Services. Mr. Minister, it 
deals with your department’s latest patronage project, the 
InfoCentre Network. 
 
Yesterday we learned that the InfoCentre Network is a plan to 
distribute government brochures and Progressive Conservative 
propaganda at taxpayers’ expense through Saskatchewan 
grocery stores and shopping malls, and we confirmed that a 
company owned by a former PC party employee will be paid 
$85,000 a year to distribute this propaganda at taxpayers’ 
expense. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, at a time when Saskatchewan families are 
struggling to make ends meet, how do you justify this kind of 
expenditure, and isn’t the 12 to $15 million a year that you’re 
spending on self-serving government advertising enough 
without having to bombard shoppers with even more of this 
kind of propaganda? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I would first of all 
challenge the member to present a piece of self-serving 
propaganda that is on display in any of those . . . It’s not unlike 
him to stand in this House and suggest that. I made it very clear 
yesterday that there is definitely a need for distribution of 
government programs to the public of this province. That 
became very clear when we toured the province and talked 
about some of the things that people felt need to improve. 
 
Secondly, I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that this program was 
piloted a couple of years ago. This is a new concept, I will 
admit, which may be something that the NDP have trouble 
relating to. New concepts are not something they are very 
familiar with. It has been tried in other provinces with a certain 
amount of success. It is probably — and I repeat, probably — 
the cheapest method available to get government information to 
the public. It amounts to something less than 2 cents per 
pamphlet. It is a response to a need. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it is new; it is a little different, and I can 
understand the difficulty of the party opposite in coming to 
grips with something that’s new. But I think that we will 
monitor this very closely. I think we will find that the public 
accept and appreciate it and that it is, in fact, meeting a need, a 
very real need that exists out there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you indicated this was a new idea. The idea is about 
as new as a wagon wheel. It was attempted a few years ago by 
the Liberal government with disastrous results. This 
government seems intent on repeating every single disastrous 
mistake of every other government, including this one. 
 
Mr. Minister, how was Associated Business Consultants,  

which is owned by a former employee of the PC party, chosen 
for this $85,000 plum? Was there a public tendering process; or 
is this just the latest example of friends of the PC party with 
their snouts firmly in the public trough? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, once again in 
reference to the earlier question, I think we will find that the 
public are very interested in learning the information regarding 
the programs that have been developed by the various 
departments under this government. 
 
Secondly, in terms of the method of choosing, two proposals 
were submitted and we chose the cheaper one. And I would 
emphasize once again, once again, that this information is being 
distributed at a cost of less than 2 cents a pamphlet, obviously 
considerably cheaper than direct mailings or any other method. 
And the answer is simply that we chose the cheaper of the two 
proposals. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
amidst such civilized talk, if I might ask the minister a 
supplementary. The supplementary is, Mr. Minister: how much 
will the taxpayers pay in total for this new propaganda project? 
I would remind the minister that $85,000 is just the cost of the 
distribution by a former PC employee. How much will the 
government and the taxpayers be paying for rental space in 
grocery stores and shopping malls? How much will the 31 
government departments and Crown corporations be spending 
on new brochures and other material for this province-wide 
propaganda system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the member has 
arrived at the $85,000 very imaginatively. He’s done a 
calculation on the costs and multiplied it by 31 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s exactly right. That, Mr. Speaker, is the 
total cost of the program. It includes the purchase of the display 
cases; it includes the material. There will be no special 
pamphlets printed for this. 
 
What we have found in fact in the past — and I’m sure that 
when the members opposite were the administration — was that 
when material was printed, it was distributed to certain selected 
client groups and then you always ended up with a lot of 
material left over. We are making that available to the public. 
The public have indicated very clearly, certainly on the tour that 
I was on meeting with business people, that the lack of 
knowledge of government programs was one very real problem 
and we have simply responded to that. 
 
But I emphasize once again that the total cost is included — the 
staff that will keep the various displays neat, the staff that will 
keep them manner, the staff that will monitor them — and I 
emphasize once again, that even with the cost covering the 
entire program, the material will be available at less than 2 cents 
a pamphlet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Minister, you 
accused us of arriving at it imaginatively. Mr. Minister, we are 
reading your deputy minister’s memos;  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1046 
 

apparently you are not. Let me read the memo which your 
deputy minister wrote: It says, “We have divided the cost of the 
service evenly so the annual cost to each agency will be 
$2,471,” something, I might add, neither the Minister of Social 
Services nor the Minister of Urban Affairs nor the minister in 
charge of the Public Service Commission knew yesterday. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: (a) who’s running the government; 
and (b) what is the total cost? This is just the cost of the 
agencies. What is the total cost of this little propaganda project? 
Would you read your deputy minister’s memos and give us 
some answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, the numbers that the 
member has in front of him . . . And I realize it’s very difficult 
sitting on that side of the room to hear the answer. I will repeat 
it again. Possibly his colleagues could remain quiet long enough 
for him to hear it. The $85,000 . . . I really think it would save 
the House’s time if you allowed your colleague to hear the 
answer. The number that is here is the total cost of the program. 
I emphasize once again that it amounts to less than 2 cents a 
pamphlet. The number covers staffing, it covers setting up, it 
covers any costs involved in the space, and it covers monitoring 
and keeping track of what’s happening. In fact we believe, as I 
indicated, that this program will be accepted, and in fact if it’s 
not, we’ll end it. But the need has been identified and it’s an 
attempt to respond. 
 

Aid to Oil Companies 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. Mr. 
Speaker, the question deals with welfare, and it’s directed to the 
Minister of Energy who just announced a new welfare program 
for the oil companies of the province this morning. The PC 
government says that it can’t afford to repair our highways, and 
maintain a fresh food subsidy for remote northern communities, 
and cut taxes for ordinary people, but it always seems to have a 
lot of money for the oil companies in the province. 
 
My question is this. Earlier this week the Mulroney government 
in Ottawa, the PC government, gave 175 million in aid to the oil 
companies. I wonder if you could indicate — because at your 
dog and pony show this morning, you didn’t outline what the 
cost would be to the taxpayers of the province — can you 
inform the Assembly and the taxpayers and where you are 
going to increase taxes to make up the difference that you’re 
giving to the oil companies. Who’s going to pay? Are you 
going to increase income taxes? Sales taxes? Where will the 
money come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the objective this 
morning of the changes and the initiatives we put in place to 
deal with the direct and indirect jobs that are at stake in the oil 
and gas industry in Saskatchewan, were designed with one goal 
and one goal in mind, and that is to maintain the 10,000 jobs 
that are in jeopardy out there, Mr. Speaker, because of the fall 
in world oil prices and because of the nature of the oil patch in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The cost, Mr. Speaker, the cost is the term the hon. member 
would use. I say what we have given up today on  

behalf of the province and the public treasury to maintain 
10,000 jobs is small, Mr. Speaker, and in fact I look at it as an 
investment. The number, for the hon. member’s information 
and to answer his question very directly, is that the cost for this 
program will be $700,000 per month over three months. And, 
Mr. Speaker, any time I can spend 700,000 a month and 
maintain 10,000 jobs in the oil and gas industry in this province, 
that is a good investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I fail to understand the 
noise and the hysteria about giving this kind of money away to 
the oil companies, but knowing the donations that flow to these 
people at election time . . . By way of background . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is making 
statements rather than asking questions. If you have a question 
I’d like to hear it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the minister in charge of 
welfare for oil companies, and it was a very specific question, 
and I ask you, Mr. Minister: what is the total amount, if this 
program is used by all of the oil companies in the province, how 
much money will it cost companies in the province, how much 
money will it cost the taxpayers of the province? And you’re 
indicating 700,000. And very clearly, by way of background, at 
the press conference this morning . . . And I want to quote from 
the documents that the minister tabled. On page 6 it says, “To 
encourage employment in the service . . . sector . . .” It goes on 
to say that they can deduct “against royalties and taxes payable 
to a maximum of $6 million for the three month period.” 
 
That’s one part of the program. And I say to you, what is the 
total cost of the program, and what are you trying to hide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, once again the hon. 
member has (a) his facts wrong, and (b) is trying to drive a 
wedge between those who work in the oil patch and the rest of 
society. The facts are . . . And you have only presented, as 
usual, part of the story, and I would have thought the hon. 
member from Shaunavon, who has some understanding of the 
oil and gas industry, would have been honourable enough to tell 
the whole story. 
 
The reality, Mr. Speaker, is that if you provide some 
encouragement to an oil producer to repair a well that is shut 
down because it is broken, if you bring that production back on 
stream you get royalties. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The Minister of Energy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s not on his feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well he was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I called order because of the 
shouting of the opposition that time, and the minister was not 
finished speaking. 
 
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1047 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I will outline, Mr. Speaker, the full 
and entire story of the costs, both direct and indirect, to all 
members of this legislature and indeed all people in 
Saskatchewan, of how this program is going to maintain jobs at 
a cost of 700,000 per month. It is true, it is true that there is $2 
million per month expended — that’s capped at that level — to 
encourage oil producers to do work over; to do repair jobs. To 
do repair jobs requires that service and supply sector activity in 
the employment side out there, Mr. Speaker, which is our goal. 
That is the direct cost. 
 
On the other side, however, and this is the other part of the story 
the hon. member fails to tell the other members of this House 
about, is that if you repair those wells that would otherwise 
have been shut down, or you bring those oil wells on stream 
that would otherwise have been shut in, you increase the 
province’s revenues . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — . . . by bringing back those oil wells 
into production . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to ask the opposition to be a little 
bit patient and to listen to the answer. It’s impossible to hear in 
here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To finish, Mr. Speaker, very quickly, 
if you maintain and bring those oil wells back into production 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve just asked for order, and I’m going to 
caution the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that we are 
not going to put up with this amount of hollering through 
question period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — By bringing the shut-in wells back 
into production, Mr. Speaker, we in fact will gain revenues for 
the province that would have been otherwise lost. So if you 
balance out the direct cost with the recaptured revenue, we end 
up with a net figure, Mr. Speaker, of $700,000 a month. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, further, that that number is a 
good investment when you talk about maintaining 10,000 jobs. 
And I also will stack that number and the job it will do for 
Saskatchewan workers in the oil patch against the $400 million 
program that Alberta has announced. Our programs will bring 
results, Mr. Speaker. Jobs will be maintained. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — After that long answer which took a great 
deal of time, which didn’t deal with the question that was asked, 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: these same oil companies — 
these same oil companies — a year ago were saying and 
arguing very loudly that they wanted government out of their 
lives; they wanted a deregulated industry and they wanted to go 
it on their own. 
 
I’m wondering how it is that you are now responding to these 
oil companies who now want to become closest socialists. How 
is it that, on the one hand, last year they  

were wanting deregulation, now they’re wanting government 
hand-outs? When did you decide to change your mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the objectives of our 
program has got nothing to do with the oil companies per se. 
The objective of this program was to maintain employment in 
the service and supply sector, Mr. Speaker, and to keep those 
people who on a daily basis go from well to well in this 
province operating and maintaining those wells. We wanted to 
maintain those jobs and, Mr. Speaker, with these programs 
those jobs will be maintained. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, over the past four years we have seen an interesting 
performance by this government. When oil prices were going 
up we had to give them a billion dollars to get them to drill oil 
wells. Now they’ve over-drilled the number of oil wells in this 
province; they have to shut some in because there’s no sale for 
it; and they need more taxpayers’ money to keep them in 
business. 
 
Now I would like to say to you, Mr. Minister: does it make any 
sense to overheat a heated market when world prices are $35 a 
barrel, give them a billion dollars of taxpayers’ money, and 
today we give them another group of millions of dollars when 
prices are down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, now we’re starting to 
get at the heart of the matter because the classic socialist 
mentality is now showing through. The hon. member is trying 
to accuse this government of somehow artificially and 
maliciously creating jobs out there such as the likes of which 
this province has never seen. They’re accusing us of 
overheating the jobs out there in the oil patch. 
 
But you see, Mr. Speaker, that makes a lot of sense when you 
think about their approach in the past. They said that the oil 
companies and the oil . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, you see, that’s quite 
consistent with their logic of the past. Because in the past they 
said to the oil companies and the oil workers, both direct and 
indirect: no, let’s leave the oil and the gas in the ground; let’s 
buy all our gas from Alberta and forget about the jobs in 
Saskatchewan. Let’s have all the oil that goes into the refinery 
here, the Co-op Refinery in Saskatchewan today, let’s buy it all 
from Alberta and leave our oil in the ground. And with it we 
leave all the jobs gone, all the economic benefits, and most 
importantly for all the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
leave all those foregone revenues in the ground. 
 
That’s the socialist approach. This isn’t the approach of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the government under Grant 
Devine who understands the oil industry, and more importantly, 
Mr. Speaker, who has the interests of the oil workers and the oil 
patch at heart. 
 

Appointment of International Marketing Consultants 
 

  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1048 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address a 
question to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. 
Some three weeks ago in the Assembly you took notice of a 
number of questions in respect to the three international 
marketing consultants of your government had appointed in 
early 1984 in Minot, North Dakota; London, England; and 
Hong Kong. And according to the public accounts these three 
marketing consultants collected about $300,000, $283,000 in 
fees paid for by the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Can the minister tell the taxpayers today where these three 
consultants are working, whether they are working as full-time 
government employees or on a personal services contract or on 
a retainer basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the answer to the question 
advanced a week or so ago, Mr. Speaker, is one . . . I think the 
first question was with regard to a Mr. Duffy in England who 
had a total pay on an all-in cost service contract of $49,000. 
That included his salary; that included any secretarial staff that 
he would have to pay for; that included his travel and I think 
that’s fairly reasonable. Mr. Duffy works out of the London 
office looking for economic development initiatives. He was 
instrumental in and worked with the CdF Chimie proposal that 
brought a very reputable French corporation into Saskatchewan 
to build an ammonia plant and I certainly don’t think we should 
apologize for that. 
 
With regard to the operation in Minot, North Dakota — the 
office in Minot, North Dakota, was about $100,000. That 
included secretary; that included travel; that included his salary; 
that included all his costs associated with attending conferences 
throughout the mid-western United States and northern states of 
United States. It also included his assisting in a variety of farm 
machinery manufacturers in attending trade sales, this type of 
thing — Degelman’s, Leon’s, many of the farm machinery 
manufacturers of our province that have in the past and are 
continuing to look into that market to sell manufactured 
products produced in Saskatchewan, creating jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With regard to the operation of Pacific rim, Mr. Speaker, that 
particular contract was worked out for the first time with the 
federal government. The federal government had, I think, some 
26 employees in the Hong Kong office. That particular person 
would be involved (a) his salary; his secretarial help that he had 
to deal with. That particular person has been very instrumental 
in working the Pacific rim which is the biggest market that 
Saskatchewan has, and quite frankly is a growing market for 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government . . . This government, Mr. 
Speaker, is very set upon taking product that is produced . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite ask a question and they 
persist in yapping and crying when they want to hear the answer 
to it. 
 
What we say in this government, Mr. Speaker, is that we  

believe it is important to promote our products, whether it’s 
natural resources or whether it’s products manufactured in 
Saskatchewan, to the rest of the world. We believe that we must 
go to the rest of the world. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, what we see today with the opening of 
Expo, Saskatchewan business has an opportunity to again 
display their wares to the world. We can sell to the world; we 
can compete in the world, and in so doing we create jobs in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and we apologize to no one for that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have a supplemental. I want to ask the 
minister . . . I’m specifically interested in the $124,000 paid out 
last year to the consultant in Hong Kong. And what I want to 
ask you is: where does this consultant operate out, and what 
services did he provide to Saskatchewan that could not have 
been provided by the 26 full-time staff at the Canadian High 
Commission in Hong Kong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well he worked out of the Canadian 
commission. And the people in the commission, if the member 
is to understand that, of the 26 people working in the Canadian 
commission in Hong Kong, five of them deal with trade issues. 
What we have found I think in the past, and what has been 
found by some of the other provinces, particularly in western 
Canada, is many of those trade officers tend to have a bias 
towards eastern and central Canadian manufacturing. And as a 
result, very often the western Canadian manufacturing, which 
was a smaller by comparison to eastern Canada, came in second 
place. This particular person has worked with that particular 
group to try to promote western Canada. As well, Mr. Speaker, 
he works with some of the specific questions as it relates to the 
sale of potash . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — This particular person has worked with 
the marketing of some natural resources that we produce in our 
province and sell to the Pacific Rim whether it be potash or 
uranium or . . . Mr. Speaker, the members opposite obviously 
don’t want to hear the answer. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — In view of the fact that, with respect with 
these trade offices, the U.S. states are closing many of them — 
one example, the state of California recently closed its office in 
Singapore because it doesn’t pay for itself — can you confirm 
to the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of this province, 
that your trade office in Hong Kong and other areas of the 
world do pay for themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well a good example, just last week the 
office in Hong Kong was very instrumental in working with 
Develcon to land a very large contract in Japan with regards to 
electronics manufactured right in Saskatoon. 
 
Now that type of thing has worked, many, perhaps United 
States states, have had a great number of these. And  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1049 
 

what’s happened in Canadian and Saskatchewan business, in 
particular, very often don’t have the wherewithal to get into the 
international, as opposed to a large California company. Let’s 
say they can in fact do that. What is in fact happening is the 
moneys that we have expended to assist in promoting our 
manufactured goods, our natural resources around the world, is 
dollars well spent. Those dollars are bringing home jobs and 
bringing home revenue to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The Cost of Credit 
Disclosure Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The cost of Credit Disclosure Act. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to refer the 
said Bill to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m sorry, I’m going to ask the minister to 
repeat what she asked because I could not hear. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to refer the 
said Bill to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Leave not granted and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting Credit Reporting Agencies 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Credit Reporting Agencies. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to refer the 
said Bill to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Leave not granted and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Highways and 
Transportation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Highways and Transportation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1983 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. 
Minister of Justice, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1983. 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, please. When we’re going down  

the order paper, there’s to be silence in the House. And I’m 
going to ask both sides of the House to obey that. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to 
refer the said Bill to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Leave not granted and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. 
Minister of Justice, I move first reading of a Bill respecting the 
Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
like you to make a ruling on it. And I don’t know whether you 
can make it today or not, but if you would review the record 
and give us your opinion. 
 
Going down the order paper under Introduction of Bills, a Bill 
was introduced by — Bill No. 3, actually — the Hon. Mr. 
McLeod moved first reading of a Bill to amend The Highways 
and Transportation Act. You called for the vote on it, and you 
called for those in favour. Not one person in the Assembly said 
yes. You said, those opposed? There were a number of people 
who said no. Then you went back and asked for the vote again. 
 
I clearly understand that that’s what took place. I find it an 
unusual, a very unusual way for a vote to take place. Members 
on this side think it’s contrary to the way the vote went. I think 
the obvious way would have been to call for a standing vote if 
you weren’t clear. But I find it goes against all the rules of the 
Assembly — and this is only my opinion; in my humble 
opinion I ask for a ruling on it — that the Speaker recalled the 
vote. And I’m unclear and would like the authority, if you 
would quote that to us, whereby the Speaker can recall a vote 
that is taken and the government loses on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, if I could just speak 
briefly to the point of order raised by the member from 
Shaunavon and speak on behalf of our side of the House. It’s a 
very difficult thing, I’m sure, for any human being, whether he 
be a Speaker or a member of the House or anybody else 
anywhere, whatever forum they might be in, to be able to hear 
what was going on in the House, considering the noise coming 
from the opposition benches at the time that we were going 
down the order paper with these Bills. 
 
So I would say, Mr. Speaker, if you take the noise from the  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1050 
 

opposition benches into consideration, we would see very, very 
well what should have been happening in here. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I’d like to speak to that point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. When the Minister of Highways raised the issue, none 
of his people were paying attention; none of them voted. And 
when it was our turn to vote, we voted “no,” and the “no’s” are 
the only ones that voted on the issue. And then you called a 
second vote. And I think that if . . . the best out of three, that’s 
your privilege, but I don’t think that’s the normal procedure of 
this House. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I’d just like to speak quickly to that motion. I 
did vote “yes” on the motion. And I don’t know whether you 
heard me or not, Mr. Speaker, but there was a “yes” on the 
motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The members are confusing 
what took place on Bill No. 3. I asked for first reading of the 
Bill, and there was a “yes” and there were a number of “no’s.” 
And then I have to at that point ask for those in favour to say, 
aye, and those opposed to say, no. And that’s exactly what I 
did. There was no deviation from the normal process of the Bill. 
 
Order, order. That’s exactly what happened, and the record will 
show it. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask for 
leave of the Assembly to revert . . . to move under government 
orders, first of all, and then revert back to government motions 
following a second reading on one of the Bills under second 
reading speeches, please. I also ask for leave of the Assembly 
for that version. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister would take a 
question just for clarification. Rather than move to second 
readings on a number of Bills, if he would clearly indicate 
which Bill on the record he’s moving to, we will then make our 
decisions. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for that leave 
to move to second reading of Bill No. 16, An Act to amend The 
Venture Capital Tax Credit Act. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Venture Capital Tax 
Credit Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
certainly a pleasure to have the opportunity to move second 
reading of an Act to amend The Venture Capital Tax Credit 
Act. I would remind the House Leader, the opposition House 
Leader, that I sent the detailed notes on the changes in this Act 
to him yesterday or the day before. I hope he has been able to 
distribute those to the appropriate critic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are designed to  

strengthen what is already a strong venture capital program and 
come about as a result of discussions with business men and 
business women across the province, business people who have 
been strongly supportive of the initiatives that we have taken in 
the area of venture capital. 
 
I’ll deal with the amendments shortly, but I’d like to take just a 
few moments and review the venture capital program which we 
feel has contributed a new attitude towards investment in this 
province. 
 
The objectives of the program are twofold: firstly, to provide 
small business throughout the province with access to equity 
capital that needed fuel for economic growth and expansion; 
and secondly, to develop and promote a strong provincial 
infrastructure for investment, an infrastructure which will get 
our CAs, our lawyers, our business consultants working even 
more closely with small businesses and assisting them in raising 
equity and expanding their operations. 
 
Equity capital is vitally important to our province’s small 
businesses. It’s important because it helps those businesses 
build our economy and create much needed jobs. But venture 
capital is also important in a psychological way. It helps create 
an anti-recession mentality which states there are opportunities 
out there despite hard times. Let’s go out and find them and 
invest in them. 
 
We may have a struggling agricultural sector, and we may have 
low petroleum prices right now, but with equity investment our 
small businesses can better withstand the ups and downs of our 
economy. We can also target equity capital for certain 
businesses, feedlot operations, for instance, and establish a role 
model for other operators to follow. Hog production, cow-calf 
operations, are but two examples of enterprises which can 
benefit greatly from equity investment. 
 
What does venture capital mean to Saskatchewan? It means 
staying power for our businesses, growing power for them. It 
means more jobs and more products produced here at home. It 
means investment, not just of money but of faith and confidence 
in Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
The venture capital story is a success story, Mr. Speaker. 
Fifty-two venture capital corporations were registered as of the 
end of December 1985. Those VCCs have raised over $32 
million and have already invested 22 million of that amount in 
Saskatchewan businesses — businesses, I might add, that are 
located in every constituency. We expect to exceed these 
figures during the fiscal year. 
 
The amendments that we’ve introduced to the Act arise, as I’ve 
already mentioned, out of discussions with our small-business 
community. A number of the amendments are housekeeping 
changes dealing primarily with clarification of the Act. 
However, there are two major changes. One of them is to 
expand the small businesses which are eligible for venture 
capital investment. We want to make it easier for agricultural 
and livestock production in facilities to qualify for this 
mechanism of equity financing. 
 
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1051 
 

We’ve also proposed an amendment, the effect of which will be 
to expand the number of communities which can register 
venture capital corporations with minimum capital of $25,000. 
In this regard we’ve raised the population ceiling from centres 
under 5,000 to those under 20,000. This change will allow 
equity investment in retail and service industries in most 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to these amendments, Mr. Speaker, my department 
officials are doing a thorough review of the venture capital 
program in concert with leading private sector tax consultants to 
ensure that the program will indeed continue to be solid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will let those remarks suffice for the time, but 
obviously I’m very pleased to move second reading of An Act 
to amend The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg leave to adjourn 
debate on this. If the minister sent those notes over, somewhere 
they got lost in the shuffle. I’m sorry I didn’t get to see them 
and study them in advance. So we’d like time to look at them 
and then make our comments in next sitting. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Agriculture as Prime Topic at Tokyo Economic Summit 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, at the end of 
my remarks today it is my intention to move the following 
motion, which will be seconded by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That this Assembly endorses the Prime Minister in his 
successful efforts to bring the agricultural problems facing 
Canada to the attention of world leaders through his 
introduction of agriculture to the Tokyo Economic 
Summit, and further, that this Assembly congratulates the 
Prime Minister and the federal government on its initiative 
to provide financial assistance to western farmers. 

 
(1045) 
 
In speaking to this motion, Mr. Speaker, I will address the 
questions of why does agriculture need to be on the agenda of a 
meeting of world leaders, and secondly, how did it get there, 
and what is our hope, Mr. Speaker, our hope in so far as what 
can come out of this summit meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question becomes simply this: why is it 
important that Prime Minister Mulroney initiate discussions on 
farming and agriculture and the agri-food business at a world 
summit meeting? Why is it so important, Mr. Speaker, we see 
in a recent news magazine, that Helmut Kohl, the leader of 
West Germany; Mr. Nakasone, the leader of Japan; Margaret 
Thatcher, the leader of Britain; Ronald Reagan, the leader of the 
United States of America; Mr. Craxi, the leader of Italy; 
Francois Mitterand, President of France; and of  

course our Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney, from Canada meet 
at this Economic Summit? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, the issue facing farmers and agriculture 
today is no longer just a Saskatchewan issue. It’s no longer just 
a western Canadian issue. It’s no longer just a Canadian issue, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s no longer just a North American issue. The 
farm problem is not just a matter of confrontation between the 
U.S. and the EEC (European Economic Community) over 
markets. Mr. Speaker, the issues facing agriculture today are 
global in nature. Mr. Speaker, it’s an international issue today. 
The issues facing agriculture today are global in nature; hence, 
Mr. Speaker, it makes the utmost sense that they be dealt with 
on a global basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prime Minister Mulroney’s initiative to have this 
on the agenda at the Tokyo summit is a significant step forward, 
one that the Prime Minister deserves our heartiest 
congratulations for, and one that our Premier deserves our 
congratulations for as well, Mr. Speaker. It is a significant step, 
as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, an historic step. 
 
The issues today are global in nature because agriculture, 
farming, is undergoing fundamental structural changes globally. 
In agriculture, Mr. Speaker, I suppose in really any commodity, 
one historically can make the observation that we’ve always 
had cycles. Prices go up, and they fall, and they come back up 
again. We’ve had drought cycles where we’ve had periods of 
good moisture and poor moisture. When it comes to agricultural 
and farming the world over, farmers are used to cycles, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But the reality that appears to be facing us on a global basis 
today, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re headed for a new baseline. 
The cycles always were up and down, but they were always 
around a common baseline. Today it appears, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re headed for a new baseline. Where that new baseline is, 
we know not. Could be here; could be here. The issue then, Mr. 
Speaker, becomes this for those leaders. How do we get from A 
to B? How do we deal with the new realities in the world today? 
How do we deal with the changes that farmers and agriculture 
are facing? How do we deal and how do we manage change, 
Mr. Speaker, in a common-sense yet compassionate way? 
 
What do I mean, Mr. Speaker, when I say global agriculture is 
undergoing fundamental structural changes? Let me give you 
some examples, Mr. Speaker. Just a few years ago, the 
European Economic Community used to be customers of ours. 
They used to buy feed grains from us particularly, and among 
the feed grains, barley in particular. They were substantial 
customers of ours. Today, Mr. Speaker, the EEC competes with 
us in grain markets. They are no longer customers. They are 
now competitors in a world market-place — through massive 
subsidization of their farming sector by paying farmers 
handsomely for their produce, and, of course, a farmer being 
what he is, he responded and responded in spades. They have 
some massive surpluses, Mr. Speaker, and albeit that their goal 
— the goal of the common agricultural policy, initially — no 
doubt was to reach self-sufficiency when they put these 
subsidies in place, they have overshot the mark, Mr. Speaker, 
and they have  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1052 
 

overshot it substantially. Now they pump money into the farm 
sector; they create bizarre distortions inside and outside the 
country. 
 
We’ve all heard the reports, Mr. Speaker, of the mountains of 
butter in the European Economic Communities — caves full of 
butter, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard stories of lakes of surplus 
milk, lakes of surplus wine — which is a large production 
sector over there, Mr. Speaker. But have they curbed 
production? Have they cut back on subsidies, Mr. Speaker, that 
led to this overproduction? The answer is no. 
 
I have to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that Prime Minister 
Thatcher, a couple of years ago, took a run at that very problem, 
addressed the common agricultural policy and the inherent 
problems in it at a European Economic Community’s leaders’ 
meeting. But of course what happened, Mr. Speaker, farmers 
hearing that there were going to be cut-backs in subsidies, 
hearing that there were going to be cut-backs in production, 
marched on The Hague — or wherever it is you march in 
Europe. 
 
And of course, as is an understandable and usual political 
reaction, the politicians scratched their heads facing these 
70,000 farmers marching on The Hague and said, whoa, boys, 
we’d better re-think this; there’s a very large human, and hence 
political, dimension to this problem. 
 
So the politicians scratched their heads, looked at the crowd of 
farmers out there, addressed the — and rightly so — the human 
dimension of the problem, and said no, now is not the time to 
cut back. So the subsidies and the distortions continue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I only have to look back to a clipping . . . And I’ll refer to a 
number of clippings and international journals through my 
remarks today, Mr. Speaker. I’m not going to give the details of 
where they are or what date, but I assure all members that if 
they wish me to provide them with the appropriate references, I 
can do so, but in the interests of time I will not. 
 
But only a couple of years ago the story line in one of the major 
newspapers across Canada read this way: 
 

French farmers carrying flags and placards staged a rally 
protesting against proposed cuts in the common market’s 
agriculture benefits. Nearby an estimated 20,000 farmers 
from Greece, Ireland and Italy marched towards the 
conference site hoisting an effigy of farmer hanging from 
gallows. 

 
And it went on further to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote again: 
 

Thousands of Italian farmers, mostly from the South, came 
in chartered planes and ferries over the weekend to protest 
against possible cuts in subsidies to Italian farmers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, end of quotation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you can see that although the politicians had, 
perhaps, a laudable goal of trying to rein in the subsidization 
because it was overshooting  

self-sufficiency and they were ending up with these massive 
surpluses, the human dimension rings loud and clear. And that’s 
not so surprising. And that’s why I say, Mr. Speaker, these 
issues have to be approached on a global basis and 
acknowledged in a compassionate way. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, before I leave Europe, Mr. 
Speaker; I think one would acknowledge, using that example, 
that what’s happened in Europe over the past few years is a 
fundamental structural change. They’ve gone from a position of 
from being not self-sufficient in food production to having 
massive surpluses and competing in our market-places, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the U.S. we see similar fundamental structural changes. In 
January of ‘85, Mr. Speaker, some y ear and more ago, I said 
then, Mr. Speaker, that the two most important things facing the 
Saskatchewan farmer were (a) the weather, and (b) the U.S. 
farm Bill. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, both statements have turned out to 
be true. The U.S. farm Bill has been very much in the news the 
last six, seven, eight months. The U.S. farm Bill, more correctly 
referred to as the Food Security Act of 1985, does many things, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
First, it is forcing down the price of world grains in the world 
market-place. The U.S. want to regain lost markets. They are 
particularly upset, as are we, that they have lost markets to the 
European Economic Community, because the European 
Economic Community has bought its way into markets with its 
massive subsidies. 
 
And so the U.S., through its farm security, or Food Security Act 
associated legislation, has put in place a program that has the 
acronym, Mr. Speaker, of BICEP (Bonus Incentive Commodity 
Export Program). It’s basically an export subsidy program that 
says to a buyer of grains or oil seeds that if you buy three 
bushels from us, we’ll give you the fourth one free, which has 
the effect, Mr. Speaker, of discounting the price out there by 25 
to 35 per cent. 
 
It also has the effect, Mr. Speaker, of lowering — and this is the 
important implication for us in Canada here and in 
Saskatchewan when it comes to wheat and other oil seeds — of 
lowering world grain prices that were too low already, and in 
many ways, Mr. Speaker, was the second volley and the 
counter-volley to the European Economic Community and what 
many are calling a trade war. 
 
And although the U.S. is attempting to clear its stocks by 
pricing its grains very aggressively, it is making up any shortfall 
to its farmers with subsidies as well, not the least of which has 
been referred to in this House recently and described as 
deficiency payments. 
 
Well as our Premier has said, Mr. Speaker, that has to be an 
option. It has to be an option for us and for our Saskatchewan 
and Canadian farmers and for our federal government. And it 
has been raised with them. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, it requires more than the 
simplistic analysis that the NDP have given it. They keep 
saying to members on this side of the legislature that there 
should be a payment, a deficiency payment, like the   



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1053 
 

U.S. farmer gets. And I have said, Mr. Speaker, that that should 
be an option, and we have raised that as an option. 
 
But the hon. member from his seat cries out, and shouldn’t it 
be? And I say yes, it should be, Mr. Speaker. But once again, 
they only tell half the story. You see, the half that they failed to 
tell Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker, is that certainly the 
U.S. farmer gets a deficiency payment. But what is the other 
side of the coin, Mr. Speaker? To get that deficiency payment, 
Mr. Speaker, he has to take land out of production. So maybe 
when the hon. member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg gets up 
and says, yes, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan farmers need a 
deficiency payment just like the U.S. farmer gets, what he 
should be saying, Mr. Speaker, is, yes, the Saskatchewan 
farmers should get $6 a bushel just like the U.S. wheat farmer 
gets, but also you have to take half your land out of production 
to get that, Mr. Speaker. Now if you tell the other half of the 
story, Mr. Speaker, I ask: is it as palatable? That’s why I say, 
Mr. Speaker, the simplistic approach to farm problems today 
will not work. Half-truths will not work, Mr. Speaker. The 
farmers of Saskatchewan deserve the full story. The farmers of 
Saskatchewan deserve to have these options explored in depth. 
 
What the farm Bill did, because they were very aggressive and 
sensitive to the marketing of export grains, but it was not 
market-driven, Mr. Speaker . . . Sorry, Mr. Speaker. Their 
export policy is market-driven. They are pricing their grains to 
sell at what some would call fire sale prices so that they will 
move through the market-place. And yet at the farm gate, their 
policies are not market-driven, Mr. Speaker, and for probably 
some of the same kinds of reasons that the European Economic 
Community cannot go to a market-driven economy for their 
farmers. You can’t take the legs out from under the farmer 
overnight, Mr. Speaker, in that heartless kind of fashion. And so 
just as we saw with Margaret Thatcher, raising with her EEC 
colleagues a couple of years ago the issue of dealing with 
oversubsidization and overproduction, when the U.S. farm Bill 
was first debated, Mr. Speaker, the intent there was to go to a 
more market-driven economy. 
 
(1100) 
 
But once the debate started, they too found, Mr. Speaker, that 
there was a human dimension to this. In fact, by every measure, 
farmers in the U.S. are suffering far more than farmers in 
Canada. And I would argue, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons 
why is they don’t have some of the very good programs that we 
have here in Saskatchewan and in Canada. Once again the 
human realities — and rightly so, Mr. Speaker — saw the U.S. 
back off that course. They are still pursuing a very 
market-driven export policy, but at the farm gate side, Mr. 
Speaker, they are maintaining their subsidies. Mr. Speaker, in 
the U.S., this attempt . . . And in some sectors, like I say, on the 
export side, having met with some success at a more 
market-oriented farm policy, is another example, Mr. Speaker, 
of what I would call a fundamental structural change in global 
agriculture. 
 
They change the complexion of that 50-year old piece of 
legislation in a way that it initially could have been radically 
altered, and perhaps not rightly so, Mr. Speaker, to a Bill that 
has some still very major implications for all of us globally. 
 

A final example, Mr. Speaker, and another major country of the 
world, China. China — a large population, Mr. Speaker. And 
for years and years and years we’ve always viewed China and 
India the world where the population grew faster than the food 
supplies. But in seven years, Mr. Speaker, the peasant farmers 
in China have doubled wheat production — doubled wheat 
production, Mr. Speaker. Can we say that of even 
Saskatchewan farmers who, we think, are some of the best in 
the world with all the technology we have. We certainly can’t 
say that about a lot of other sectors out there in the economy, 
Mr. Speaker. Who has been more productive than the Chinese 
peasant over the last seven years. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, because of those production gains, partly 
triggered by injecting a little capitalism into that system — the 
new responsibility system, Mr. Speaker, as it’s called — China 
is now the world’s largest wheat producer. Not only the world’s 
largest wheat producer, Mr. Speaker, they are also the world’s 
largest rice producer, cotton producer and tobacco producer. 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are other striking examples of what’s 
happened. And I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that China’s 
production and what they are doing today is a fundamental 
difference to what it was 10 or 15 years ago — another 
fundamental structural change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also should add however, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from an 
international wire service: 
 

However, (and they’re referring to China) problems with 
the feed production system, grain storage shortages, an 
inadequate infrastructure and inferior processing 
technology will make it difficult to sustain the growth rate 
of agriculture production. Because gains and yields are 
expected to be limited by seed varieties and fertilizer use 
. . . 

 
And certainly we’ve seen the implications of less fertilizer use 
on the amount of potash that they did not buy from us last year. 
It goes on to quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . China could regain its title as one of the world’s 
largest importers. 

 
So even with their great strides and gains to this point in time, 
Mr. Speaker, there is two sides to that coin as well. 
 
Another point I would like to share with the members of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, and I quote again, to give another 
example, yet another example of the global changes taking 
place: 
 

Small subsistence farmers in many Third World countries, 
helped by new seed varieties, new technology and 
enlightened government policies aimed at encouraging 
them to produce more food, are doing just that. 

 
They are feeding themselves and starting to send surpluses to 
their country cities, reducing the need for grain imports. India, 
Pakistan, and China, for example, have gone from being big 
importers to self-sufficiency. This particular analyst, Mr. 
Speaker, with the U.S.D.A.’s  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1054 
 

(United States Department of Agriculture) economic research 
service went on to say the world is drowning in grain. 
 
Fifteen years ago, Mr. Speaker, would we have ever stood in 
this House and said India, Pakistan, and China, for example, 
have gone from big importers to self-sufficiency — I would 
argue, Mr. Speaker, a fundamental, structural change in global 
agriculture. 
 
But there is more, Mr. Speaker. India targeted about 2.5 million 
tonnes of wheat for export last year. Not only are they 
self-sufficient, Mr. Speaker, but even exporting. And another 
example: the U.S.S.R., Mr. Speaker, one headline here from a 
APN news release, “U.S.S.R. plans more private farms.” What 
are the implications, Mr. Speaker, in Soviet Russia? If the new 
responsibility system worked in China as it did, what does this 
mean for one of our largest wheat importers, Soviet Russia? 
 
On a further and more recent story, and this one is The Globe 
and Mail of March 25th of this year, Mr. Speaker. A Mr. Raig, 
and I quote him here talking about Soviet Russia and what is 
happening there with food production. And I quote: 
 

Mr. Raig said 42 per cent of vegetables produced in 
Estonia come from private plots, as well as 32 per cent of 
the Baltic country’s potatoes, 22 per cent of its eggs, 18 
per cent of its milk and 19 per cent of its meat. 

 
End of quote, Mr. Speaker. All that is produced from the private 
plots in Soviet Russia. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, we saw what the new responsibility 
system has done, at least in part, in China. And with this new 
policy of First Secretary Gorbachev in Russia, what are the 
implications for the Canadian wheat farmer, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I give one further example, Mr. Speaker. Argentina — 
Wall Street Journal, November 15, 1984, headline here: 
“Argentina’s new breed of farmers are paring U.S. growers’ 
markets.” This is what the U.S. BICEP (Bonus Incentive 
Commodity Export Program), or export subsidy program, is all 
about, Mr. Speaker. They want to get back their markets that 
countries like EEC and Argentina has, in their minds, stolen 
from them. But a quote from this same newspaper article, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Argentine farmers have doubled annual grain and oilseed 
output over the past decade and turned this country into 
the world’s fifth-largest exporter of wheat. 

 
End of Quote, Mr. Speaker. And that’s from Argentina, Mr. 
Speaker. Ten to 15 years ago, I ask, Mr. Speaker, did one ever 
think that food production in some of these countries would 
ever come close to meeting their needs? 
 
But I turn, Mr. Speaker, now for a moment to another large 
continent in this world: Africa. A problem of a totally different 
dimension here, Mr. Speaker — this continent is the more 
classic definition of a farm and food crisis. 
 

Most often, when we talk about a food crisis or an agriculture 
crisis, the word “crisis” in itself implies shortage. In the rest of 
the examples I’ve given, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a food and 
agriculture crisis because of over-production and surpluses. 
Such is not the case in Africa, Mr. Speaker — a crisis, and a 
crisis because of shortages. They are not drowning in food, Mr. 
Speaker. For many months this past year, almost nightly, we 
saw the tales of sorrow, of food shortages and starvation, of the 
waste of humanity, of the poor transportation systems even for 
they food they did have, of the drought and of the devastation. 
And many days, Mr. Speaker, it looked like for those people 
that there was no hope. They have no money. They have no 
credit. There were no smiles. They could buy no food. 
 
Fortunately, provinces, and farmers like those in Saskatchewan, 
have donated food and food aid, and the crisis, to some degree, 
is under control. But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this 
diverging view — the very opposite sort of situation that exists 
in Africa — herein lies the challenge for global leaders. Here is 
the challenge of the statesmen of the world, assembled in Tokyo 
this very day, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the paradox of a glut on 
one hand and shortage of food on the other hand in a very 
populated part of the world, Africa, and other parts as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Just to put that in perspective for you, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
quote from the Premier’s statement at the first ministers’ 
conference November 25, ‘85 in Halifax, just this last fall, Mr. 
Speaker, because the Premier put this challenge so very, very 
well, and he put this challenge to the other premiers from across 
Canada, and the Prime Minister. I think what was put to those 
members and those leaders then, Mr. Speaker, is extremely 
important in the light of what is happening today in Tokyo. And 
I quote from the Premier’s statement: 
 

The third thing I want to touch on, Mr. Prime Minister, is a 
central irony. We have so much production from our 
ability to produce, with surpluses in the United States and 
feeding butter to the livestock industry in Europe. At the 
same time we look at huge population growth and 
staggering amounts of starvation in other parts of the 
world. 

 
He went on to say: 
 

It bothers people to think that you have children and 
families in Africa or wherever without food while we have 
the capacity to be so productive and we are falling short. 
 
There is something a little haywire when we have that 
ability to produce and the wherewithal to put that kind of 
standard of living on tables of North America; yet at the 
same time, we have got millions and millions of people 
without cash, in poverty, and empty stomachs. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Prime Minister, that Canada . . . 

 
The Premier went on to say, Mr. Speaker . . . And this is very 
important, Mr. Speaker, in light of what is happening  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1055 
 

this very day. The Premier said, and I start again: 
 

It seems to me, Mr. Prime Minister, that Canada is a 
natural to take a lead in that. We have to address all of 
these things because they are connected. I go through this 
exercise because I am not just talking about a farm 
problem. I am talking about a consumer problem, an 
industrial problem, a trade problem, a protectionism 
problem, and a humanitarian opportunity. 

 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, is what sets the great leaders apart from 
the mundane. And, Mr. Speaker, that comment was made by 
this very, very great Premier of this province, Premier Grant 
Devine. Statesmen are made of such stuff, Mr. Premier. 
Statesmen are made of such stuff. 
 
These many examples that I’ve given, Mr. Speaker, of the 
fundamental structural changes taking place in global 
agriculture that are today coming to the attention of our world 
leaders — and it doesn’t matter whether we talk of Africa or 
Pakistan or India or Argentina or France — all are examples of 
this structural change taking place in global agricultural policy. 
 
Part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, is global agriculture policy 
has become a philosophical jungle. We see, on the one hand, 
free market risk; at the same time, running into government 
intervention and protectionism. We see on one hand, capitalist 
entrepreneurship; on the other hand, socialist central planning. 
And in countries like China and Russia we see some of both at 
the same time. And I suppose we could give similar examples 
of similar conflicts at the same time in other countries. 
 
Now some might say, Mr. Speaker, that what I’ve laid out in 
terms of its implication for Canada and western Canadian 
farmers, in so far as the implications for these global changes, 
some would say it’s very scary, Mr. Speaker; that these are 
scary implications for Canada, for our farmers. Some may even 
panic, Mr. Speaker. That would be perhaps an NDP response. It 
would be a useless response, in my mind. This is not the time 
for knee-jerk reactions once again. Nor is it the time for despair, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The world leaders, all of us, have a tough task ahead of us. But 
it can be an exciting one, Mr. Speaker. The world and the world 
leaders are poised to deal with this issue, Mr. Speaker. And I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that a window of opportunity presents 
itself and that we must seize the moment. We must provide 
hope for our farmers, not measured doses of despair. We must 
provide hope for our farmers, not measured doses of despair, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker? Because we want our farmers to 
emerge from this period of change, this period of apparent 
turmoil, their period of apparent changing times, as not merely 
survivors, Mr. Speaker, but as winners. And I would say to the 
members of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and in fact to all of 
the people of western Canada and Canada, that our Premier, 
when he took this message to the other premiers in Canada and 
to the Prime Minister, I would suggest that he was the right man 
in the right place at the right time with the right message, Mr. 
Speaker. He was in the right place at the right time with  

the right message, and that message was that Canada needed a 
national agricultural and food strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I similarly, Mr. Speaker, because of our Premier’s 
initiative, I similarly believe that Prime Minister Mulroney 
today — and this is why I say we endorse him fully and we 
congratulate him — is the right man in the right place at the 
right time in Tokyo because, just as our Premier was 
fundamental in getting the embryo of an idea into the full born 
creation, the national agriculture and food strategy, so now is 
the Prime Minister to develop a new global agriculture and food 
strategy for this world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1115) 
 
I’m not going to get into the options of the future, of what this 
new policy could look like on a global basis, Mr. Speaker, 
except to say that there are options, and there are many more 
options than I could probably ever dream of or work away at. 
 
The important thing, Mr. Speaker, is that we address the issue. 
But I will say there are some exciting possibilities out there. It 
is not all doom and gloom; it need not all be despair. For 
example, Mr. Speaker, if some of what we today call the lesser 
developed countries have their lot improved; suppose we do 
address some of these issues I’ve talked about, Mr. Speaker, in 
continents like Africa; suppose we have these lesser developed 
countries have their lots improved, their incomes improved. 
They become a tremendous, tremendous — simply by the size 
of their populations, Mr. Speaker — tremendous, tremendous 
market force that could eat up any of surpluses in a matter of 
hours. 
 
And what do I mean, Mr. Speaker? Well, for example, let’s go 
back to China with its billion-plus people. A very recent 
clipping headlined, “China’s cattle market offers challenge,” 
and this article, and I quote Robert Watson who is president of 
Asiatic and Pacific Trading Co. Ltd., and put it as well as 
anyone could put it, and I quote from the article where they 
were quoting him: 
 

They don’t eat much beef now, but one billion people 
don’t have to eat much of anything to create a huge 
market. 

 
And that’s why the headline was, “China’s cattle market offers 
challenge.” They don’t each much beef now, but one billion 
people don’t have to each much of anything to create a huge 
market. A tremendous market potential out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I could go on further to give some Chinese examples of the 
diet changes that are taking place and the implication it has for 
the type of food product we grow here. And I’m quoting from 
an international wire story of last year, “While the Chinese still 
use the phrase, three meals of cooked rice a day to indicate 
well-being, the reality” . . . I’m sorry, I’ll start again. 
 
While the Chinese still use the phrase, three meals of cooked 
rice a day to indicate well-being, the reality is that the 
Chinese consumer has altered his diet to include cream 
cakes, soft drinks and  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1056 
 

noodles. 
 
They are changing their diet patterns, Mr. Speaker. And I use 
that example to show that those who might think that beef, and 
the Chinese consumer increasing his beef consumption, is a 
pipe-dream . . . I would suggest to you, such is not the case 
when you hear stories like that. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, what else is happening to the Chinese 
consumer who, as his lot improves and he has some cash, what 
does he do with it? 
 
Well the same story, Mr. Speaker, went on to say, and I quote 
again: 
 

The Chinese consumer is spending yuan (y-u-a-n, which is 
the Chinese currency) at record rates last year. Last year 
sales of refrigerators rose 240 per cent, electric fans 160 
per cent, and sewing machines 73 per cent. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are changing consumer patterns in countries 
like China. And what is the potential of the Chinas of the world, 
the Japans of the world, the Thailands of the world, Mr. 
Speaker? And those three countries respectively have a 
billion-plus in population, 120 million in population, and over 
50 million in population. 
 
China today, Mr. Speaker, per capita beef consumption — and 
these were ‘83 numbers — less than two pounds . . . rather, 
sorry, Mr. Speaker, I correct that. China’s per capita beef 
consumption, ‘83 numbers, less than one-half pound per day per 
person. In Japan, Mr. Speaker, the same number is 11.5 pounds. 
In Thailand, Mr. Speaker, the same number is six pounds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Canada we consume 80 pounds per person, Mr. 
Speaker, on a yearly basis. What, Mr. Speaker, for example in 
China, would happen if we took a half pound per capita 
consumption and more it to even half or a quarter of what 
Canadian consumption is? the market implications for our 
ranchers is tremendous. The market implication for our grain 
producers is tremendous, if you even work on a five-to-one 
conversion rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amongst all this doom and gloom that the 
structural changes seem to be suggesting, there are some bright 
spots out there. We may have to change what we sell and where 
we sell it and how we sell it, but the implications are 
tremendous. 
 
And to give a final example on the size of the Chinese market 
and what it could mean, Mr. Speaker, and it has to do with our 
canola industry. If China were to double its oil consumption to 
18 pounds per capita — and to put that in perspective, the same 
number for Canadians is 50 pounds — we would have to take 
all of our canola productions for the last three years just to 
provide them with one year’s supply at that consumption level. 
Well I think these examples, Mr. Speaker, show that trade, new 
trade, will be to the last half of this decade what the energy 
crisis was to the decade of the ’70s. 
 
I have just talked, Mr. Speaker, about the significance of  

just one of the Prime Minister’s initiatives — getting agriculture 
on the Tokyo summit agenda. A giant step forward, Mr. 
Speaker, not just for farmers, but maybe, in the global sense, for 
all of mankind. 
 
And I could have talked, Mr. Speaker, about the many other 
initiatives that the Prime Minister has undertaken and which we 
congratulate him for. He’s put in place assistance to help 
farmers deal with the short-term realities, to deal with fuel 
costs. Fuel costs have been driven down, Mr. Speaker, with the 
removal of all federal taxes on farm fuels. And I think it’s worth 
reminding the members of this legislature, and I’ll quote again 
from the statement the Premier made at the first ministers’ 
conference when he was speaking to the agriculture issue. And I 
quote, and he was referring to gasoline rebates, fuel rebates. 
And the Premier said: 
 

I have obviously made a move. (And he was referring 
there, Mr. Speaker, to the 21-cent a gallon oil royalty 
passed back to our farmers.) Alberta has made a move 
presently with respect to farm fuel. 

 
And I remember sitting here that very morning, Mr. Speaker, 
when the Premier went on to say: 
 

You are hard-pressed, Mr. Prime Minister, to explain to 
farmers why they pay tax on the fuel for their tractors. 
You are not on somebody’s road, you are not on 
somebody’s parking lot, you are not on somebody’s 
airport. You are on your own land, trying to make a living 
and make a standard of living for the rest of the country. 

 
And I sat there that morning, Mr. Speaker, at that first 
ministers’ conference when the Premier made perhaps what has 
been the finest agriculture address ever delivered in this 
country. And I saw the Premier very directly put that to the 
Prime Minister, in a very, very direct fashion, standing up for 
Saskatchewan farmers. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I saw the 
Prime Minister’s reaction, and the Prime Minister knew the 
Premier was right. And because our Premier was right, Mr. 
Speaker, just this week we’ve seen all of the federal taxes on 
farm fuel removed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, that’s what I call our 
Premier standing up on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers. And I 
say to members of this House, I say to members of this House: 
what did the farmers of this province ever get when the Leader 
of the Opposition was premier of this province and he stood up 
to Prime Minister Trudeau? What did he ever get for the 
farmers of this province? What did he get for us? I can’t think 
of anything he got for us, Mr. Speaker. Did he get the removal 
of the federal tax on farm fuel? No. Did he get the removal of 
the capital gains tax, Mr. Speaker? No. Did he get 6 per cent 
loans for our Saskatchewan farmers? No, Mr. Speaker. He got 
nothing for the farmers of this province. He did not get 
increases in the domestic price of wheat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the hon. member who is now Leader of the 
Opposition was premier, farmers in this province  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1057 
 

were a forgotten entity. In fact, Mr. Speaker, every time the 
Leader of the Opposition attempted to stand up for 
Saskatchewan farmers, his arches caved in. That’s all that they 
got from him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister has put in place measures to 
deal with the short-term realities. Fuel costs, as I’ve mentioned, 
have gone down. Wheat prices are going up, Mr. Speaker, as a 
result of the domestic two-price wheat system. Interest rates are 
under control. Capital gains tax is removed. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, he’s done many good things, all of which he deserves 
our congratulations for. And he will do more, Mr. Speaker. And 
I think rather than go on, I think there was one member who 
said and offered our congratulations better than I could ever say 
it. This is the Hon. Vic Althouse, the member for 
Humboldt-Lake Centre, when he said in the House of 
Commons on April 30, 1986 and I quote, Mr. Speaker . . . This 
NDP member of parliament, Mr. Speaker, on April 30th, after 
the Prime Minister announced his new initiatives in assisting 
the farm sector, said — and offered his congratulations perhaps 
better than I could ever say it — and I quote, Mr. Speaker, and 
here is what he said: 
 

The farm community and our party applaud the removal of 
these irritants. 

 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, when our Premier raises issues with the 
Prime Minister, co-operation does get results, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — But, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I could go 
on at great length about the results of the co-operation that our 
Premier has enjoyed with the Prime Minister. And I have no 
doubt other members in this House will want to do that. 
 
But I say again, perhaps, in assessing the very large picture, the 
fact that agriculture is going to be raised at this economic 
summit in Tokyo is the most important. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say how very proud I am 
of our Premier, how very proud I am of our Premier because 
he’s a farmer, and because he’s a leader, and because he’s a 
statesman who could look beyond the mere borders of 
Saskatchewan. I want to commend him, too, and offer my 
congratulations to him for what he has done on behalf of 
Saskatchewan farmers. And I go back, Mr. Speaker, a few 
months ago, when he first embarked on what many said then — 
the sceptics, the NDP, some of the media — what they said then 
was an impossible task. And I remember back even in 
September of this past year, Mr. Speaker, a headline in a local 
newspaper, a weekly newspaper, or a daily newspaper rather, in 
this province. It said, “Journey to nation agriculture policy 
begins.” And the first sentence was: 
 

Premier Grant Devine started the process for a national 
agriculture policy Friday, but indications are he still has a 
considerable distance to go. 

 
That was the sceptic, Mr. Speaker. That was the sceptic. That 
was the sceptic, Mr. Speaker. As time passed — and this is a 
mere eight months ago, Mr. Speaker — the  

headlines changed perceptibly every time. We had an October 
conference with the farm leaders, the cream of the crop if you 
like out there, in October in Saskatoon, and most important, the 
farm leaders and the farmers of this province had their input on 
this national agriculture policy. 
 
Then the Premier, Mr. Speaker, took this idea of his of a 
national agriculture strategy to the western premiers’ 
conference and they endorsed it. And then he took it to all the 
premiers’ meeting and they endorsed it. And the headlines then, 
Mr. Speaker, were: “Premiers plant seed for new national 
agriculture policy: Saskatchewan to draft national plan on 
agriculture,” Mr. Speaker. The sceptics were starting to come 
around, Mr. Speaker. “Set of principles for a national 
agriculture policy proposed.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the meeting that in my mind has had 
tremendous national and international implications, where all 
this came together, Mr. Speaker, was at the first ministers’ 
conference last fall in Halifax, where the Premier tabled and 
addressed what he called directions for a national agricultural 
development strategy for Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier got the ball rolling, and because of 
that today, Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister is going to — I 
have every reason to believe, Mr. Speaker — be fundamental in 
developing a global agriculture and food strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The sceptics continue to bay from their seats, Mr. Speaker. But 
the Premier and the Prime Minister will continue to progress 
and proceed on behalf of Saskatchewan, western Canada, and 
Canadian farmers, Mr. Speaker. That Tokyo Economic Summit 
is a milestone. It’s the first step to a new global agriculture and 
food strategy, Mr. Speaker. We have come a long way, Mr. 
Speaker. My congratulations to the Premier, and my 
congratulations to the Prime Minister. 
 
(1130) 
 
As I said, and we hear them from their seats, Mr. Speaker, there 
will be sceptics; there will be detractors; there will be those who 
will say it can’t be done. There are those, Mr. Speaker, out there 
across from us who do not view agriculture as high a priority as 
we do. And Mr. Speaker, the evidence on that is clear — the 
evidence on that is clear. An NDP story out of Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker, the headline, “Manitoba turns down request for farm 
aid.” And the story went on to say: 
 

The Manitoba government turned down a request Monday 
from the National Farmers’ Union for an $80 million aid 
package to help struggling farmers with spring seeding 
costs. 

 
It goes to show you, Mr. Speaker, there are NDP people who do 
not place agriculture as high a priority as we do. No 6 per cent 
production loans in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, for our farmers to 
get the seeding done. The NDP, Mr. Speaker, do not believe 
agriculture is a priority; they do not believe farmers are a 
priority. When they were in power, farmers were a forgotten 
entity in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1058 
 

And there’s further evidence, Mr. Speaker, and I refer to The 
Barley Grower, a publication of the Western Barley Growers 
Association. On the front page — and we talk about the 
importance of the trade issue and the future, Mr. Speaker, I 
quote from the lead editorial; I quote from the lead editorial, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

The message that comes through loud and strong from 
labour, the CFA (Canadian Federation of Agriculture), the 
NDP (and I repeat that, Mr. Speaker, the NDP) and others 
is that Canadians are so unproductive and inefficient that 
they must be sheltered from the real world. 
 
Balderdash! 

 
And I say balderdash too. The NDP do not believe that 
Saskatchewan farmers are competitive. They believe the spirit 
of Saskatchewan and the soul of Saskatchewan should be run 
by some government Crown corporation. I say, Mr. Speaker, 
the spirit and the soul of the Saskatchewan farmer is alive and 
well, and he’s prepared to face the future with very much 
confidence. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in closing I think I can say in all confidence 
that our party, our Premier, our government, our Prime 
Minister, believe agriculture and farmers are important. We 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that so goes the family farm, so 
goes the economy. And, Mr. Speaker, so goes the family, so 
goes civilization. 
 
We don’t need the NDP spreading gloom and despondency, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to spread opportunity. We’re going to 
seize this window of opportunity and look at future foods, at 
future fuels, at future technology, at future hope, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Ours is a party and a Premier for the future. Ours is a 
party and a Premier that believes in building bridges, Mr. 
Speaker, not walls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I move: 
 

That this Assembly endorses the Prime Minister in his 
successful effort to bring the agricultural problems facing 
Canada to the attention of world leaders through his 
introduction of agriculture to the Tokyo economic summit, 
and further, that this Assembly congratulates the Prime 
Minister and the federal government on its initiative to 
provide financial assistance to western farmers. 

 
Seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena is on his feet to give his speech. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
start out by thanking the Minister of Energy for those brief 
opening comments, and I’d like to get a little deeper into the 
motion if I may. 
 

When you look at agriculture in the world, as the minister has 
pointed out in his comments, it’s becoming very, very 
important. It’s becoming clearer and clearer to the entire world 
that we live in a closed system — what happens in one country 
affects the next and the next, and so on and so forth. And we 
have to come to terms with that. We can’t isolate ourselves, as 
the NDP would have us do. We have to go out into the world, 
negotiate, talk, trade, communicate, get to know the people of 
our world, because it’s the only one we’ve got. Those are the 
only people we can trade with, and we’re going to do that. 
 
The Prime Minister is presently at Tokyo at the summit 
discussing the very important issue of world agriculture — not 
agriculture in Canada, and not just agriculture in Africa, not just 
agriculture in the European Economic Community, but world 
agriculture and the trade in agricultural commodities. 
 
And why is this necessary, Mr. Speaker? Why? In the past 
months we’ve seen increasing protectionism in countries all 
over the world — not just increases in production, but 
protectionism. And it’s a domino effect. One group of countries 
get together and put in an economic community situation, 
subsidize their farmers, increase production, and we end up 
with tonnes of butter being fed back to cattle, lakes of milk, as 
the minister, said, going to waste. 
 
Another country said, well we’ve got to get into the game too. 
We’ve got to protect our farmers. Increasing political and 
economic pressures on leaders in the United States have caused 
them to put trade barriers against one of their best trading 
partners, Canada, all in the name of protecting their farmers. 
 
Well I suppose Canada could follow the same course. We could 
follow the NDP suggestion, like the big union bosses, and close 
our borders, and close our doors, and try to pay everybody a 
high wage, and try to make sure that we ate all the wheat we 
produced, ate all the beef we produced, used all the refrigerators 
we build. that’s the NDP idea. You’re supposed to be able to 
live in a closed system. And I think that probably is indicative 
of the closed minds that most NDP members have displayed. 
They don’t want to be open. They don’t understand that we 
have to trade. They don’t understand that we have to get outside 
of our own boundaries. 
 
So the Prime Minister of Canada has been criticized by those 
people for talking about open trade, for talking about more trade 
— freer trade, if you would. And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
the many world leaders who are attending this Tokyo summit 
today, he is the only one who has stood up and said, we can’t 
have this protectionism continuing. Canada could join in — yes, 
they could — and on the backs of our taxpayers we could 
subsidize agriculture; we could subsidize labour; we could 
subsidize everything. But there comes an end to subsidization. 
 
The Prime Minister has taken the responsible approach and has 
said no, let’s negotiate; let’s work this protectionism problem 
out. Let’s have an orderly return to marketing as we knew it. 
Let’s have markets that are open for all people, and let 
comparative advantages and  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1059 
 

initiatives of the people involved, not some artificial trade 
barrier decide who buys what and where and when and for how 
much. And when you say, well that’s nice, you know, the Prime 
Minister’s a great guy, but I’m sure this idea didn’t just come to 
him in the night, you’re quite correct, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
didn’t just suddenly come as a flash out of the blue. It came 
from people like our Premier in this province, from people like 
the Conservative members of this Assembly. 
 
We’ve worked very diligently, Mr. Speaker, over the past four 
years that we’ve been government, to try to act upon some of 
the economic and natural disasters that have fallen on us, and 
all the time listening to the doom and the gloom of the NDP. 
It’s either too little too late, or it won’t work, or they’re going to 
build a better mousetrap on the back of the taxpayers somehow. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve started out right at the grass roots level 
listening to farmers, and farmers are telling us they want to 
trade. Farmers are telling us that they have a product that they 
can grow, and they want to be able to market that product, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We take it into the floor of the Assembly; we discuss it. 
Whenever there’s a motion on agriculture, the NDP pooh, pooh 
it, try to sweep it under the table, and yell and scream about 
subsidy this and subsidy that. And if we were allowed to go 
their way, we would end up the same things that happen in the 
United States, the European Economic Community, and 
England — subsidization, a closed system, isolating ourselves 
from the rest of the world. And where would we be in five years 
or 10 years? You have to take the longer approach, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You have to look 10, 15, 20 years down the road. 
Where will my children go to sell their cattle and their grain? 
We can’t eat it all here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In keeping with dealing with grass roots people in 
Saskatchewan, members of this Assembly, at least on the 
Conservative side, have gone out and talked to farmers. We 
have listened to them. We’ve held public meetings. We’ve gone 
around the countryside. Just this spring we had an ag input 
study that was done, Mr. Speaker. Last year many members of 
this Conservative caucus travelled throughout the province 
talking with farmers and getting their views and opinions. 
We’ve passed those on, in turn, to the Premier, who, in turn, 
succeeded in getting the views of Saskatchewan farmers on the 
first ministers’ conference in Halifax. It’s a simple process. It’s 
negotiation; it’s consultation; it’s co-operation. It’s not 
confrontation. The NDP would have us stand up and fight with 
everybody in the world and say, we’re going to close our doors, 
and we’re all going to go on strike, and we’re going to cut our 
production in half — to hell with the rest of the world; let them 
starve. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the hon. member 
in his enthusiasm to stay away from language that might be 
construed as unparliamentary. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for that 
slip of the tongue. 
 
When you look at the rest of the world, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
don’t give a darn. They just don’t care. So we have to look to 
the future. 
 

And at the first ministers’ conference, Mr. Speaker, in dealing 
with consultation and co-operation, in his closing remarks our 
Premier pointed out three things. And I’d like to read them into 
the record, if I may. 
 

I will close, Mr. Prime Minister, by making several 
recommendations. The first is that by April of 1986, this 
spring, Canada, in co-operation with the provinces and the 
farm sector, have in place a permanent, long-run, 
straightforward, agricultural emergency program that will 
trigger financial protection for farmers that face weather 
and insect related disasters. You have to have some 
protection against three or four or five or six years of 
drought. It’s not your fault. You have to maintain the 
confidence so farmers will hang in there and they will 
build the irrigation pumps and they will put in the fertilizer 
and protect the soil, because without that you lose the 
resource base. Farmers need the confidence that they can 
cope with cyclical disaster. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think, when you take a look at that suggestion, it 
has been acted upon. Just within this past month, Mr. Speaker, a 
disaster mechanism has been put in place in conjunction with 
crop insurance to help farmers in times of disaster. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have acted quickly in emergency 
situations. But a knee-jerk reaction to an emergency situation 
only solves the problem at hand. And the responsible attitude is 
to put a mechanism in place that will take care of emergencies 
and disasters that may perhaps come about. Be prepared for 
them, have it in place, and if it happens, you have a mechanism 
that will protect our farmers. And that’s been done. 
 
(1145) 
 
His second point: 
 

(2) By spring of 1986 Canada, in co-operation with the 
provinces and private sector, has in place a mechanism to 
restructure and redesign Canadian farm debt, including 
both interest rate limits and targeted tax changes to lower 
input costs. If we want to be competitive, then we have to 
target our tax changes into those areas that have the ability 
to produce. Goodness knows, we have to all have taxes to 
help deal with deficits in our budget and the rest of it, but I 
believe, when we look at strengths and potential, that is 
where we have to start looking at tax changes. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that too has come about. That too has come 
about. Just this week, the Prime Minister announced tax 
changes on the federal sales and excise taxes on fuels. We had a 
change in the taxation levels earlier in the year, and now 
they’ve removed another 2 cents, bringing the total saving to 
5.5 cents per litre. 
 
And capital gains taxes, Mr. Speaker, were removed. Tax 
changes, targeted to areas where you have production, will help 
the entire situation. We have to identify those and continue with 
them. 
 
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1060 
 

And the third point the Premier made: 
 

I am going to recommend to you, and I believe that you 
will get support in Europe and you will get support in the 
United States, to call an agricultural summit in advance of 
GATT — I believe that agriculture is too important just to 
leave with GATT. I am not optimistic that GATT is in a 
hurry or that a new round is going to be there. The things 
that are going on in agriculture are so far removed from 
the kinds of things that you try to talk about in a 
multilateral trade agreement that I do not think it will 
work. 

 
And there you have it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The request by our 
Premier of the Prime Minister to convene or bring to a summit 
meeting the concerns of agriculture has been met. And we’re 
seeing that today. We’re seeing the fruits of four years of the 
labour of this Conservative government working in 
co-operation with the federal government, helping it, consulting 
with it — not fighting with it. 
 
We try to work together, Mr. Speaker. The NDP in Manitoba 
stand up and say, no, we’re not going to help our farmers in 
Manitoba. That’s the feds’ job. That’s the feds’ job. Let George 
do it. Let somebody else do it. That’s the attitude the NDP here 
have always had. 
 
In 1980, Mr. Speaker, and in 1981, the former premier of 
Saskatchewan, now Leader of the Opposition, said he didn’t 
want to interfere with interest rates; it might upset the natural 
flow of things. So I had to pay 21 per cent interest. And I’m still 
hurting from that, and so are thousands of other Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
We, on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, look forward, look into the 
future, and with a little co-operation we get results. And I’d like 
to go through a few of those. 
 
Now the removal of the federal tax on farm fuels will save 
farmers $165 million in the next two years. Furthermore, we 
had a freeze on freight rates. That should save farmers $40 
million. The higher-priced domestic wheat, at perhaps $10 or 
$11 per bushel, could bring an additional 375 million, or a 
dollar per bushel, to western farmers. 
 
I mentioned the removal of the capital gains tax. It saves about 
50 million a year. The farm debt review panels that the federal 
government has said they are going to put in place, and indeed 
said they are going to have in place as early as June if they can 
get the legislation through, will give some support to an ailing 
industry. 
 
Again, just bringing international awareness to agriculture gives 
us a better opportunity to be recognized throughout the world 
and gives us trade opportunities. 
 
We’ve had lower interest rates through the Farm Credit 
Corporation, and we’ve had a record $580 million paid out in 
the western grain stabilization fund. Now, Mr. Speaker, if that’s 
not working together, if that’s not co-operation, if that’s not 
getting results, I don’t know what is. 
 

And just to show you that there are other people in the world 
who appreciate it, this morning’s news broadcasts quoted Bill 
Duke of the western wheat growers and Ted Turner of Sask 
Wheat Pool as being in favour of the Prime Minister’s actions 
this week. 
 
And the Minister of Energy, when he spoke, read into the 
record commends of an NDP MP in favour of what the Prime 
Minister is doing. Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask you: if all the people 
in Saskatchewan, if farmers in Saskatchewan, if the members of 
this Assembly are in favour of what the Prime Minister does, 
don’t you think that will lend some more credibility to the 
Prime Minister in Tokyo? Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
supporting the motion and asking all members to do likewise. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When you talked about 
our patience this morning, mine has been worn very thin 
listening to a long, long, boring speech, and now another one 
from the member that just took his seat. So I am pleased, 
finally, to present our position on this motion, and I rise to 
speak in this Assembly this morning on this motion that is 
before us. 
 
The motion is lengthy and complex but, when you strip it down 
to the bare essentials, there are three things in the motion that 
we are talking about this morning. It’s the Devine government’s 
way of saying yet again, keep up the good work, Brian. It’s 
their way of saying the Mulroney government has done enough 
for Saskatchewan farmers. It’s their desperate attempt to cling 
to Mulroney’s coat-tails, hoping he will pull them through their 
sagging political fortunes. That’s what this motion is all about, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers are facing a crisis — a severe, severe 
financial crisis. In real dollar terms the price of wheat is lower 
than it’s been in the ’30s. And across Saskatchewan even now, 
as Saskatchewan farmers are doing their spring work and in 
some cases seeding, they are deeply, deeply concerned, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a serious issue that’s facing us. 
 
Family farms right across the constituency are concerned by the 
20 per cent drop in grain prices, by the unfair, subsidized 
competition from the U.S. and European treasuries, and by the 
prospects of a good crop but very, very poor prices. And that is 
a concern, not only for Saskatchewan farmers, but for all 
Saskatchewan people. Everybody is concerned about this crisis 
that’s facing farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers — and I want to say this very, very 
seriously — are disappointed in the Devine government. 
Farmers are disappointed. And they are especially — especially 
disappointed now when they see wordy and politically 
motivated motions like the one before us today. They are very 
disappointed. A motion, I might add, Mr. Speaker, that was not 
moved by the Premier; it was not moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture; it was moved by a second-string cabinet minister, 
the minister of oil companies, the minister of welfare for the oil 
companies — that’s who moved the motion. 
 
When farmers see motions of this sort that are, number  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1061 
 

one, empty; number two, they’re partisan, they’re political, and 
they’re shallow . . . When farmers see moves like this — which 
are nothing more than the Premier’s way of saying, keep up the 
good work, Brian — these farmers are getting more and more 
disappointed, for they are not rushing out to congratulate Brian 
Mulroney. 
 
Last September farmers watched in disbelief when the 
Mulroney government took just 48 hours to provide a billion 
dollars to bail out some banks — 48 hours, Mr. Speaker, for the 
banks. Today farmers, farm lenders, and farm organizations are 
not congratulating Brian Mulroney; instead all across 
Saskatchewan they are saying one thing loud and clear — 
farmers need help. They need real help. They need help from 
Ottawa. They need a provincial government that will stand up 
for the interest of Saskatchewan farmers, not a government that 
is simply a cheer-leader and apologizes for Brian Mulroney in 
Ottawa. That’s what every major farm group has said. 
 
The Wheat Pool, and let me quote, “It is a long way short of 
what we need,” is what Sask Wheat Pool said. The Western 
Canadian Wheat Grower said, and I quote, “The dollars don’t 
represent anything close to what is required.” And the same sort 
of comment from other farm groups such as the UGG (United 
Grain Growers) and NFU (National Farmers Union). 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers find it almost unbelievable that both the 
Devine government and the Mulroney government would 
demonstrate so clearly their preference for the oil companies 
over farmers, and I will get into more detail on the summit in 
just a minute. 
 
The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, may not want to hear this. 
The minister of the welfare for the oil companies for Weyburn 
doesn’t want to hear this, but the farmers of Saskatchewan have 
figured out the numbers pretty quickly. The Mulroney 
government announced it was providing more federal money to 
oil companies and not a dollar for farmers. More federal money 
to help oil companies than to help farmer s- $165 million to the 
Canadian oil companies from the federal treasury, and what 
have they got for farmers, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Saskatchewan farmers simply can’t understand why the Premier 
and his PC members want to congratulate Brian Mulroney for 
giving more federal assistance to oil companies than to farmers. 
I can understand why the Premier thinks help to the oil 
companies is good politics in parts of Estevan; I can understand 
that. But I don’t understand how Brian Mulroney giving $175 
million to the oil companies is good politics in Weyburn, or 
Humboldt, or Melville, or Rosetown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are not congratulating 
Brian Mulroney. Saskatchewan farmers are not saying, keep up 
the good work, Brian. In fact, more and more Saskatchewan 
people are saying, get to work, Brian, and that is why people all 
across rural Saskatchewan — farmers, small-business operators 
and others — have become so deeply disappointed in both the 
Devine government and the federal government. For they want 
some solid leadership. 
 

The member for Weyburn talked about real leadership, and I 
think the words he used — statesman are made of such stuff. 
Well last night, Mr. Speaker, I quoted from the last page of an 
article and the article was called, “Election fever (and) 
Blakeney tonic.” This article happens to appear in as good a 
page as any page . . . as a magazine could be, and it’s the 
Saskatchewan Report. And I think the members opposite said 
that that was a socialist paper — sure, you’re quoting from one 
of your socialist papers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan realize 
that . . . from the publisher’s notebook — and here’s his picture, 
the guy that wanted to build the rink in Saskatoon, his 
signature’s there, one Bill Hunter — says that turning from the 
Riders to our Saskatchewan Report . . . And they issued the two 
people that are going to be winners in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Roughriders haven’t done so good in the last four years and 
our party hasn’t either. But I want to make a little prediction. I 
like the prediction that Blakeney made on “Contact” last 
Wednesday night, when he said that Calgary was going to win. 
And I want to make a little prediction that the Roughriders are 
going to be winners. Hunter picked the Roughriders for the 
front page. And the back page story . . . 
 
Oh, I just got a note here that Tkachuk is also an owner of this 
paper. But the back page story, Mr. Speaker, the back page 
story is one of election fever that says, “Blakeney tonic,” who 
Hunter realizes is the real leader — real leader — the 
upcoming, new winner in Saskatchewan. So when . . . 
 
This paper isn’t only owned by Hunter, but I understand 
Tkachuk has some interest in the paper as well, and everybody 
knows who he is. 
 
An Hon. Member: Sean Quinlan. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Does Quinlan as well? That is very . . . The 
paper is waking up, and I guess it’s time to leave the Tory party 
like rats leave a ship. 
 
But when the member for Weyburn says that statesmen are 
made of stuff like this, I want to tell him: the only statesman 
that Canada recognizes is the statesman that showed you what 
Blakeney tonic was all about. When Blakeney sat down, or 
when our leader — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker — when our leader 
sat down at the table with Trudeau, everybody in Canada 
recognized that here is one man that could take him on. Here 
was one man that could take him on. And we held our own in 
Saskatchewan. And I’m proud, I am proud of our record of 
leadership. I am proud of our statesman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Engel: — I am proud of our statesman. We need solid 
leadership, not shallow cheer-leadership — cheer-leadership. 
They want a provincial government that will fight for 
Saskatchewan farmers, a provincial government that will stand 
up for Saskatchewan interests in Ottawa. They want a premier 
who will fight for  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1062 
 

Saskatchewan’s interests, a premier who will put Saskatchewan 
as number one in deed, not in word — in deed and in action — 
a premier who will stand up for Saskatchewan. And 
everybody’s waiting for the election so we can get that change. 
They don’t want four more years under the leadership of a 
cheer-leader — or five. They don’t want any Mulroney 
cheer-leaders in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Farmers across the country are calling for action from Ottawa 
on two major issues — two major issues the farmers are saying 
they want action from Ottawa. And they are calling on the 
Devine government to fight for Saskatchewan’s interests on 
these two issues. 
 
First, they are calling on Devine and the Mulroney PC 
governments to repudiate the Nielsen task force proposals that 
would spell disaster for Saskatchewan agriculture. The true 
hidden agenda of the PC Mulroney government is not hidden 
any more. Nielsen has pointed out what’s going to happen to 
farmers. They want to say, that’s got to be set aside. They don’t 
want a word from it. Not a word of protest from the cheerleader 
here in Saskatchewan. Not a word. We don’t even hear a protest 
from our leader here. No, he just says, keep up the good work, 
Brian. 
 
Second, and this is absolutely critical, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan farmers are calling on Devine and the Mulroney 
governments for a federal deficiency payment. Now the two 
former speakers have talked, and quite precisely have pointed 
out the competition Saskatchewan farmers are in. They have 
made it very clear that the common market agricultural benefits 
amount to . . . I mean the member for Weyburn didn’t give the 
numbers, but common market agricultural benefits and the 
Canadian equivalent amount to $7.50 a bushel — $7.50 a 
bushel. 
 
The U.S. farm Bill to farmers . . . And he talks about taking a 
third of their land out of production, and I agree with that. I 
have relatives that farm down there. It’s great. They put a third 
of their garbage land aside, and they fertilize like everything on 
the other land and produce more wheat than they ever did. But 
they can afford to fertilize because they’re getting $6 Canadian 
equivalent for every bushel of wheat they grow, and it will 
market on the world market price at a depressed price that we 
have to compete with. 
 
And we’re saying that deficiency payments . . . the member for 
Weyburn said has to be an option. Well he said it requires more 
than the simplistic thing the NDP are asking for. I’ll tell what 
that more is and what is the other half of that option. The other 
half of that option that he’s talking about that we’re so 
simplistic, Mr. Speaker, is that they are putting the money into 
the oil companies. 
 
Today he made an announcement about how they’re 
guaranteeing a floor price for oil, and how they’re guaranteeing 
their production costs, and how they’re guaranteeing a tax 
credit on money they’re spending on improving their oil wells. 
How much did he do for farmers? What is he doing for you and 
your depreciation if you want to repair your tractor or you want 
to replace your combine, Mr. Speaker? What are you getting? 
Are  

you getting a great big 40 per cent tax credit on the new 
equipment that you need to replace your old farm equipment? I 
don’t think so. He’s doing it for the oil companies, and the oil 
companies have been making record profits in the last three 
years. 
 
Never have the price of oil been better — 30 and $35 a barrel. 
And now within three or four short months of the price of oil 
dropping, he’s got a subsidy in place. That’s the other half of 
the story that he failed to tell this morning. That’s the half of the 
story that’s making the farmers so angry that I dare him to come 
home to Assiniboia with me, because I’ll tell you what, he’ll 
need more than me as a bodyguard — he’ll need more than a 
bodyguard. And just as a note from my colleague that knows all 
about the oil giants and the profits, and the oil giant profits are 
unhurt. The oil giant profits are unhurt, is the headline in May 
1, 1986. 
 
It was interesting to read recently the first quarter profits for 
1986 in U.S. dollars of the five large oil companies — Exxon 
corporation, 1.7 billion; Texaco, 328 million; Shell Oil, 276 
million; Standard Oil, 253 million; Sun Oil, 146 million. and 
these are the guys that are going to get the money. The small oil 
companies in Saskatchewan aren’t going to benefit. These are 
the ones that are getting more money. 
 
And today we congratulate the Prime Minister on what he’s 
doing for farmers. Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly 
know that Saskatchewan farmers are the most efficient and 
productive in the world. European Common Market farmers, 
U.S. farmers, can’t compete with Canadian farmers as far as 
being efficient and productive. They can compete head to head 
with farmers of the world on a fair and even basis. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers cannot — and let me 
repeat — cannot compete with the treasuries of the United 
States and Europe. And that is why every major farm 
organization has repeatedly called on the Mulroney government 
for a federal deficiency payment. Every major farm 
organization. 
 
But does our little cheer-leader ask his friend Brian Mulroney 
for a deficiency payment? No. Does the Devine government 
join with farmers and farm groups in urging that the Mulroney 
government provide a federal deficiency payment? No. All he 
can say yet again is, keep up the good work, Brian. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s just not good enough for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me turn now for a moment to some very 
interesting and significant points about the Mulroney 
government’s plans for the Tokyo summit and the place of 
agriculture in those discussions. 
 
You know, when I listened to the news last night and again this 
morning on Canada AM, and I watched Brian Mulroney in 
Vancouver, I watched Brian Mulroney and a couple of our farm 
leaders in Vancouver, I was impressed, Mr. Speaker, that he 
didn’t show this book and tell what this book is. 
 
Now I see you’re quite interested in looking at this nice  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1063 
 

blue book, and it’s a Tokyo Economic Summit, May 4 to 6, 
1986. And I happen to have gotten this on air express this 
morning from my friends in Brian Mulroney’s office, by the 
way . . . The little cheer-leader isn’t the only one that has 
friends in Ottawa. Somebody put this on air express to me this 
morning when we knew there’s going to be a motion here. 
 
The Tokyo Economic Summit table of contents. Who’s going to 
the conference, Mr. Speaker? Who’s going to the conference? 
The Right Hon. Prime Minister Mulroney tells us here that he 
was born in 1939. I thought he was about that age. Joe Clark is 
going. He was born in ‘39 as well. Who else is going? Mr. 
Wilson. 
 
Let’s look at who else is going with him. Oh, oh. Only three, 
Mr. Speaker. It happens to be kind of sad that Charlie Mayer 
isn’t there — I’m talking about Canadian Wheat Board — or 
Mr. Wise, the Minister of Agriculture. He didn’t happen to get 
to go. Let’s look at the economic summit . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting that in their book that was 
printed, and that’s for the summit starting May 4th to 6th, and it 
has a little thing here called the Tokyo summit agenda. It has 
this little agenda in here. Let me go through; it gives you an 
overview of the economic summit, Mr. Speaker. It talks about, 
page 1, international monetary issues — international monetary 
issues, page 1. That’s the number one item. 
 
Number two, international debt and financial situations. 
 
Number three, new round of multinational . . . multilateral, I’m 
sorry . . . new round of multilateral trade negotiations — little 
section on that. North-south relations. Development in 
international . . . Oh, oh. Listen to this, Mr. former minister of 
Energy. The Minister of Energy is not here to listen, so you 
relay the message to the member for Weyburn. Development in 
international petroleum markets. Happens to be a topic right in 
there. The oil companies got their topic up front, Mr. Speaker. I 
should hold it steady enough so that it can be picked up. 
 
Next page. Political issues. 
 

As is the case of previous economic summits, leaders and 
foreign ministers will have an opportunity at Tokyo to 
discuss a number of important political issues, the current 
state of east-west relations and the slow pace . . . 

 
And so on. Other issues. Now surely — surely — agriculture 
and grain sales will make it on other issues. At least . . . It didn’t 
make the main topics. Oil came number five. It didn’t make . . . 
It will come under other issues, won’t it? The next one is 
science and technology. 
 

In the 1982 summit in Versailles a working group of 
technology growth and employment was established. 

 
The next issue, Mr. Speaker — this motion we’re having to 
congratulate Brian Mulroney for what he’s taking to the summit 
and is Canada’s position — the next issue is the environment. 
 

During the 1984 London summit leaders included in their 
final declaration a paragraph initiated by the FRT and 
supported by Canada, acknowledging the international 
dimensions of international environment . . . 

 
And I bet you what, Mr. Speaker — the environmental issues 
will be moved up. The environmental issues . . . I’m talking 
about what’s being discussed at the summit. I’m talking about 
what’s being at the summit, by dear friend. 
 
The final topic — the final topic, Mr. Speaker — that’s going to 
be discussed at the summit is narcotic drug abuse. I know that’s 
a serious problem. But I want to tell you, not one word in the 
entire submission and preparation of the documents that are 
going to be taken to the summit talks about agriculture. Now as 
a last-minute political effort, our Premier convinced Mulroney 
to make a little press conference and fly Ted Garner and a 
couple of guys down to Vancouver and say, we’ve got to get it 
on the agenda — we’ve got to get it on the agenda. 
 
But what happened when our friend from Weyburn talked about 
— our leader went down there and he put the challenge; our 
Premier put the challenge. Well, Mr. Speaker, when he put the 
challenge to Ottawa that agriculture should be discussed, he 
maybe did a good job with the media, and he maybe did a good 
job convincing his colleagues, but the thing fell on deaf ears. 
The message fell on deaf ears because there’s not one word, not 
one word on the agenda. He stands up and he says, that’s what 
sets good leaders and great leaders apart. Statesmen are made of 
such stuff. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what, Mr. Member for Weyburn, I’ll tell you 
what statesmen are made of. Statesmen are made of Blakeney 
tonic. I like that. This article here, written by your friend Bill 
Hunter, printed in his back page . . . and when Bill Hunter talks 
about the Roughriders and in the last he talks about his key 
stories, he says: 
 

Turning from the Riders to our Saskatchewan report, we 
are pleased to remind our readers that our upcoming June 
issue will herald our first anniversary . . . 

 
And I’ll tell you what. I’ll bet you the number one message in 
the first anniversary will be an election anniversary issue. After 
one year of publication, they will have Blakeney tonic on here, 
because everybody is wondering how come you look so good. 
How come you look so good and so positive? And how come 
he’s doing so well? 
 
And what are the Tories doing in the Tory magazine? They are 
screaming and hollering, and it says here that: 
 

He listened and has changed. NDP policies are different 
than four years ago, (although the) Tories will scream at 
you until they are blue in the face that they haven’t 
changed at all. 

 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, some things haven’t 
changed. Some things haven’t changed, but some things have. 
The one thing that’s changed is, this group over here has 
resorted to doing like the former premier Lee did,  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1064 
 

and you’re tying your little political wagon, you’re tying your 
little political wagon to the wrong guy. You’re tying your little 
political wagon to one Brian Mulroney who, after listening and 
coming to Regina and saying the right words, didn’t do it. 
 
The true acid test of what’s going to be on the Tory summit is 
what’s in the book . . . the Tokyo economic summit . . . the true 
acid test is going to be what’s going to be discussed — 
narcotics, environment, political issues. Everything else is rated 
and listed, but not one word about agriculture. 
 
If Canada were anxious to put agriculture on the table, if 
Canada were anxious . . . Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in this House 
and I have taken my stand at my chair, and I’ve challenged 
members opposite for misleading the House. I’ve done that 
before. Well I want to tell you, we have a motion before us 
today that is grossly misleading the people of Saskatchewan — 
grossly misleading the people of Saskatchewan — because 
there’s not one word, there’s not one word about agriculture, 
not one word about agriculture in the Tokyo summit conference 
agenda. And I want to tell you that this smells of political 
rhetoric. 
 
(1215) 
 
They wasted the day today. We wasted the day today listening 
to the member for Weyburn go on and on and on and on for an 
hour and 20 minutes — and didn’t tell one word of the truth, 
because it isn’t in the agenda. It’s not in the book! It’s not in the 
book, Mr. Speaker. And I want to tell you that the people of 
Saskatchewan know, and they’ve got your number. They’ve got 
your number, Mr. Members, from north or south. You can sit 
and laugh, and maybe it sounds funny to you, but it doesn’t 
sound funny to me as a farmer — to try and think that the world 
is so small that we won’t know in Canada what they’re 
discussing. 
 
Well I wish him good luck; so do my colleagues in Ottawa. 
We’ve encouraged Brian Mulroney and said, look, you didn’t 
do it because our Premier asked, you didn’t put it in the book 
because you got it last fall, you didn’t put it in the book; but 
we’re saying, get it on the emergency debate. I kind of think 
that when you look at this table of contents and you see 
environment on here, that likely the environment issues and the 
recent disaster in Russia will move up. Those discussions will 
move up. 
 
An Hon. Member: What about agriculture, though? 
 
Mr. Engel: — But let me talk about agriculture for just a 
moment, and it talks about the summit countries that are 
involved. And let me read about them. Japan. Our second 
largest trading partner since 1973 is Japan. And it talks about 
Japan. But what happened to our markets with Japan, Mr. 
Speaker? What’s happened to our deficit-of-trade with Japan? 
We’re losing sales to United States. 
 
Canada and United States relationship. They are each other’s 
largest market, it says about Canada and United States. And we 
know what United States farmers are getting. 
 

What about Canada and the Federal Republic of Germany? 
Two-way trade and economic co-operation has grown 
significantly over the last decade to its present level of some 4 
billion. In Germany though — the next line, Mr. Speaker — 
Canada has incurred a trade deficit of 1.5 billion with Germany 
— trade deficit. 
 
France. France is our ninth largest trading partner. Canada 
experienced a deficit of more than $500 million with France. 
Right in your own book. 
 
What about Canada and the U.K.? Let me read a quote here. 
The Canada-U.K. trade relationship is regarded as good, and 
U.K. will remain an important economic and trading partner for 
Canada. The U.K. is currently Canada’s third largest market. 
Imports from the U.K. amounted to — listen now, listen now, 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood — imports from the 
U.K. amounted to 3.3 billion, whereas Canadian exports 
totalled only 2.3 billion. 
 
Increase of imports into Canada — are you listening? — an 
increase of imports into Canada of 42 per cent, as well as a 
decline of Canadian exports by 5.7 per cent who are registered 
with the U.K. The U.K. has dumped 42 per cent more products 
into Canada, and Canada has sold them 5.7 per cent less. Is that 
growth? Is that doing your job on the international market? Is 
that saying, keep up the good work Brian. That’s the new, open 
for business strategy. 
 
What about Canada and Italy? It’s the conference we’re going 
to. What about Canada and Italy? Canadian exports to Italy are 
at $550 million. It declined from 577 million in ‘84. Imports in 
Italy rose. Are you listening? Exports to Italy declined from 550 
to 577; imports from Italy to Canada rose from 1.1 billion to 1.3 
billion. Boy, keep up the good work Brian. Keep up the good 
work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve only one more, and that’s Canada and the 
E.C. relations. The E.C. accounts for almost a fifth of the world 
trade, whereas Canada accounts for 3.3 per cent. The E.C. has 
20 per cent of the world trade; we’ve got 3 per cent. The 
European community is our second largest trading partner, 
however — and listen to this my friend. However, Canadian 
exports decreased by 5.1 per cent, yielding a trade deficit with 
the European community of $3.8 billion. This is the situation 
that Brian Mulroney is going into, and he hasn’t got one dollar 
— one dollar — to subsidize the Canadian farmers. He’s saying 
to the Canadian farmers, you carry the deficit. You carry the 
trade deficit and I’ll do the cheer-leading. I’ll be the good guy. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that 
farmers will get this story. The farmers will get this story. You 
can make fun of my voice going, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite can make fun, but I want to tell you, Brian Mulroney is 
afraid to come to Saskatchewan to listen to Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
And why is he afraid to come to Saskatchewan and make his 
announcement about the aid to the oil companies and about his 
pittance to farmers, if he’s so proud of it? Why is he afraid to 
come out and listen to Saskatchewan farmers in Biggar or 
Assiniboia or Foam Lake or Rosetown — why is he afraid to 
come? Well I’ll tell you, he knows the  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1065 
 

position he’s really taking and the position he’s not taking. He 
hasn’t taken his Minister of Agriculture to Tokyo. He hasn’t 
taken his minister responsible for the Wheat Pool. If agriculture 
is so very high on his agenda for Tokyo, why isn’t it in the book 
— why isn’t it in the book? 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, before the end of the day 
we’re going to have a vote on this motion before us. And while 
each member of this Assembly is listening to the debate and 
considering how he is going to vote, I invite the members to ask 
themselves this question: would the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
would the people of Saskatchewan have formed this kind of 
motion if they’d have had their chance to do it? 
 
I ask the member for Morse: would any of your constituents’ 
executives have formed a motion like this in light of the price of 
grain in your riding? What would Saskatchewan people have 
wanted to have drafted into a motion like this that in essence 
says: keep up the good work Brian? 
 
The answer, Mr. Speaker, is a resounding no. They wouldn’t 
write this kind of motion. And therefore, on behalf of all the 
people of Saskatchewan, and particularly the farmers, I want to 
move a motion that I believe the people of Saskatchewan would 
have wanted to have debated today, and that is the amendment: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
Regrets that the Mulroney government has refused to 
agree to a federal deficiency payment to grain farmers, 
despite the urging of Saskatchewan farmers and farm 
organizations, and despite the severe impact of low grain 
prices on Saskatchewan farmers, small business, and 
working families. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
I so moved, seconded by my colleague, the member for Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
get into this debate, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a 
good number of the members brag about what’s going to be 
happening at the Tokyo conference. And it’s not only the 
members opposite that have been bragging about it. It’s also the 
Prime Minister of Canada. It’s been on television and in this 
House and all over, saying all that’s going to happen at that 
conference that’s going to help farmers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
told us exactly what’s going to happen at that conference. And 
what’s going to happen is that the Prime Minister is going to go 
there and try to get something on that agenda that’s going to 
help farmers. And he’s going to go there and tell them that 
we’ve got to  

get the price of wheat up. We have to get the price of wheat up 
because the farmers of Saskatchewan are hurting. But, Mr. 
Speaker, does the Prime Minister really believe, and do the 
people of Saskatchewan really believe, that he’s going to be 
able to accomplish what he’s going for? 
 
What he’s saying is that we want another cartel. And we’ve 
talked about cartels in the past. When the oil cartel was put 
together, everybody complained about it. They said we 
shouldn’t have a cartel, that the market-place should decide 
what the price is going to be. Well, Mr. Speaker, the oil 
companies said that that should happen, that the market-place 
should decide the price, the price of oil, and that the farmers 
then should have to pay that price. But now they are saying, 
when the price goes down, that the market-place is no longer 
relative. It’s no good; we should do something different; we’ve 
got to set up another cartel to get the price of oil up. And 
they’re supposed to be helping the farmers of this province. 
 
And they virtually mislead the public of Canada and of 
Saskatchewan into thinking that somehow the Prime Minister of 
Canada is going there with an item on that agenda and he’s 
going to be able to deal with it. Well, Mr. Speaker, it would be 
nice if that item was on the agenda, but the Prime Minister 
really misinformed the people of Canada when he said that 
that’s what he was going to do there, because it’s not on the 
agenda. 
 
And the Government of Saskatchewan is doing the same thing. 
In their motion they say — and in case they don’t remember 
what their motions says — that they endorse the Prime Minister 
in his successful efforts to bring the agricultural problems 
facing Canada to the attention of world leaders through his 
introduction of agriculture to the Tokyo Economic Summit. 
 
Well we saw, Mr. Speaker, we saw the agenda for that summit, 
and the agriculture that they are talking about is not on there. 
And here they stand in this House congratulating the Prime 
Minister, congratulating the Premier of this province for 
accomplishing something great and terrific out there. Nothing 
but words, Mr. Speaker, words, as this government has been 
doing — issuing press releases, having news conferences. But 
they never accomplish anything. 
 
We see communications allowances from this government in 
the millions of dollars for every department to do nothing more 
than deceive the public into thinking that something is what it 
really isn’t. That’s what they’re trying to do; deceive the public. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are not going to 
be that easily fooled. They will know what is happening and 
they will tell this government that they do not approve of those 
kind of tactics. They will be telling them nice and clear. 
 
We have members saying that they are going to somehow bring 
forward some solution to that conference; that they are going to 
stop all the problems that are facing farmers today. They are 
going to turn it around. Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena said, that we should not be professing 
protectionism at this  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1066 
 

point. Why would we want to protect our farmers? If we do 
that, we’re the same as the Americans and Europe. We don’t 
want to protect our farmers. That’s not right. So we shouldn’t 
do it. That’s what they are saying. We have to get rid of 
protectionism. 
 
(1230) 
 
It’s fine if the States do it and if Europe does it. Somehow the 
Americans thought that it was going to be good for their 
farmers to protect the price that they’re going to get for their 
grain. But the members opposite, the government of this 
province, is saying that that shouldn’t apply to Saskatchewan 
farmers or Canadian farmers. These farmers should be able to 
compete against the U.S. government and against the European 
governments. That’s what they are saying the farmers of 
Canada should be doing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that the farmers of Canada 
think that that should be what’s happening in this country, that 
they should be forced to be the ones to compete with 
governments of other countries. I think what they should be 
saying is that the farmers of this country can’t afford to compete 
against the U.S. or against Europe, and that what we need is 
some deficiency payments, the same as what the U.S. is 
offering their farmers and the same as Europe is offering their 
farmers. And that’s what we should have in place immediately 
to make sure that our farmers survive. 
 
And then if we want to talk about regulating the price of wheat 
on the world market with other countries, then they should be 
going to a conference or to a summit, putting it on the agenda, 
and discussing what can be done throughout the world to 
stabilize the price of our wheat. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to expect that the farmers should at this point 
bear the brunt of what is happening and be the ones to lose 
while other countries subsidize their farmers, well, Mr. Speaker, 
I think this government is on the wrong track. I think they are 
on the wrong track because they certainly will not be able to 
compete against the U.S. or against Europe. 
 
But these members think that it’s a lot better to just go and talk 
and not do anything about it, and try to tell the farmers, that 
we’re going to do something about it eventually. For now we’ll 
talk, and just keep on trying to farm and trying to survive, while 
we go to Tokyo and while we go everywhere else and do 
nothing more than talk and put out more press releases. That, 
Mr. Speaker, is what the members opposite and what this 
government is telling us to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about the freedom for the farmer to 
produce and to be an individualist. Well, I think, Mr. Speaker, it 
has been proven in this country that the small, family farm is a 
very efficient and a very productive type of operation. It’s a 
very efficient type of operation and very productive. It has been 
producing more food for supply to other countries that need it. 
That’s what the producers of this province can do, and they 
have certainly proved that, and nobody disputes that fact. 
 

But what is happening to the farmers of this province right now, 
Mr. Speaker? They are being put in a position where many of 
those small farmers cannot survive. When they have to pay 
more to produce that grain than what they get for it, it’s going 
to make it awful difficult for them to survive. It’s going to make 
it difficult for them to survive, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And the member for Kelvington-Wadena keeps 
talking about all these programs that they are putting in. He sits 
there in his seat. He had an opportunity to talk here a little while 
ago, but now he wants to talk from his seat. And he keeps on 
yelling and he says, give me an opportunity to get up again. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he had the opportunity. He should have used 
that opportunity to come forward with something constructive. 
 
They talk and they brag about their $25 an acre, the same as 
they do about everything else. Well, Mr. Speaker, that helped 
some farmers, but I know a lot of farmers that are not able to 
get that $25 an acre. They are the ones that are really hurting. 
They are the ones that are on the verge of losing their land and 
no longer being farmers. That’s what they are doing. They are 
refusing that money to some of those, and what they are 
actually doing then is saying that there’s a good portion of our 
farmers that are going to be kicked off that land and are no 
longer going to be farmers. 
 
That is what they’re saying, because those farmers can’t get that 
loan. And all it is is a loan, Mr. Speaker. It’s a loan. When 
you’re getting less than $2 a bushel for wheat, like we are in my 
area right now . . . Not right now, but after August; that’s what 
we’ll be getting for wheat that froze last year. With the drop in 
price that has been announced by Ottawa, we are going to be 
getting less than $2 a bushel for Canada feed wheat. That is 
what we are going to get, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this government, the arrogance of it, with the numbers that 
it has, go yelling at us now saying that that is not true — 
somehow that is not true, Mr. Speaker. Well they should take a 
load of frozen wheat to the elevator after August and see what 
they’re going to get for it. Because I know what the price of it is 
right now, and I’ve got some of that wheat. I know what it is 
now and I know what I’m going to get for it after August. I 
know what I’m going to get for no. 1 wheat after August, and 
it’s only about $3.18 a bushel. But when you talk about Canada 
feed wheat, and in that northern part of the province we have a 
lot of that from year to year, Mr. Speaker, those farmers can’t 
survive on wheat that’s going to be less than $2 a bushel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also talk about us being able to donate food 
to countries that need it — third-world countries. Well that’s 
true; we have been able to do that. And they think somehow 
that’s a big joke. They think it’s a big joke, Mr. Speaker. Well 
I’ll tell you, it is no longer funny in this province. It’s very 
serious because we can produce food, we can produce food to 
feed other countries, to feed the starving people of the world. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we can hardly be expected to do that when 
we get less than what it costs us to produce that. How long is 
that farmer that has been efficient, has been productive, how 
long is he going to be able to survive if he is going to be asked 
to produce it for less than what it cost him? 
 
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1067 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina North West says that 
we should be eating more bread. Well, I suppose that would 
help some; I suppose that would help some. And I wish the 
member for Regina North West would take some of his own 
advice and eat more bread and maybe tell the rest of the Tories 
to do that too. But if you’re selling it for $2 a bushel it doesn’t 
really matter how much bread somebody eats. You’ve got to get 
a little more than $2 a bushel for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they brag about all the things that the Premier has 
been able to do when he goes to Ottawa. Well he talks about 
what he can do every time that he goes to Ottawa. And we’ve 
heard the Premier do that in this House, and we’ve heard the 
members that have been up there on their feet in this House talk 
the same way, saying that when the Premier of Saskatchewan 
goes to Ottawa he gets anything he wants. Well, the one thing 
he does get is a lot of press releases. Same like everyone in this 
administration — they believe in issuing press releases. Maybe 
not very good ones from time to time, but they will issue them. 
 
And they talk about all the good things that they are doing for 
farmers. Well they talk about the subsidized freight rates that 
are frozen. That’s what some of the members mentioned. Well 
we went to Ottawa; now the federal government froze the 
freight rates for this year. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
anyone objects to that. 
 
But we have to think back to a few years when we had a fixed 
freight rate, when we knew what we were going to pay for 
freight. And the farmer wasn’t asked to pay what somebody 
else decides. But now they fix it. They are part of the ones that 
took the Crow rate away from the farmers of this country, of 
Saskatchewan. They took it away and now they’re saying, well, 
at a given time we’ll fix the rates. We’ll freeze them so they 
don’t go too much higher. 
 
Well they would have been a lot better off if at the time when 
the Crow rate was being discussed, that they would have said, 
no, the farmers of this province should not be told to pay freight 
for what they produce. General Motors doesn’t pay freight on 
what they manufacture. The implement companies don’t pay 
freight on what they manufacture and sell to the farmers. The 
consumer pays that freight. I can’t see why the farmer of 
Saskatchewan should be asked to pay the freight on a 
commodity that he produces and that the federal government 
sells on the world market. 
 
They use it as a trade commodity and yet the farmer is asked to 
foot the bill. That is how these members opposite think — that 
it’s good for the oil companies, it’s good for the large 
manufacturers, for someone else to pay the freight on their 
product. But when it comes to the farmer, he should be paying 
the freight on his product. 
 
I have yet to see an oil company that would deliver fuel 
anywhere without charging the freight on it. And if they could 
convince the oil companies to do that, it would be nice. Let the 
oil companies pay the freight. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or the fertilizer companies. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Or, like my colleague says, the fertilizer  

companies. 
 
Everybody charges you freight when they bring a product to 
your door. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. There is so much commotion in 
the Chamber with members visiting and hollering, that we can’t 
hear the member that’s speaking. Order! Order, please. When 
I’m on my feet I would ask for order. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
mentioned before, they talk about how much help they’ve given 
the farmers. But there are a lot of farmers at this point that are 
not going to survive unless something happens in the price of 
wheat at all. They are not going to survive. 
 
What we need is for this government and the federal 
government to take some action and make sure that we have a 
decent price on our grain. That’s all that has to be done. And if 
they want to talk about something else after that, well they can 
do it. They can have all the discussions and all the news 
releases they want, but the first thing that we need is a 
deficiency payment on our grain. 
 
And that’s what they should be saying. But I haven’t heard any 
members on that side of the House mention a deficiency 
payment. They just say, we don’t want to be the same as the 
U.S. or Europe. Well it’s nice for them to talk; they of a salary; 
they’re getting paid. But what is the farmer going to do? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oil companies are looked after — the 
big ones. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — And as my colleague says, you only have to 
look at who they’re really looking after, and there’s no question 
that the oil companies certainly are. When you talk about 
providing assistance for someone, one only has to look at who’s 
getting the assistance. And there’s a good article here, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Southam News that says: 
 

. . . the smoke-and-mirrors exercise which will help big oil 
companies more than the small ones and offers financially 
strapped farmers mostly optimistic words . . . 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, clearly indicates what all the announcements 
that this government has made and the announcements that the 
federal government has made really means. It means that we are 
going to give all the assistance we can for the oil companies. 
 
In the past three years when the oil prices were high, we gave 
them away a billion dollars. Now the oil price went down some, 
and again they say we’ve got to give them more. The oil 
companies are going to get more than the farmers. That’s what 
this government is saying: it’s not the farmers that need it. 
They’re saying that the oil companies need it more. We’ve been 
giving it to them and we’re going to give them ore. And when it 
comes to the farmers, well, you know, we don’t want to be like 
the U.S. and Europe. We don’t want to give you a deficiency 
payment and give you a decent price for the wheat you produce. 
No, we’d be too much like Europe and the U.S.  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1068 
 

But we’re going to give it to the oil companies because they are 
more important. That’s what this government is saying, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1245) 
 
What do they do for the small-business people? Nothing. They 
just talk about more of the tax changes that they have brought 
in, all the good things that they have done. But one would wish 
to know just where those tax changes are that have done so 
much good. 
 
They brag about capital gains, and I find that very interesting, 
Mr. Speaker. They brag about capital gains. And again you 
never see this government talking about anything they do. 
They’re totally hanging on to the coat-tails of the federal 
government. And when they get themselves in trouble, they go 
to Ottawa and they say, Brian, we need help again, give us 
something. But does he really give them anything? All he does 
it give back what the people gave to him in the first place. 
 
They talk about capital gains. Well we eliminated capital gains 
in this province when we were government, before this 
government ever became a government, if you want to call 
them that. We got rid of capital gains then. Finally after years of 
us complaining and now the people of Saskatchewan 
complaining, the federal government finally decided that they 
would remove capital gains. But somehow this government 
talks as though all the effort on their part, that they’re the ones 
that accomplished it. Well, Mr. Speaker, that certainly is not the 
case. But like always, this government tries to make something 
look like what it isn’t. And if they can sell themselves, even 
though it may not be true, this is what they try to do. 
 
All we have to look at is what it’s really costing us in taxes. 
When they removed the property improvement grant from 
farms, well that wasn’t a tax decrease; that was a tax increase. 
When they put the flat tax on, that wasn’t a tax decrease; that 
was another tax increase. 
 
And all of this going on. The farmer, tax increases year after 
year and the price of grain going lower and lower. And every 
member on that side of the House is saying that this is what 
should be happening. We approve of all of those actions. That’s 
what should happen. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is slowly 
destroying every farmer in this province. There are some that 
are still surviving and they are trying to hang on, but they won’t 
be able to hang on for long unless this government takes some 
action. And it appears very clearly that this government is not 
going to take action. It has to be a different government that’ll 
take action, and hopefully the people of this province will have 
the opportunity to elect a different government so that they can 
have some action taken on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while they talk about all the good things that they 
are going to do for farmers, they are really letting farmers 
down. They are really letting them down. Because I have talked 
to many farmers that say that if things don’t get better within 
the next short while, they are going to be off their land. They 
are going to be off their  

land. And yet they brag about all the good things that they are 
doing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, some of the members opposite are hollering 
“doom and gloom”. Well I think if you talk to many of those 
farmers out there, it’s not doom and gloom. They are optimistic 
that something will change; they are hoping that it will change. 
If the Premier will ever come back to this House and call that 
election, they are hoping that things will change. And it’s not 
doom and gloom. They know what is happening to them; they 
know the way they have to suffer right now and wonder what’s 
going to happen to them a month from now or a year from now. 
And that certainly isn’t doom and gloom. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province are fighters. They 
go out there and they keep trying year after year and they will 
continue to do that. They do not give up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, and some of the members 
opposite mentioned, the farmers are competitive but for some 
reason or other they seem to be saying that we shouldn’t be 
having as many farmers as we have. Because every action that 
they have taken in the last three years has said to us and to the 
small farmers of this province, that you don’t have a place in 
Saskatchewan. What we need is the big farmers; those are the 
only ones that will be able to survive. That is what this 
government is saying. They are saying the same thing to the 
small oil companies; if you’re not big you’re not going to 
survive. That is what this government is saying. And it’s clear, 
it’s clear . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s very difficult for the 
member to be heard in the Chamber and I would ask for order. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I just asked for order and the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is yelling before I sit 
down. I would ask him for order. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I called for order in the Chamber and that 
applies to all people here, but the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was hollering while I was still on my 
feet. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said before, it is 
very clear what this government is doing. They are not really 
interested in the average person of this province. They are not 
interested to what happens to the people of this province. Their 
main concern is trying to help the big oil companies that is 
stated in the article. Their main concern is also to get big 
farmers in this province and somehow they think that’s going to 
help, but it won’t. 
 
Because what we need is more of the smaller farmers. And it’s 
getting to the point now here it isn’t only the farmers that are 
saying that. When you go out in rural Saskatchewan you see the 
bankers even saying that; you see the business people saying 
that . . . 
 
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1069 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! The member from Regina North 
West, I’ve asked you several times now and I would ask for 
order. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, when you go out in rural 
Saskatchewan you hear different people — and I’ve talked to 
some of them — and I’ve had a banker tell me that we can’t 
afford to have our small farmers disappear. If we do, there 
won’t be any rural Saskatchewan; all the small towns will 
disappear with them. That is what they are saying. The bankers 
are saying it; the small-business people are saying it. That is 
what is being said in rural Saskatchewan. And yet this 
government refuses to recognize what is happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I realize that the 
members of this House don’t like to hear the truth. They don’t 
like to hear it. They don’t like to hear . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to ask the member for Regina 
North West to contain himself. He’s continually hollering and 
it’s impossible for the House to operate under these conditions. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members of this 
House don’t want to hear the truth, and that’s quite obvious 
from all the hollering and interruptions. They don’t want to 
know what is really happening. They don’t want the people of 
Saskatchewan to know what is happening in this province. They 
don’t want to know how badly people are suffering at this point. 
And they don’t want to do anything about it. 
 
They think that they can continue to issue their press releases, 
to spend millions of dollars on advertising, and somehow that is 
going to keep everybody happy. Well, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t 
going to keep the farmers of this province happy, and it isn’t 
going to get them elected if they continue on the road that they 
are going now. What they have to do is take some positive 
action to get Saskatchewan working, to get Saskatchewan’s 
economy to a point where everybody can see some future in 
whatever business they happen to be in. 
 
And it’s not only agriculture. It is the business men of this 
province too. And what they have to do is take that positive 
action. Agriculture is a start. It would be one way to get this 
province going again. 
 
And we have told them time and time again: go to Ottawa and 
ask for deficiency payments, and we’ll get the economy of this 
province going. Go to Ottawa and get what is necessary. Don’t 
let Ottawa cut back on the payments that they make to 
Saskatchewan, because if they do, then that means the taxpayer 
is going to have to pay more here. And the taxpayer of this 
province can’t pay much more. And as some of the members 
opposite are saying, what do you care? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I care. Because I think the farmers 
can’t pay any more in taxes, because they aren’t making any 
money now. The business people can’t pay  

any more in taxes, because they aren’t making that much any 
more. They are being pushed right to the limit. They are being 
pushed to the limit. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to ask the member 
from Regina North West to apologize to the Assembly for 
refusing to obey the rules of the Chair. 
 
I’m asking the member from Regina North West to apologize to 
this Assembly for refusing to obey the rules of the Chair. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I do apologize, Mr. Speaker, if there have 
been rules broken. I sit in here daily and I see people more 
unruly . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I have cautioned you three 
times in the last 10 minutes, and I’m not asking you now to 
make a speech. I’m asking you to apologize to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I apologize to the Assembly, sir. I’ve just 
been trying to make a speech today, and I’ve been unable to get 
into the debate. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, this 
government has been doing nothing more than cheer-leading 
with their Premier and not really bringing forward any positive 
programs that are going to help anyone in this province. 
 
They’ve brought forward a motion here that they think is very 
good. Well, Mr. Speaker, if they think that this motion is that 
good, we’ll let them vote on it. We have an amendment before 
us that we think is better than their motion, and one that we 
think is required, and that is deficiency payments for farmers. 
That would get our economy going. And I think we should have 
the opportunity to vote on this motion, and on the amendment. 
And deficiency payments are very important, Mr. Speaker, at 
this point, and I think what we should be doing is asking the 
members of this House to vote on it because I would like to see 
what they think of deficiency payments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we have 
seen today, Mr. Speaker — and here again the members 
opposite are acting in their normal fashion, not wanting to listen 
to the debate — what we have seen today, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the House to 
remain somewhat silent so at least we can hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — What we have seen today is an NDP 
opposition that refuses to support the efforts of the Prime 
Minister of Canada to bring agriculture to the international 
summit in Tokyo. I have not heard one word of support from 
the NDP members opposite supporting the Prime Minister of 
Canada, supporting the Premier of Saskatchewan, in their 
efforts to see this matter addressed internationally. 
 
We have heard caustic comments about the actions of the  
  



 
May 2, 1986 

 

1070 
 

Prime Minister. We have heard vitriolic criticism of our 
Premier. But I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that the citizens 
of this province understand very clearly that the party that cares 
about farmers, and the party that cares about the West, is the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Canada. We stand for 
farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 

Tchorzewski Koskie 
Thompson  Lusney 
Engel  Shillington 
Lingenfelter   
 

Nays — 29 
 

Tusa Morin 
McLeod  McLaren 
Taylor  Rousseau 
Schoenhals  Parker 
Duncan  Rybchuk 
Pickering  Caswell 
Myers  Domotor 
Hepworth  Meagher 
Dirks  Muller 
Klein  Sauder 
Currie  Zazelenchuk 
Martens  Gerich 
Maxwell  Petersen 
Smith (Moose Jaw South)  Swenson 
Hodgins   
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could raise a 
point of order. The point of order is that before voting on a 
motion that congratulates the Prime Minister for having 
agriculture on the agenda at the Tokyo Economic Summit — 
we have the agenda here and it’s not on the . . . Does it make 
any sense to congratulate . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:04 p.m. 
 
 


