


















































May 12, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 12, 1986 
 
 

1213 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Advertising by Department of Energy and Mines 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Minister of Energy and Mines, I direct a question to the Premier, 
and it deals with what I consider a waste of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
In the light, Mr. Premier, of the fact that you’re already running 
a $2 billion deficit and have imposed record tax increases on 
ordinary people, can you explain why your Department of 
Energy and Mines is spending thousands of dollars of taxpayers’ 
money to run full-page colour ads in the May issue of the 
Saskatchewan Business magazine? 
 
I don’t have it reproduced in colour, but you will note, Mr. 
Premier, that it consists almost entirely pictures and virtually no 
copy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in the 
legislature several times, when we initiate programs for 
individuals in Saskatchewan or we initiate invitations for others 
to come in to this province and invest, it has been working. 
 
And the fact that we have many new projects, that we have 
upgraders, that we have drilling records, we have many projects 
that are brand-new, Mr. Speaker, we have asked that the people 
across the country do come into Saskatchewan because we do 
invite them here to invest and to build. And the hon. member 
knows that when you provide that kind of information, that they 
will. 
 
And we obviously, Mr. Speaker, have done that in the energy 
business as well as in agriculture, processing, manufacturing, and 
mining. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, the ad does not inform Saskatchewan taxpayers about 
any specific benefit, does not invite anyone to come to our 
province, simply trumpets the PC line and trumpets that line at 
taxpayers’ expense. 
 
My short question to you is: if you are going to trumpet the PC 
line, which is perfectly appropriate for you, do you not think that 
it should be paid for by the PC party and not the voters of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the members of the 
opposition asked the same question with respect to the program 
we had for agriculture in a small book. And it went all across the 
province of Saskatchewan so that we, in fact, have informed 
farmers of the kinds of things that were available. Now this 
publication, Mr. Speaker, goes outside the province of 
Saskatchewan. It encourages other Canadians to look at our 
province and say, invest in Saskatchewan, whether it’s in tourism 
or energy or anything else. We do that in the kinds of magazines 
that get distribution among people who are investors.

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a large increase in investment in 
Saskatchewan. We have billions of dollars of projects on the 
books. We have the lowest rate of unemployment in western 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, we have the lowest rate of unemployment 
among women any place in the nation. We have created more 
jobs than any western province as a result of the investment 
attitude and the strategy. Mr. Speaker, it’s been working. Despite 
drought, recession, grasshoppers, and so forth, we see that kind 
of investment, those kinds of new projects in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. So it seems to make sense to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. Four years 
ago, sir, you promised that your party would cut government 
advertising, except government advertising which was designed 
to inform citizens of specific government programs. This 
advertisement very clearly does not do that. This advertisements 
very clearly does not advise anyone outside the province of 
specific invitations to invest. Why are you spending money 
which is clearly advertising by way of puffing the PC line? Why 
are you spending taxpayers’ money to continue that type of 
advertising, specifically which you said you would not continue 
four years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what we said four years ago 
is that we were not going to advertise Crown corporations that 
were monopolies and people didn’t have a choice. Other people 
across the country don’t use the monopolies, Mr. Speaker. People 
in Saskatchewan know SGI’s a monopoly; the know Sask 
Power’s a monopoly; they know that Sask Tel is an monopoly. 
What we said we would do is put Saskatchewan open for 
business, invite people in, increase advertising on tourism, 
increase advertising on investment, show people across the 
country, as we have in Expo, Mr. Speaker. Expo is a typical 
example. 
 
The NDP in British Columbia, the NDP in Manitoba, and the 
NDP here would not get involved in Expo. They wanted it to fail. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our pavilion is a typical example, a beautiful 
example, of the attitude of our administration towards 
Saskatchewan and towards Canada. We are proud of that 
pavilion, proud of the home-coming, proud of the information 
the whole world was going to find out about Saskatchewan, and 
proud, Mr. Speaker, that we put millions of dollars into that to 
talk about Saskatchewan people being number one in the world, 
all across the world. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the province of Manitoba under the NDP 
didn’t even have a pavilion. The NDP in British . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the 
Premier. In view of the fact that, in your judgement, the 
Saskatchewan pavilion at Vancouver somehow justifies the ad 
which was being run in Saskatchewan Business — I take it that 
was the thrust of your answer — and in view of the fact that it’s 
difficult for most people to understand how the Saskatchewan 
pavilion at Vancouver justifies this particular advertising, would 
you explain how your government justifies something that, I’m 
informed this morning, one of my fellow citizens of Regina heard 
nine 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1214 
 
 

different government ads on one Regina radio station in the 
course of one hour. 
 
Are you running a campaign of ads now, which consists of 
saturation advertising of that kind, and if so, why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t take the hon. 
member’s word for it that he had one individual say there’s going 
to be so many ads per hour. I would like to have the 
documentation. 
 
But I point out, Mr. Speaker, I believe the hon. member said it 
was a business magazine where we were advertising to 
encourage business to come into the province of Saskatchewan. 
Well I know that he would rather, and he did rather, promote 
Crown corporations and monopolies through the Saskatchewan 
family of Crown corporations and did not invite business. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same thing as the post cards you see 
being produced at Expo by Expo itself — not us, Mr. Speaker — 
and they have the number one pavilion at Expo is the 
Saskatchewan pavilion, talking about promoting and marketing 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that will help business and investment all 
across this province from one end to the other, because we’ve 
decided to invest in that. Mr. Speaker, I think it says the same 
thing with respect to Saskatchewan Business magazines. We 
promote Saskatchewan because it’s important. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
minister, in the absence of the minister responsible for Sedco — 
to the Premier — and again it deals with what we consider a 
waste of taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Premier. The president, the chief 
executive officer of the Sedco, who was also the former general 
manager of pioneer Trust, if you recall, one Douglas S. Price. 
 
Well, under Mr. price Sedco has lost, as you are aware, about $9 
million over the last two years. And we’re wondering, in the light 
of this record, can the Premier explain why Mr. Price spent all of 
last week, at taxpayers’ expense, in San Francisco. I know San 
Francisco is a nice city, but could you explain why he was there 
in San Francisco at taxpayers’ expense? And can he inform, then, 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers how much this little trip to the city 
of the bay was, on taxpayers’ expense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say at the 
outset that I don’t take the hon. member at his word. He has been 
standing in this legislature, and the opposition has, for the last 
week, Mr. Speaker, picking on individual names — innuendo, 
has been untrue. 
 
The member from Shaunavon raised the issue: well, the PC Party 
of Saskatchewan must have received information and money 
from Pioneer. I don’t accept the allegation, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
sure the public of Saskatchewan is getting a little bit fed up with 
the fact that all they can do is stand in the legislature and ask 
about an individual — he can’t defend himself in here — pick on 
a civil servant, pick on somebody else, pick on individuals that 
work in the private sector that can’t defend themselves.

Now they get upset when I challenge them on it. Well the public 
of Saskatchewan is getting upset with you guys. That’s all you 
can do. You can’t talk about jobs. You can’t talk . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. It’s impossible to hear if members 
are going to holler and yell. If you have questions and answers, 
I’d like to have them, but we can’t operate under those terms. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All I want is the answer. And I want to ask the 
Premier, can he explain why Mr. Price — the head of a Crown 
corporation which you and your government are responsible for 
and the activities which you are responsible for — can you 
indicate why he was, in fact, in San Francisco at taxpayers’ 
expense for a week’s holiday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I raise the point. I raise 
the point, I mean, what is the attitude and the value of the 
opposition asking about individual employees time and time 
again? They know, Mr. Speaker. Why would the Leader of the 
Opposition go to China? Why would the Leader of the 
Opposition go to the Soviet Union? Why would the member who 
just asked the question end up in France? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
when they were in government, maybe they had good reason to 
go here or go there. 
 
All I’m pointing out, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why an 
employee might have been in Chicago or might have been in 
London or might have been some place else. But I just draw to 
the attention of this Assembly that the public across the province 
have a pretty good idea what’s on the agenda of the members 
opposite, because I heard it in Saskatoon, I heard it in Assiniboia, 
I heard it in Moose Jaw, that all these people can talk about are 
defenceless civil servants, employees or private individuals, who 
can’t defend themselves in here. That’s all they can talk about — 
not about agriculture, not about jobs, not about the real things — 
but what about this poor individual. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice with respect to another 
government employee. But the government employees are 
getting pretty sick and tired of the opposition just picking on 
individuals that can’t defend themselves in the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to ask a new question to the little 
cheer-leader and the Premier. And I ask you, Mr. Premier, an 
economy air fare from Regina to San Francisco, return, is $786. 
In addition, Mr. Price stayed all last week at the Hyatt Regency 
Square where the cheapest single room was $152 American, per 
night, and the smallest executive suite runs at $350 American, 
plus his other expenses. 
 
I want to ask the Premier: can the Premier tell the taxpayers how 
much Mr. Price’s trip to San Francisco, his holiday last week, 
cost the taxpayer? Can he provide a full written justification for 
his attendance at this particular convention, when there were 
already five other executive officers attending in respect to this 
same convention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the public 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1215 
 
 

knows and the member of the opposition knows, they have had 
delegations go to China to sell potash; they’ve had delegations 
go around the world and do this and do that and whatever. So 
he’s standing in the legislature as a former cabinet minister 
asking, why would an individual go to a city in the United States? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I said I would take notice and find out. 
 
I just remind the public that day after day after day in this 
legislature the opposition picks on individuals, picks on poor 
individuals that don’t have a chance to defend themselves. And 
when I challenge him right here in the legislature, all he can do 
is holler over there. Everybody in the gallery knows that all he 
can do is holler because he’s raised the issue. I’m calling his bluff 
and say, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe the people of this province 
recognize, really understand what the NDP are really after, but I 
believe that they will. 
 

Cancellation of Contract with Sask Forest Products 
Corporation 

 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct my 
question to the minister responsible for Sask Forest Products 
Corporation, SFPC. Mr. Minister, a public company . . . Pardon 
me. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, relates to the Saskatchewan 
Forest Products Corporation, a public company, which lost more 
than 4 million of taxpayers’ money last year. In light of that loss, 
one would assume that SFPC would be anxious to gather new 
business. However, is the minister aware of a recent letter from 
a Manitoba company which cancelled a contract with SFPC for 
the purchase of 1 million board feet of pressure-treated wood, 
and can he confirm that the reason this contract was cancelled 
was SFPC’s poor marketing effort? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would say that I will take 
notice as it relates to the particular issue — the contract that the 
member raises. I would ask the member, if he has more 
particulars than just the innuendo which he raises, that he would 
send that to me or give it to me, and I’m sure that he’s got his 
supplementary which he’ll give me. 
 
As it relates to the losses that the member talks about, he will 
know that Sask Forest Products Corporation, or at least I would 
hope that he would know, that they have lost money for a good 
long period of time. We have taken some good steps in Sask 
Forest Products: one, of the installations of Sask Forest Products, 
the Big River sawmill, for example, Mr. Speaker, is now moving 
over to the private sector, to Weyerhaeuser. And I would say to 
the hon. member, give me more details and I will take notice and 
give him a reply another day. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supplementary to the 
question. Mr. Minister, I have here a copy of a letter directed to 
an executive of Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation from 
a Manitoba company called Shan-Wood Lumber Ltd. The letter 
says in part for your information, Mr. Minister: 
 

. . . phone calls to you have not been returned.

Information which we required to sell your products, 
brochures, pamphlets, etc., have not been received. We are 
dismayed by the lack of interest shown by the Sask Forest 
Products in the treated wood area. 

 
Can the minister explain why you people are not following up 
every possible sales angle at a time when you are losing money 
for Saskatchewan taxpayers? Mr. Minister, is the problem the 
state of the market or is it your government’s poor marketing 
efforts? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I have said, I’ll 
take notice, and now that the member has given some detail I’ll 
take notice and check on it. I would say though, however, Mr. 
Speaker, that the information given by the member I do not take 
at face value because I’ve learned that, as my colleagues have 
learned that in the last several months, and the Premier referred 
to it just a few moments ago, that what they say in the legislature 
and what turns out to be the facts are very, very often, very 
different propositions altogether. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In light of the 
fact that this government has no policy to really put 
Saskatchewan first in terms of marketing efforts pertaining to this 
company — pertaining to our issue at hand — I’ll willingly, in 
terms of providing assistance to the minister so that they can 
follow up appropriately, I will table this letter in this legislature 
and have the minister respond to it accordingly. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I would take 
notice. The member refers to a “Saskatchewan first” policy. I’m 
not sure . . . but I would suggest that if there is a policy in 
marketing of “Saskatchewan first,” it relates to being sure that 
we can fulfil the responsibilities we have in the market here in 
the province first. And that makes eminent good sense for a 
Crown corporation in the province. But certainly if there’s a 
market out there that we can . . . that can come to Sask Forest 
Products — we’re interested in — and I’m sure the management 
are as well. 
 

Brochure Contract to Associated Business Consultants 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. My question is to the 
Minister of Supply and Services. It deals with the awarding of 
government contracts to Associated Business Consultants which 
is owned by one Ron Ryan, a former employee of Dick Collver 
and the PC party. 
 
Can you confirm, in recent months, that Ron Ryan had been 
awarded an $85,000 a year contract, without tender, by the 
Department of Supply and Services to distribute government 
brochures and other PC propaganda in Saskatchewan grocery 
stores and shopping malls? 
 
Also it awarded an $11,000 contract without tender by the 
Premier’s office to compile a report on the NDP convention 
resolutions at taxpayers’ expense; awarded a $10,000 contract 
without tender by the Department of Tourism and Small Business 
to develop something called “summer monitor”; awarded a 
$20,000 contract without tender by the Department of Tourism 
and Small Business 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1216 
 
 

to provide management advice to businesses in Kipling. 
 
It’s been a long introductory comment, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a 
long list of tenders. Can the minister confirm the list, and can you 
give us details of all other contracts which Mr. Ron Ryan has 
qualified for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, again this is a repeat of 
questions that I took notice to earlier last week, and I tried to 
bring the information back last week but was not recognized. 
 
First of all, in response to the member from Regina North East’s 
question which I took notice which is related to this one: he 
asked, I believe, who the second proposal was from regarding the 
information program. The second proposal was from Coopers & 
Lybrand. Their proposal involved manning the stations. 
Obviously that would be more expensive, and, as I indicated, we 
had chosen the less expensive of the two proposals that were put 
forward. 
 
And again the attempt is made to suggest that somehow the 
$85,000 that is the cost of the program all filtered into the pocket 
of this particular company. That of course is not true. The 
$85,000 covers the entire program — the space allocation, the 
equipment that’s required, the pamphlets, and so forth. 
 
Anyway, to then go on to the activities of Associated Business 
Consultants with the Department of Tourism and Small Business, 
which I believe was your question, and you asked if I could 
provide details. Obviously it will take a minute or two. 
 
The list that I provided in the first day of estimates, which was 
quite some time ago, indicated that there were 61 contracts 
undertaken by the Department of Tourism and Small Business in 
’85-86 and that that represented an expenditure of $1,022,090. 
Of these, two were given to Associated Business Consultants. 
The total dollar value was $29,800. I should repeat that possibly 
so you can note that — two of 61; $29,000 out of an excess of a 
million dollars. One was by tender and one, which is a very much 
smaller one, was not tendered. In percentage terms, Associated 
Business Consultants received about 3 per cent of both the money 
and the number of consulting awards that Tourism and Small 
Business awarded in that year. 
 
I think it’s also important to remember that one of the objectives 
that we have as a department is to strengthen the private 
consulting industry that is available to small business in 
Saskatchewan. Towards that end we have used a large number of 
private consultants so that they can gain more experience in this 
very important and previously neglected area of private sector 
employment and development. 
 
Associated Business Consultants . . . and this is also equally 
important and certainly relevant to the question, Associated 
Business Consultants is not the only firm to receive more than 
one job from us. Others include Derek Murray; Peat, Marwick 
and Mitchell; Waybar Management; Langan Woods; Saskatoon 
Data Management; Canwest Opinion . . .

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, yesterday . . . I wonder if you 
can give us this and perhaps try to finish your remarks by 5 
o’clock so the House will adjourn on time. Mr. Minister, you took 
notice of a question as to whether or not Associated Business 
Consultants had been awarded any contracts by the Department 
of health, or the Department of Supply and Services on behalf of 
the Department of Health. You undertook to check into this and 
report back. Can you report your findings in this regard? Has 
Associated Business Consultants ever been awarded work for 
either of these departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, let me just, in terms of 
the department I am responsible for, which it would be logical 
that I know about, it’s important to note that Associated Business 
Consultants tendered for three jobs and received one. In the 
period that we’re talking about, I think it’s safe to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that there has to be some question of the motives of the 
question. Sixty-one different contracts; they’ve chosen one. I 
don’t believe this is the vigilant watch-dog, the opposition 
keeping track of the public purse. I think this is political 
grandstanding of the worst kind. I don’t think that they’re 
interested in these facts at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have clearly indicated this company received 3 
per cent of the consulting business; 3 per cent of the money that 
was awarded. I think that it’s highly improper to suggest that 
somehow this company has received some special treatment 
from this department. And when we get to estimates a little later 
today, I will be pointing out again some of the feelings about the 
department as far as this is concerned. But this is clearly not a 
misuse of funds. This corporation, this company, has been treated 
the same as every other. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I’m going to caution the member 
for Quill Lakes that when I’m on my feet, he’s to be quiet. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my short 
remarks, I shall be moving second reading of a Bill, An Act to 
amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 
 
Our government is committed, Mr. Speaker, to retaining the 
concept of sharing revenue with the province’s municipalities. 
We have over the past several years undertaken extensive 
discussions with the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities to review all facets of the revenue-sharing 
program, including possible revision to the distribution formula 
and alternative approaches to indexing the funding to the 
economic growth of the province. Mr. Speaker, as an interim 
measure, this Bill provides that the total available for 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1217 
 
 

revenue sharing in the ’86-87 fiscal year will increase by 3 per 
cent compared to the total amount available for the payment of 
grants at the beginning of the ’85-86 fiscal year. The urban and 
rural revenue-sharing pools taken together will amount to 115.7 
million of operating assistance to the province’s municipalities. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, our government is assuring that all urban 
municipalities will receive a 3 per cent increase in revenue 
sharing’s basic, per capita, and foundation grants in 1986 
compared to 1985. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, also revises the definition of an urban 
municipality as a consequential amendment related to The Urban 
Municipality Act passed in 1974. 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, that we are able to provide 
municipalities with a 3 per cent increase in grants over last year’s 
level and consequently I move, Mr. Speaker, second reading of 
the Bill, An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I would like to 
make a few comments on this Bill before I adjourn debate in 
order that municipalities and others can have an opportunity to 
have a look at the Bill. I am sure, knowing the record of the 
government and the record of the minister opposite, having 
discussed this at some length during estimates of the Department 
of Urban Affairs, that there was very little of any consultation 
with the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association or with 
municipalities with regard to what we see here today. 
 
In fact I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that there was not any 
consultation at all. From the indications that I have, that is what 
the situation has been. I find that very regrettable, Mr. Speaker, 
because one of the cherished traditions of this province has been 
that the provincial government, in developing legislation that was 
going to affect either hospital boards or municipalities or school 
boards, has always in the past, over the years, under our 
government before 1982 and under the previous Liberal 
government prior to 1971, went out of its way to provide 
municipalities and boards with proposed drafts of legislation, 
proposed programs, to work out with them the best possible 
solutions which we jointly face, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have here before us is the result of four years of this 
government’s refusal to listen to local government. This 
government, meeting with local government, pretending to 
consult and then acting in whatever way it chooses to act, 
completely ignoring the consultative process and the 
recommendations that local government bodies have provided. 
 
In 1985-86, Mr. Speaker, in that budget which the famous former 
minister of Finance of the most intelligent budget provided, the 
revenue sharing was frozen for a year. Municipalities in this 
province received no increase at all. They were faced with the 
same kind of cost increases as any other local government body, 
or any other organization, or, in fact, as was the provincial 
government. But this government chose to say to them — 
although it boasted about its four pillars on which it was

going to build — chose to say that our municipalities, they don’t 
count to be amount those four pillars. They were not either one 
of the fourth; in fact, they weren’t the fifth. 
 
Here we have a Bill which now talks about the revenue sharing 
for 1986-1987. The minister stands up and he boasts about the 
terrific and tremendous 3 per cent increase. Well, Mr. Speaker, if 
it wasn’t such a serious matter it would be somewhat laughable. 
But it is a serious matter because in 1985-1986 the grant was 
frozen; in 1986-1987, it’s 3 per cent. So over a period of two 
years this government is providing to our municipalities an 
increase in each of those years of 1.5 per cent. 
 
Now do you know, Mr. Speaker, what this Bill will provide for 
some municipalities? Increases in the range of $50 if you average 
it out over two years — $50 a year. I will bring in my remarks 
later, after I take up the debate, when it’s called up before the 
House again, examples of where municipalities over the period 
of those two years — in each of those years — are getting an 
increase of $52 a year; $63 a year. Even the Minister of Urban 
Affairs, in his usual way, cannot stand up in this House and 
defend the fact that municipalities have not had an increase of 
greater amounts than that. It is not laughable because it is so 
serious. 
 
The question one has to ask when you consider this Bill: why 
have we totally now seen in Saskatchewan, under this 
government, an absolute destruction of the revenue-sharing idea? 
The principle of revenue sharing does not exist any more. The 
government did away with the escalator when it first was elected, 
so now there is no escalator formula. And I notice, with some 
concern, Mr. Speaker, the misleading comments in what is 
provided in the explanatory notes to Bill 38. In these explanatory 
notes, and I just quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . that the reason there is no formula for the escalation of 
the revenue sharing is because there’s been the elimination 
of the provincial gas tax. 

 
Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that’s blatantly untrue. The 
revenue-sharing escalator formula was never based on a 
particular tax. The revenue-sharing formula was based on the tax 
base. You don’t have to have a tax in place in order to determine 
the tax base, Mr. Speaker. So for the explanatory notes, which 
the minister tabled in this House, to say what they say, is really 
— if it wasn’t close to being unparliamentary, I would say 
“misleading the House,” because it is blatantly dishonest. And I 
submit, Mr. Speaker, that that has just got to be the weakest 
excuse to defend a bad Bill and a bad program that I have ever 
seen. 
 
This government has done away with the escalator formula so 
that municipalities, instead of knowing what they can expect 
from one year to the next, now have been forced to the situation 
where every year, before the budget, they more or less have to 
come to the government, tin cup in hand, and say, please, will 
you provide us some assistance? And the government, depending 
on whether it’s an election year or whether it’s an off-year, will 
then decide how much it’s going to give. 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1218 
 
 

The purpose of the revenue-sharing program, Mr. Speaker, was 
to provide some certainty and to eliminate some of the blatant 
politicking that governments have been known to do, particularly 
governments of this stripe, in the history of funding 
municipalities. And that’s what we see here today. Not only do 
we have the escalator formula destroyed, Mr. Speaker, we now 
see a Bill which shows that we no longer have a distribution 
formula. 
 
Instead of allowing for the distribution of revenue sharing in such 
a way that municipalities — because of increases in population, 
and as a result of having greater pressures because they’ve got to 
build up municipal infrastructures and sewage systems and water 
systems — instead of allowing for that, the government says, 
we’re going to punish you now because you showed some 
growth. We’re not going to have a revenue-sharing formula that 
recognizes problems that exist in municipalities depending on 
each individual case; we’re going to give you each 3 per cent. 
 
And as a result, Mr. Speaker, there are municipalities who are 
getting increases this year of 50 bucks — $50 — and some less, 
and indeed some more. No recognition given to the problems that 
are there. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that there are many municipalities 
who are concerned, and will continue to be concerned, about 
what this government has done to revenue sharing. I wish to 
discuss with some of them what some of their concerns are. I 
know they will be interested in seeing what this legislation says 
and does. And therefore, until they are given an opportunity to 
do that, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Schoenhals that Bill No. 16 — An Act 
to amend The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I want to make a few brief 
remarks with respect to the venture capital corporation Bill. 
 
The program expands . . . The Bill expands the program, I gather, 
to include investments in agriculture and livestock operations. 
While that in itself is not a bad thing, it hasn’t always produced 
happy results on some past programs. In some past programs, this 
government has introduced programs supposedly to help farmers 
but which in fact has done more to get professional people with 
too much money into farming operations, particularly feed lots, 
and seems to get the farmers out of it. 
 
I note, Mr. Minister, that this is a continuation of the same effort. 
The opposition will want to know what the program will cost and 
how much additional tax . . . what would be the additional 
expenditure and how much

additional taxes will be foregone by this amendment? I note that 
the estimates provide for an expenditure of 17 million on the 
venture capital corporation. I would assume that does not include 
taxes foregone as a result of this being introduced. 
 
The Bill also expands the program to permit registration of 
venture capital corporations in communities up to 20,000 as 
compared to a limit of 5,000. That’s again not bad in itself. 
 
It is apparent that, whether because the idea was flawed or 
whether it has been unable to function in a recession which has 
been aggravated by the Conservative mismanagement, the 
venture capital corporations have not had a major impact on 
Saskatchewan. Well the members opposite are making noises 
which suggest they disbelieve that. I point out to members 
opposite that, while the level of political promises and the level 
of announcements is at an all-time high — I cannot think of a 
six-month period in which there’s been as many announcements 
as there have in Saskatchewan — in fact, capital investment is 
almost at an all-time low. In absolute terms, capital investment 
in this province is lower now than it was in 1981. Well the 
member for Regina North, who has left that riding — the member 
for Regina South, who never will be— shakes his head in 
disbelief. I suggest that the member from Regina North-South 
check StatsCanada’s figures. The capital investment in this 
province is lower now than it was in 1981. And that suggests that 
your efforts have not been remarkably successful, and that people 
can’t spend announcements on ammonia plants, on upgraders, a 
wide variety of other things, which have gone nowhere. 
 
The real tragedy of the venture capital corporation is not that it 
was introduced. Again, by itself it’s perhaps not a bad idea. It, 
however, has not been able to function in such a harsh 
environment, aggravated by your mismanagement. It’s a great 
shame that you have ignored the economic crisis in 
Saskatchewan and that this represents your only effort, virtually 
your only effort, to deal with it. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dutchak that Bill No. 35 — An Act to 
amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance orders 
Act, 1983 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In respect to Bill 35, 
we’ve had an opportunity to review that and note that it 
essentially makes some modification into the procedure for 
processing reciprocal maintenance orders. We may have a few 
questions specifically when we get into committee of the whole, 
but in principle we are in agreement with the amendments as 
presented by the minister. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1219 
 
 

proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Dutchak that Bill No. 36 — An 
Act respecting Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In respect to Bill 36, 
again we’ve had an opportunity to take a look at it. We note that 
there is a clarification in there in respect to garnishment of 
pension benefits which we are in agreement with, and also in 
respect to protection under The Labour Standards Act of not 
losing one’s job because of a garnishment under the Act. These 
basic principles I think we are in agreement with. We may have 
some questions in committee of the whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hodgins that Bill No. 34 — An Act to 
amend The Highways and Transportation Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the opportunity 
to review some of the comments made by the minister. There are 
a few questions that we’re going to certainly have regarding the 
changes to this legislation, but I think we can agree to some 
extent that there is some signing required. Some small-business 
people may require some signing to state the kind of business that 
they have and services that they can provide, and we don’t 
necessarily disagree with that. There will be, however, some 
questions that we’ll have when we get into the different clauses, 
and we’ll deal with those in committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
only have a few brief comments regarding this Bill to amend The 
Highways and Transportation Act. In my comments to the hon. 
member from Pelly, I would like to state to the Assembly and to 
the people of Saskatchewan how very, very pleased I am that the 
hon. member of the opposition has said that in principle they are 
agreeing with this Bill. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that it is a 
refreshing day that the opposition has finally consented and said 
yes, indeed one of your programs, one of your policies, does have 
merit. 
 
And I do know that the small-business community around the 
province of Saskatchewan will be very, very pleased to see this 
legislation go through in the forthcoming regulations. So once 
again, I would like to sincerely commend the opposition on 
agreeing with us, on being fair and objective about a relaxation, 
if you like, of restrictions that is long overdue, and I want to 
commend the member on his attitude. It is for this side of the 
House very, very refreshing to see at last some small bit of token 
co-operation, if you like. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Tourism and Small Business 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as you’ll remember, in 
the consideration of these estimates of the last two or three 
sessions we have listened in each case to a speech ranging in 
length from 20 to 30 minutes by various members of the 
opposition at the end of the day. In the other two instances I 
didn’t bother responding to these rather lengthy statements at the 
start of the next session. 
 
But I think it’s important in this case that I refer you back to 
Friday and some of the comments made at that time and to make 
a few comments. And I only do that, Mr. Chairman, because of 
what I will only call the amazing reaction that I have received 
over the past weekend from two specific groups who have been 
in almost . . . well, in regular contact both with myself and with 
members of our department. 
 
Mr. Chairman, statements that were made by the members of the 
opposition during consideration of the Department of Tourism’s 
estimates last week in the committee of finance have caused a 
great deal of concern in the tourism industry of this province. 
And also statements that were made last week and most 
particularly on Friday by the members opposite have also caused 
a great deal of concern among senior officials and staff of my 
department. 
 
And my staff — and I think this is important considering the tone 
and tenor of question period today, and some of the rather astute 
comments made by the Premier on responding to the member 
from Quill Lakes. 
 
My staff is extremely upset over what they consider were attacks 
on their integrity as public servants, and they have brought their 
concerns to me over the weekend. And I only think it’s right that 
I should . . . and, Mr. Chairman, as minister of this department I 
believe it is my responsibility to bring the concerns of these two 
groups — the tourism industry and the members of my 
department — to the attention of the committee, and I’m sure the 
committee will be interested. 
 
When members of the provincial tourism industry — which we 
are working so hard to serve — and senior officials and staff who 
are providing that service are upset by what is being said in the 
deliberations of this committee, which of course are public, I 
think it’s incumbent that the committee pause for a moment and 
take stock of what is going on. 
 
A steady stream of telephone calls have been coming in to my 
office since last Wednesday as a result of statements made by the 
opposition with respect to the tourism advertising program of my 
department. Reference has been made, not only to what’s been 
happening in estimates, but to a couple of things that were 
mentioned in question period as well. 
 
You can appreciate these concerns, the concerns of the 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1220 
 
 

tourism industry. This industry is finally getting some support to 
develop more business opportunities and jobs for citizens after 
decades of neglect from the previous administration, the 
administration of the NDP. 
 
The tourism industry are pinning their hopes for a revitalized 
industry on this increased support from the provincial 
government. You can appreciate their concerns when they read 
headlines that the deliberations of this committee suggest that 
that support should, in fact, be cut or eliminated or certainly 
drastically reduced. 
 
The members of the tourism industry simply cannot understand 
statements made by the opposition that these ads being placed in 
Ontario and in Alberta, and in states such as Minnesota, North 
Dakota, Montana, are supposed to be promoting this department 
or even promoting this government. Those statements are very, 
very difficult for tourism people to understand because they 
know full well that these ads that appear on TV, radio, and in the 
print media, and which were made public to the media folks in 
Saskatchewan and to the members of the public last week, are 
really promoting the tourism attractions that exist in our 
province, and are designed solely to help attract visitors to the 
province of Saskatchewan. And to suggest that they’re anything 
else is really difficult to understand. 
 
These ads promote the tremendous sport — fishing that exists in 
our northern lakes, the camping, canoe trips, provincial parks, 
historic sites. They don’t promote our department, nor do they 
promote the government. The tourism industry simply cannot 
believe that members of the opposition seem to have such great 
trouble understanding this. And in our discussions over the 
weekend with myself and with members of the department, they 
indicated they couldn’t understand how the opposition could lead 
with that type of questioning. They suggest that when they were 
in government they didn’t understand tourism; they didn’t 
understand it when we came to office, and they refuse to 
understand it now. And once again I think it’s important that I 
explain where tourism fits in the provincial economy. 
 
Tourism is a job creator in Saskatchewan. It provides over 30,000 
direct and indirect jobs today, and it’s got tremendous potential, 
probably as great a potential as any element of our economy. Our 
job is to promote and to develop this industry in co-operation 
with the private sector. That’s why we advertise, so these tourism 
businesses, over 2,000 of them, will continue to grow, continue 
to employ, continue to be successful. 
 
And as I laid out last day, I indicated the dollar return in general 
touring area which is roughly: the average dollar spent bring back 
$12.40. In the sport fishing sector, it’s much higher — something 
in excess of $21.50 for every dollar spent. But the 12.40 number 
is certainly average on our expenditures. 
 
We turn then to the attacks being made on my staff. Several 
members of the department came to me after Friday’s session and 
advised me that they felt that their integrity was being attacked 
by statements that were made in this committee. And once again, 
Mr. Chairman,

we clearly saw the same tactic today in question period. In fact, 
I had numerous people on the weekend in Saskatoon tell me that 
they had some problems understanding exactly what the 
opposition was involved in. 
 
Early in the session we had the woollen socks and the clucking 
and the jelly beans, and now we have turned to a personal attack 
on civil servants who can’t defend themselves in this forum, on 
business people, members of the public, who simply have no 
recourse. 
 
And people asked me several times, do these people not 
understand the real problems that exist today, things in 
agriculture and employment and so forth? And I simply had to 
indicate that I had as much trouble as they did understanding the 
rationale for what we were hearing. 
 
Statements that were made inferring that officials were living 
high off the public trough and references to contracts being 
improperly handed out, those types of things, were things that 
members of my department clearly indicated they felt were 
aspersions on their integrity. And members opposite may think 
that deliberations in this committee are really quite frivolous and 
don’t have a great deal of meaning, and you may even think that 
that’s good politics, but I would somehow question that. 
 
But I want to assure opposition members . . . Now the member 
from Pelly doesn’t want to hear this, but I can assure opposition 
members, including the member from Pelly, that the staff in my 
department are professionals and that they’re very dedicated and 
very serious about their programs, and that they have advised me 
that they resent these allegations that are really slurs on their 
integrity. 
 
I have to say that I fully agree with them, and I would suggest 
specifically that the member from Shaunavon might think about 
apologizing publicly to the members of the staff and the senior 
officials of Tourism and Small Business because of some of the 
comments that were made. 
 
It has taken us and the provincial government a couple of years 
to build up the outstanding staff that we now have in place in 
Tourism, and I don’t want to lose any of them. And I’m sure that 
the members opposite, in all honesty, feel the way I do. But you 
can’t make inaccurate statements that cast aspersions on the 
integrity of officials, officials who are proud of the work they’re 
doing and who are carrying out their role in attempts — very 
successful attempts, too, I might add — to increase tourism for 
this province. 
 
Some of them are called upon to travel to the United States. 
That’s going to be a target market. I think it’s safe to say that it’s 
reasonable to expect that on occasion members of the department 
will travel to the United States. We have had people go to places 
like California, and Dallas, Minneapolis — areas where we feel 
are tremendous potential, and in fact studies would indicate that 
is true. 
 
While they’re there they put in 12-hour days which are 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1221 
 
 

usually Saturdays and Sundays. Since most of the shows that we 
go to take place on those days, they’re there promoting the 
tourism activities of our province at many exhibits and displays. 
And I would suggest that it’s their job to sell Saskatchewan’s 
tourism attractions and that they have done it better than it has 
ever been done in the past in this province. 
 
And when they’re on these trips, in the few hours that they do 
have free, they spend a great deal of that time meeting with clubs 
and groups and showing films. I could talk about Sun Spirit 
Saskatchewan and the many awards it’s won, and that type of 
thing, and as well as meeting with media groups. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated the other day, on a recent Expo 
promotion trip to Ontario one of the results was a full, half-page 
article on Saskatoon and the places to eat in Saskatoon. 
 
(1500) 
 
And I indicated the tremendous coverage that the Toronto Star 
has where the article appeared, and I think that’s a direct result 
of the professional people in the Department of Tourism taking 
the time to meet with the Toronto Star when it was there, talking 
with their reporter when he was in Saskatchewan. And that type 
of advertising is free and is something that you simply can’t 
measure in terms of its impact. 
 
These public servants, however, who don’t have the opportunity 
to defend themselves in this committee except through the words 
that I might say, which they may find inadequate at times, don’t 
deserve the attacks that have been made on them, and I think that 
when they carry out a professional job the way they have, I think 
there’s an element of ashamedness that should be in place on the 
opposition benches. 
 
With respect to contracts, and this has been discussed and in fact 
was discussed in question period today — questions of contracts 
that have been awarded by this department — I would indicate 
that they are the responsibility of the deputy minister; that in the 
brief history of this department the minister, whether it was 
myself or the member from Regina North, has never been 
involved in determining where contracts will be awarded. 
 
And so when you make statements about contracts being 
improperly set out, you are attacking the integrity again of one of 
the senior officials of my department, and we take some 
exception to that. You have advised us that . . . My officials have 
said they’re certainly upset, and I, for my part, believe they 
probably have a very good right to be. 
 
My officials have requested that I ask on their behalf for an 
apology from some of the members who have certainly slurred 
their integrity . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll tell the member 
from Quill Lakes that I gave this a great deal of thought this 
weekend because I think that this is something that should be 
answered. And probably the member from Quill Lakes in his 
booming, bull-moose voice, is one of the most guilty of the 
members opposite, in terms of throwing slander and aspersion at 
people who

do not have the right to defend themselves. And I would 
challenge that member to step outside and make the comments 
that he has made, because you will find that, Mr. Chairman, he 
does not have the integrity to do that. He won’t step outside and 
repeat those. It’s far beyond him. Mr. Chairman, if they don’t 
wish to apologize in the committee, possibly they would like to 
apologize outside in a private statement, because my officials do 
take this very seriously. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I must confess that I am terribly disappointed in 
the responses that we’re getting from the members of the 
opposition to the tourism estimates that have been brought 
forward, although I am not surprised. This has happened many 
times in the past. 
 
After several decades — and I repeat that; several decades — of 
neglect from the NDP administration, tourism has now literally 
entered a new era of development in this province. This is 
happening because of our increased support for the industry and 
increased support that is obvious to all who have been in any way 
involved in this industry. This increased support from the 
provincial government means that the industry is developing a 
new pride and a new confidence in itself — confident that it can 
hold its own with the tourism attractions of other Canadian 
destinations. 
 
I don’t think it’s unfair, Mr. Chairman, to suggest that the NDP 
had almost convinced the tourism industry that they were, in fact, 
losers — that Saskatchewan could not compete for tourism 
dollars. Because of their neglect, Saskatchewan’s tourism 
industry is 10 years behind the rest of the country. And I make 
that statement without any fear of contradiction — at least 10 
years behind. However, we’re catching up, and I believe that 
upsets the opposition to no end. To be proved wrong time after 
time, I agree, must be rather upsetting for them. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that there is anew pride in 
Saskatchewan tourism today, and it will position Saskatchewan 
to realize the benefits that tourism has to offer. And I’d like to 
just spend a moment and re-emphasize some of the things that 
have already been said in this debate about what tourism really 
means to this province. Tourism means today close to $1 billion 
annually in expenditures in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s 
responsible for providing 22,000 direct and indirect jobs. And 
these totals will be growing rapidly for our province, because 
predictions are that tourism, by the year 2000, will be the number 
one industry world-wide and the number one employer in North 
America — which I’ve said several times, but seems to have been 
lost to the members opposite. 
 
Despite these optimistic developments for tourism in 
Saskatchewan, the opposition doesn’t appear to want to talk 
about tourism, about tourism marketing, development, tourism 
publicity — programs that are contained in these estimates — in 
any type of serious way. Either they don’t understand what 
tourism is all about, which is what I suspect, because they did 
practically nothing to support tourism during their time in office, 
or they know that we are now doing such a good job of promoting 
and developing tourism in Saskatchewan that they would like to 
divert the public’s 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1222 
 
 

attention away from the accomplishments and try to discuss some 
other aspects of tourism, which are the type of thing we have 
been experiencing in recent question periods. What else could be 
the reasons for stooping to the level of attacking the integrity of 
members of the department staff? Whatever statements they do 
make, or questions they do ask, all tend to be negative, dealing 
totally on the negative, and it’s the doom and gloom mentality 
that the member from Quill Lakes has demonstrated so often. 
 
They are giving the impression that they are anti-Saskatchewan; 
that they really don’t want to see our province publicized as well 
as other parts of Canada and the United States; that they really 
don’t want to see Saskatchewan attract visitors to our province. 
And of course visitors to the province will mean more jobs for 
our citizens, particularly for young people, for many young 
people are employed in the tourism business, and obviously it’s 
another diversification element of our economy, and of course no 
one argues that question. And I wonder if they really are 
anti-tourism, because that’s the way they’ve been coming across 
to Saskatchewan’s growing tourism industry, and that is what 
they have told me time and time again, over the weekend, as the 
phone continues to ring. 
 
Or maybe, as I indicated, they feel it’s good politics to be 
frivolous about the tourism estimates that are before them. I’m 
sure that the profile of Saskatchewan, or that the people of 
Saskatchewan, will have something to say about their behaviour 
one of these days. 
 
I do not want to get involved in the same attitude or the same 
types of discussions that they have been involved in, but I will 
raise a couple of points because I do it only to demonstrate the 
type of arguments that have been presented here and to indicate 
the hypocrisy of the party opposite when they raise the types of 
things that have, and question the integrity and the motives of the 
departmental staff. 
 
After the statements that we heard on Friday about officials of 
the department living rather high off the public hog, these 
officials volunteered to me some information about a former 
minister of their administration, a former NDP minister, who was 
really living high off the public purse. I didn’t know anything 
about this until they brought it to my attention, and really when I 
heard it, I must say that I was rather shocked, as we see them try 
to project themselves as the vigilant watch-dogs of the public 
purse, while we look at their performance in office, we find a 
particularly different picture. 
 
The last minister of tourism and renewable resources, in the NDP 
administration, made a trip to Whistler, British Columbia, for a 
half hour meeting on ski resort business — a half hour meeting 
in Whistler, British Columbia — and then spent three full days 
skiing, accompanied — and I think we should listen to this 
carefully — accompanied by one official of the department and 
by his brother, and all that at taxpayers’ expense. Again, the 
hypocrisy of the arguments that we’re hearing. 
 
That same minister in 1981 . . . And, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to 
point out that in 1981, in estimates, tourism

advertising by the province of Saskatchewan, by the department, 
in those days tourism and renewable resources, the budget for 
advertising was $149,000. That’s how much that government, 
that administration, was prepared to spend to promote this 
province to the rest of the world. That’s how much they cared 
about bringing people to Saskatchewan — $149,000. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in that same year, that same minister, I believe 
Mr. Gross, travelled to Baden-Baden, West Germany, to visit the 
famous spas. It was a feasibility research trip on mineral spas. 
The excursion was on the pretext of learning enough to develop 
a spa at Manitou Beach. Taxpayer-paid trip to Baden-Baden, 
West Germany, to check out the feasibility of a mineral spa 
which they were thinking about, apparently at Manitou Beach. 
 
What did he do for Manitou Beach then, Mr. Chairman? Possibly 
this trip would have been worthwhile if anything had come out 
of it. The fact of the matter is, of course, that he did nothing in 
Manitou Beach. Nothing was done until our government in the 
last year provided encouragement and an incentive grant that this 
year has led the business men of the area to proceed with plans 
to rebuild that mineral pool at Manitou. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, clearly we see here two different sides of the 
opposition. One, it was standing in estimates attacking the 
attempts, and successful attempts by this department, to promote 
tourism, to attract people to Saskatchewan. And secondly, 
casting aspersions on the integrity of the outstanding staff that we 
have assembled in that department. 
 
And then we look back on their recent history, we find them 
prepared to spend the princely sum of $149,000 promoting the 
province. But they have no compunction about sending the 
minister and a couple of officials off to Baden-Baden, Germany, 
to pursue the feasibility. 
 
I would suggest that that money would have been better spent, if 
there had to be a trip to West Germany, to send one of those 
consultants that they’re always complaining about. And I 
wouldn’t even have minded as much if they’d picked a consultant 
who was supportive of their particular political leanings. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think it is incumbent that the reaction 
of those two groups, the tourism industry and some of the senior 
people in my staff, be made known to this committee. Because I 
think it’s important that we get on with the business of the 
committee and that we try to maintain that focus on what is really 
important, and that is the activities of the Department of Tourism 
in terms of promoting tourism, and the activities the Department 
of Small Business in promoting small business within the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I listened with 
some care and some interest to what the minister had to say in 
the last 15 minutes or more. I guess it was longer than that. I 
might add, Mr. Chairman, that the minister did not enlighten the 
committee one little bit about the issues which were discussed on 
Friday. 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1223 
 
 

If that’s the best performance that this minister can do, by 
dragging his officials in to try to defend his own political 
ineptitude and his government’s political bad judgement and his 
social bad judgement, then I suggest, Mr. chairman, the best the 
minister could do — a favour for the people of Saskatchewan — 
is convince his Premier so he could call that election so that the 
people of this province can actually pass judgement on whether 
a government which advertises in excess of $20 million a year — 
in excess of $20 million a year — is exercising good judgement 
in the expenditure of the public money. 
 
And there is no doubt about it, Mr. Chairman, that most of that 
advertising is political advertising. 
 
The minister referred to question period today. Well I want to 
refer to question period today; since you allowed him to do that 
I will be in order doing that. In question period today, Mr. 
Chairman, there was some discussion about advertising and 
about contracts, and I want to get into that, and I’m going to ask 
the minister some specific questions if he suggests that the 
policies of his government are the adequate policies and are 
judiciously spending the public’s money. 
 
Mr. Minister, the greatest problem that your officials have is 
administering a policy which is established at your cabinet table, 
which is a bad policy. Your officials don’t have any choice in 
that, so don’t try to defend yourself by bringing them into your 
defence the way you have today. I think you have done them a 
great disservice, as you have done to officials in any department 
of government by the kind of arguments which you have 
provided. It’s not them who are at stake and their integrity, Mr. 
Minister, it is the integrity of you, as a member of this Devine 
government and its integrity that’s at question here today, and 
has been at question for weeks and months into the future until 
you finally decide to call that election. 
 
(1515) 
 
We’re dealing in these estimates — Mr. Minister, I wish you 
would soon realize — with taxpayers’ money. People pay taxes, 
and since your government had been elected, I might say very, 
very high taxes, and the range of them has increased. They pay 
those taxes and they expect value for the dollar that they pay in 
taxes. Your government has not given them value for the dollar. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, the integrity of the government is what’s at 
stake here because when the public of Saskatchewan sees the 
patronage of this government that’s being handed out in such a 
way that is unrivalled and unequalled anywhere else in this 
country, the public ought to be concerned. Every time you walk 
into this legislature, into our offices, there is a new example of 
some blatant political patronage that is being handed out and 
dillied out by this government. 
 
Now the minister stands up and he’s surprised. He’s surprised 
that the public should be concerned about that. Well I’m not 
surprised. I mean we have just had a recent incident in Ottawa 
with a member of the Mulroney cabinet. I’m sure he was 
surprised, but he’s not surprised today. That’s the kind of thing, 
Mr. Chairman, that in the

parliamentary democracy which we think is so important there is 
no room for. There is no room for that. And the other reason, Mr. 
Chairman, as I have already said, and I will repeat once more, 
why the integrity of this government is at state is because of that 
in excess of $20 million advertising that’s been going on in the 
1985-86 fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member referred to the questioning of the 
opposition last week about the government’s advertising for 
tourism. But he never once addressed the issue that we concluded 
with on Friday and that is the issue of the contradiction of the 
policies of this government. On the one hand, Mr. Chairman, the 
minister says this government is going to spend some $3 million 
on advertising, to promote tourism, and then on the other hand, 
Mr. Chairman, his colleague, the Minister of Parks and 
Renewable Resources, goes and closes 75 parks and related 
facilities around the province. And that’s the conflict. And 
related facilities. You pick up the letter you sent not so long ago, 
Mr. Minister, and I think you will find that what you wrote is 
exactly what is said. Now I ask, Mr. Chairman: does it make 
sense that a government which promotes tourism on one hand 
and closes facilities which tourists will use on the other hand — 
does it seem to you, Mr. Chairman, that that’s a government that 
has a control of what it’s doing? 
 
And that was the issue that was being pursued last week, Mr. 
Chairman. The minister did not want to touch that one today 
because he knows it shows a complete and utter lack of 
co-ordinated government programming. Now the minister will 
stand up and he will say, oh, but it’s a new kind of tourist that’s 
coming in. Well, if there’s some new tourists coming in, Mr. 
Chairman, I would welcome that. I would be the first one to 
welcome that. And maybe there is. Maybe as they drive through 
Saskatchewan to go to Expo, which these fellows over there are 
promoting, they will stop and stay for a while, and I hope they 
do. But if they’re going to stop and stay for a while, those who 
come with their family, with their children, driving maybe with 
a camper . . . Why does this government close some of those 
small parks that they used to be able to stop in, have their lunch 
and go for a walk along the river or along the stream, maybe take 
out their fishing pole and cast it in the water and catch a fish? 
Why do they do that, Mr. Chairman? I don’t know that. And I’m 
sure that the minister doesn’t either. 
 
Now there is another component to tourism that this government 
has totally and utterly ignored, and that is the component of the 
Saskatchewan resident. Now I know countless families in my 
constituency, and I know countless families around the province, 
who like to take their vacation in Saskatchewan. They have done 
it; they continue to do it; they like the Saskatchewan outdoors. 
 
Now what this government has done with its policy, which the 
minister boasts about, is say, we don’t care about them. We’re 
not going to go out of our way to provide them with the kinds of 
services and accommodations that they are interested in. They 
may not be interested in the motel room. I hope we provide good 
motel accommodations because that’s good for the tourists who 
want to use them. But in doing that, Mr. Minister, in your efforts 
to do that, do not ignore the needs 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1224 
 
 

of the local family that goes for a camping trip, that goes for a 
weekend drive around a certain part of the province and likes to 
stop here and there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, the member from Regina North who is trying desperately 
to get re-elected in Regina South — he speaks from his seat. I 
submit if he had been sitting there, he’d have answered the 
questions more directly than what we’re getting answered here in 
the last few days. I have every confidence in that. It’s too bad that 
when the next election comes, and even in Regina South he’s not 
going to get re-elected, and he will never get the opportunity to 
do what he once did. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the minister made some reference to contracts. 
Well, I want to ask the minister about a contract because I think 
it highlights why we have been concerned and why we ask the 
questions. And we have an obligation to ask these questions. Mr. 
Minister, you made reference to question period. And you made 
reference to InfoCentre, and you said there were two proposals 
that were made. Well I ask you, Mr. Minister — and I know that 
that was under your other department, but I’m sure you have 
similar situations in your present department — why would you 
not, in such cases as InfoCentre, offer the work that’s done in 
advertising or the distribution or the printing of pamphlets and 
literature, put it out for tender rather than simply ask for proposal 
calls as you have done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think the fact of the 
question probably speaks volumes for the understanding of the 
member opposite about tourism. The comment that he made that 
the question of tourism and parks, which was the location of 
tourism under their administration, they have to be given some 
credit; they built enough unmanned, unserviced parking spots 
that they have in Saskatchewan, per capita, the highest level of 
any province in Canada in terms of those things. The member 
continues to mislead the House, of course, suggesting that 75 
parks have been closed. Seventy-five parking spaces have been 
closed, which is a considerably different comment than the one 
that the member erroneously indicated, and I believe he knew the 
difference. 
 
Mr. Chairman, to talk about some of the things that were 
mentioned. He discussed the question that it was my integrity that 
is in question. I don’t for a minute doubt that he probably does 
have a question about my integrity. The point that I was making 
in my initial comment was that members of the department are 
questioning why the members opposite would cast aspersions 
and direct questions about their integrity because they, in fact, 
know where the policies come from, know what they’re doing, 
what they’re attempting to accomplish, and they made it very 
clear what they thought. 
 
I’m not sure what I can say about the member opposite, the 
misleading information he presented in terms of parking spaces 
and parks. He talks about the promotion of the province and then, 
probably a close personal friend of the previous minister who 
took the trip to Baden-Baden, I think it demonstrates the 
hypocrisy and the arrogance that the people in the province are 
telling

me is so evident every time that member gets to his feet. 
 
However, Mr. Chairman, I think that it’s obvious from the 
comments made that the commercial value of tourism is still not 
understood, at least by that member; possibly some of his caucus 
are beginning to understand, but he relates it particularly to small, 
unmanned camping sites, of which we have many, and I would 
suggest in the judgement of the Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources we have more than enough of those to service the 
needs of our people. 
 
We are talking about tourism, its commercial implications and its 
tremendous impact on small business in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I went through the numbers. I’ll repeat them 
again. A billion dollar industry today, growing to $3 billion by 
the end of the decade; 32,000 people today employed directly or 
indirectly in the industry — and that number is growing every 
year by 2,000 to 3,000 people. And I think it’s that growth in 
difficult agricultural times, difficult economic times, that is so 
important. And I think those are the things that seem to be missed 
by the member opposite. And the only thing I could add, I 
suppose, about his comments, was that he conveniently forgot to 
apologize in any way to the staff members. So I have to assume 
that that will not be part of it. So maybe now we could get on 
with the particular estimates of this department and some of the 
programs that those moneys will be spent on. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’d love to be able 
to get on with the estimates, except once again, as is the case, the 
minister didn’t answer the question. He chose to make a speech. 
I asked him a specific question, and he stood there for the 
moments that he stood there and then tried to once again cover 
up the government’s misguided policies by avoiding to answer 
the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, I will grant you I maybe should not have used the 
words “parks.” the words: campgrounds and related services — 
that’s what the issue here is. And the Minister of Parks and 
Renewable Resources has indicated in his own handwriting, 
signed in his own letter, that there were 75 campgrounds or 
related services that had been closed. Now, Mr. Minister, I 
submit to you that the list of those facilities that have been closed 
includes campgrounds. They include, as you have indicated, 
parking places. Does that mean that you don’t think that they’re 
important? Surely the public wants to be able to stop somewhere 
along the way when there is a site of some interest and therefore 
needs parking places. They include a whole linkage of historic 
sites and heritage sites and so on. Now it seems to me that one of 
the things that the average tourist, many tourists, is interested in 
is sort of the heritage of any province. And yet what your 
colleague has done, or your government has done — all he does 
is act on behalf of your government, as you do — what he’s done 
is he’s closed many of those. And there is a lot of concern about 
that, and I’m bringing that to your attention. 
 
Now one of the things that you mentioned in your debate on 
Friday was that Saskatchewan had an excess of these facilities. 
In fact, you said they had more per capita than anywhere else in 
Canada. I agree, because over the years governments have made 
them a priority. I say to you that 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1225 
 
 

you should be proud of that, as should anybody else, and you 
should continue to keep that kind of a high ratio rather than 
adopting a policy of mediocrity, which is what, with your 
proposal to close many of these facilities, you’re doing. Instead 
of saying, yes, it’s good that we have this high per capita ratio 
because we want to serve the public; we have important places 
the public ought to see if they want to see; you’re saying, no, 
we’re going to close some of them because we’ve really got to 
catch up to the rest of Canada — going in reverse all the time. 
 
Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer this question. I asked you the 
question, that in the work that your department does and the 
contracts it gives out for advertising and printing and so on, why 
would you not, Mr. Minister, provide an equal opportunity to all 
the companies that provide that kind of work and offer the work 
from your department by tender rather than the proposal call 
system or whatever other system you do. That was my question; 
you didn’t answer it. Maybe you forgot after you finished making 
your comments. I ask it again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of comments 
very briefly. Once again the member would suggest that parking 
stalls and campgrounds are the same thing. I think he rally 
understands the difference in his own mind. If he’s going to talk 
about campsites, then the number 75 does not apply. And that is 
where the misleading of this House, of this committee, comes 
into play. And I think he should stand himself and make it very 
clear that he understands the difference between a campsite and 
a parking place. Maybe he doesn’t. 
 
(1530) 
 
I would indicate, very simply, that there were no historic 
campsites closed. This is completely misleading; that is not true. 
I would suggest as well that there was an increase, Mr. Chairman, 
that we announced the formation of new provincial parks in the 
recent budget. And to suggest that somehow there has been a 
lesser emphasis is simply incorrect. 
 
I believe the last part of the question, which was the same one 
that he offered before, is clearly a Supply and Services question. 
The information centres that he referred to clearly come under 
Supply and Services. I realize that it’s very, very difficult for the 
member to get Tourism, and Parks, and Supply and Services 
separated. But I would indicate once again that we have tourism 
in the Department of Small Business because tourism has a 
tremendous economic impact on small business, and our 
direction is to provide the services that government should be 
providing to promote this province for the benefit of small 
business. And I think that that is clearly the thrust. 
 
And once again I would be very willing to discuss information 
centres and the awarding of those types of things, as I have in 
question period, when we come to Supply and Services 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well obviously, Mr. Minister, you are 
saying . . . because on Friday last there was a letter read by my 
colleague from Athabasca from the of Doré Lake, who asked the 
government not to close one of

those campsites which indeed was a historic site, a heritage site. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s not an historic site. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well maybe in your mind it’s not, Mr. 
Minister, but in the minds of the local people who live up there 
and who know that there are people who travel, actually stop and 
look at the historic significance of it, it is a pretty important 
historic site. Now the members opposite may laugh . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Have you ever been there? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, indeed, I have, I want the member 
from Meadow Lake to know. I happen to have spent quite a bit 
of time in the North, and I have been there probably as much as 
you have, sir. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that you may say, ask the question under 
Supply and Services. And let me assure you that I will indeed ask 
questions under Supply and Services, as will other colleagues of 
mine, about your contracting procedures, and about the lack of 
tendering, and about the contracting to individuals only on the 
basis of whether they are strong contributors to the Conservative 
Party or not, and you can be assured of that. 
 
But let me tell you why I asked the question. And I ask it because 
I know, even in your department that we are now considering 
here today, there is work that’s let out. And I’m telling you, Mr. 
Minister, that I’m not saying it because only I am concerned. I 
have here a publication by the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business. Now the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business does regular surveys of the attitudes and 
the feelings of the people in the business community. And one of 
the things that I noted about your government’s policy which the 
business community, particularly small business, is concerned 
about, is fair access to government contracts, tenders, etc. 
 
And I’m reading out of the publication here. And the thing that I 
find particularly interesting is that in the footnote, Mr. Minister, 
it says, indicates, that the highest proportional concern west of 
the Atlantic provinces was expressed in Saskatchewan about fair 
access to government contracts and tenders. 
 
And what has been said? Here is what has been said. And I will 
even refer you to the page. It’s on page 23 of this report that we 
get regularly. This was the most recent survey taken in May of 
1985, and it showed an increase in the number of businesses that 
are concerned about this issue. Let me quote to you: 
 

Concern over fair access to government contracts was 
identified as a serious provincial problem by those who 
responded to this. Most importantly, fair access to 
government purchasing appears to be a somewhat unique 
concern to Saskatchewan with a much higher percentage of 
our total membership identifying this as a problem in this 
province compared to any other province in Canada west of 
the Maritimes. 

  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1226 
 
 

The problems appear to exist with all aspects of government 
purchasing, not just confined to one department, and 
includes the purchasing policies of Crown corporations. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, surely in your initial remarks when you so 
lightly glanced over this whole issue of contracting, there needs 
to be no stronger evidence than that that is provided by the 
business community who have said in no uncertain terms to your 
government that they are concerned about fair access to 
government contracts. That’s why we raise these questions in the 
House day after day, whether it’s in question period or in 
estimates, because it’s a legitimate concern, and it’s time that 
something was done to change it around. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of this evidence: why 
would you not provide tenders for the work that your department 
contracts instead of picking and choosing by a proposal system 
or whatever other system you may be using? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of comments. 
At least in that lengthy discourse the member has obviously 
ended his efforts to try to convince people that 75 parking stalls 
are 75 parks. And I think that’s certainly a step in the right 
direction. 
 
The member has quoted from a Federation of Independent 
Business survey. He has, I believe, for the most part, quoted 
accurately. The comments are not inconsistent with comments 
we have been getting from small-business men around this 
province since we came to government in 1982. I would suggest 
to him that while those studies did not take place prior to 1982, 
had they, he would have found that particular concern a great deal 
higher than it is today. 
 
That concern has led to several things. Possibly I could just 
expand on the concern a little bit. 
 
What business men would like, I think, is some type of 
preferential treatment in terms of tendering to government. We, 
as a government, have not been prepared to get into that element. 
We have, however, done a great deal to encourage the use of 
Saskatchewan-made products by government, Crowns, agencies, 
boards, and departments. 
 
I would think very quickly of the Sask Power “buy 
Saskatchewan” program, which has been extremely well 
received and I think has Sask Power’s amount of materials 
purchased in Saskatchewan raised by something in the area of 40 
to 50 per cent. and I think that program is being followed by other 
departments and by other Crowns as well. 
 
In our department we have instituted another service — a branch 
that was unknown previously — the marketing benefits branch. 
It runs the Saskatchewan Made program which, as most people 
are aware, works very closely with Saskatchewan businesses 
who are pursuing new market opportunities within the province. 
It conveys the government’s import replacement policy to the 
business community and to the public. And I think that is 
extremely important. It assembles information on

Saskatchewan suppliers and upcoming market opportunities and 
works with the farmers’ market program and, of course, the 
Saskatchewan Made program which I referred to earlier. 
 
During 1985-86 the branch was instrumental in arranging 
contracts worth $42,850,000 and has assisted clients to bid on 
contracts worth many times that amount. 
 
So I think that the concern that the member has identified is one 
we’re aware of; it’s one that has been in place for a long time; 
it’s one that the Crown corporations are working hard on; it’s one 
that this department has made some significant strides in through 
the Saskatchewan marketing benefits branch. 
 
Of course my colleague, the Minister of Economic 
Development’s department, has the major projects branch within 
his portfolio which is doing the same thing on the many larger 
projects, and of course those larger projects have been discussed 
at some length in these estimates. And we have had that rather 
strange situation of the member from Quill Lakes, in the House, 
suggesting that many of these projects should not be continued 
with. I think particularly of the paper plant, while his leader was 
in Prince Albert last Monday, suggesting that it’s a great project 
and we would certainly carry on with it. And it’s that confusion 
of policy, I think, that is causing many people in the province to 
wonder just exactly where the party opposite is coming from. 
 
Burt I suppose the bottom line is we recognize the concern; we 
are working hard to try to correct it. Obviously there’s a lot more 
work to do, and we will continue through this year and through 
the next four, eight years to continue to try to improve 
Saskatchewan content wherever possible, whether it be a 
government department, a Crown corporation, or some other 
element of government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to direct a 
question or two to the minister. I heard him this morning indicate 
that on Friday last members of our caucus were casting 
aspersions, I think was his phrase, on the senior officers of the 
department. I took the opportunity during one of the more 
lengthy interventions by the minister to review the Hansard for 
last Friday, and I could find no words which would bear that 
interpretation — none whatever. And I would like the minister to 
point out to me what was said last Friday, as recorded in the 
Hansard, which would possibly bear the interpretation that he 
has given as an aspersion on senior staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I will direct you to page 1210. One 
that bothered some staff members particularly was a comment by 
the member from Shaunavon, your desk-mate, half-way down 
the page, and I’ll indicate that he said: 
 

. . . that the public cannot believe, when they look in the 
Public Accounts and see the spending that was done in this 
department and others on travelling around the world, on 
hotels, on expenses, on liquor — yes, believe it or not, on 
liquor (all at taxpayers’ expense). 

  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1227 
 
 

That, for example, that’s just one that I grabbed very quickly. It 
was something that people indicated to me cast some aspersions 
on their credibility as professional civil servants. 
 
And yes, we do send people to the United States. I indicated that 
in my remarks. Members of this department attend travel shows 
in the U.S. They take private-sector people with them. As I 
indicated, they spend 12 hours a day on the floor of those shows 
promoting this province in a way that this province has never 
been promoted in the past. 
 
They spend a lot of time with media, and I used a specific 
example of the direct results of that in the half-page article in The 
Toronto Star that came directly from our efforts. They spend a 
lot of time with community groups, students sometimes, showing 
films on Saskatchewan, answering questions about 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And to have the member stand in his place, as it says here, and I 
think I’m quoting accurately: “travelling around the world,” 
money spent on hotels — I haven’t quoted accurately there 
obviously — but “on hotels, on expenses, on liquor.” Those types 
of things would indicate that members of our department are 
travelling to San Francisco or Houston or wherever to attend a 
party, and I think that is clearly something that is . . . it bothers 
me. 
 
I find that despicable, that reference, because these are 
professional, hard-working people, accompanied at all times by 
members of the private sector — and that is another new thrust, 
something that had never been done in the past — and I simply 
take some exception. And I don’t know; if I had time I could try 
and find more. But I think that one clearly indicates what was 
bothering some of the professional members of my staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, that is exactly the sort of 
thing to which I take exception. The member was very, very 
clearly referring to the style of the government, on this 
department and others. It wasn’t directed solely to that 
department, but that department and others — and others — so it 
was a . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, do I have the floor, or does the minister wish to 
speak? I will sit down if he wishes to speak. If I have the floor, I 
will speak. Would you kindly indicate who has the floor? Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Very, very clearly, the reference is to a style of government. 
There isn’t a suggestion that the person who is spending the 
money is necessarily a public servant. It could be a minister; it 
could be some of those members of the private sector that we’ve 
heard about; it could be any one of the junkets which your 
government has sponsored and on which the entertainment, as I 
think you would agree, has been relatively lavish. 
 
I propose to go on to some other points, but I’ll let you make a 
reply to this point, if you wish to do so, before I go on to the 
others, so we can keep the discussion in focus. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think I’m reading this 
accurately. I refer to the third paragraph, first

column, on that page, and I read: 
 

. . . that the public cannot believe, when they look in the 
Public Accounts and see the spending that was (and the next 
four words are) done in this department . . . 

 
That says nothing — done in this department. I submitted the 
notes on my travelling. I’ve been to one conference in Banff. This 
is clearly — clearly — an aspersion on the purposes of our 
advertising campaigns, of our trips into the United States to key 
markets, and I think that I take exception to it, and I know the 
members of my staff do. They are hard-working, professional 
people who spend a great deal of time, done in this department. 
 
(1545) 
 
I don’t know how you, sir — and I know I’m not allowed to say 
this but I’m going to say it anyway — who was absent, can sit 
there and tell me what the member meant when I sat here and 
listened to him. There was no doubt who he was talking about. 
And they sat is those galleries and behind me and came and said 
they took exception to it. In fact, they would like an apology from 
the member for Shaunavon. I don’t want to get carried away with 
it, but I think it’s a legitimate concern on their part, and it’s 
certain legitimate on mine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I think 
the minister has made his case. He has to stop in the middle of 
the sentence; he didn’t dare go on, because if he had he would 
have very, very clearly given a different meaning to the sentence. 
And others, other departments. It was obviously a comment 
about the whole style of this government, and quite rightly so — 
and quite rightly so. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Chairman, I take the view that I can 
understand the English language in print as well as verbally . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Make your point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I have made my point. I read the stuff in 
print. I know what it means, whether I’d heard it or not. The 
language is clear, and it makes itself very, very clear. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I will shake my book at the member for 
Moosomin, just so that he will have a reason for speaking in this 
House; he so rarely finds any other occasion. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I will ask a question of you, and I want to ask 
some questions about destination resorts. I have some questions 
on destination resorts, and I ask you, sir, whether there is any 
proposal of the department for a destination resort at Candle 
Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, one brief comment 
before I leave the little debate we had on, you know, those 
keywords. 
 
If the member is suggesting that the member from Shaunavon 
made this a very reasonable accusation by including all other 
departments of government, I take considerable exception to that, 
too. And I can tell 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1228 
 
 

him from experience, that the members of the Department of 
Energy and Mines do not travel around . . . and that type of thing. 
And I would imagine all my colleagues would like to stand up 
. . . And because the member from Shaunavon has slandered, not 
only my department but many others, I find that a very weak 
defence. 
 
In terms of destination resorts at Candle Lake. We have had a 
number of proposals before us at various times. My information 
is that we have nothing current in terms of a proposal for a 
four-season destination or any other type at Candle Lake at this 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, can 
you tell me what is the status of the proposal which was around 
at La Ronge for a major resort proposal involving cabins, hotel 
and the like? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Very briefly . . . well, maybe not so 
briefly; in detail I suppose would be a better term. The 
government has given approval in principle for the development 
of the $7.1 million wilderness destination resort at McGibbon 
bay on Lac La Ronge. 
 
Secondly, the concern raised at a series of public meetings held 
on the development . . . or held regarding the development are 
reflected in this conditional approval. The destination resort will 
create a projected 167 person-years of employment, and it will 
feature 58 hotel rooms and 42 condominium style units, with a 
range, full outdoor and indoor recreational facilities, and meeting 
spaces. 
 
The other note that I would include, the developer will be seeking 
some financial assistance under the tourism sub-agreement. Such 
assistance would be provided by the federal government. That 
proposal is currently being evaluated by the federal government. 
We anticipate a decision on the funding element of it very 
shortly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, can you tell me what the 
position is at McPhee Lake? Can you tell me whether that project 
is going forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well I should correct the last comment 
on my previous one on the destination resort site at Lac La 
Ronge. The federal government have, in fact, approved the 
funding under the sub-agreement, so that is certainly one large 
step closer. 
 
As far as McPhee Lake is concerned, and I believe . . . I assume 
the member is probably aware the matter is under litigation at this 
time. I don’t think there are any proposals to carry on, so in the 
resort development side of it I don’t think there’s anything in the 
works at this time. And since it’s under litigation, it would be 
improper to comment on that proposal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is it 
true that you are still being sued for in excess of $9 million for 
the activities of the department at McPhee Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well I think it’s safe to say that the 
matter is under litigation. We did not initiate it, so I

think that’s all I’d like to say at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do you 
deny that the Government of Saskatchewan has been sued for in 
excess of $9 million for the activities of your department at 
McPhee Lake and that this lawsuit is still pending? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well I don’t deny that at all. I think 
that’s public. I would correct, however, that it is not against the 
activities of our department specifically; it’s a broader question 
than that. But I think to comment further . . . And I don’t have 
the legal background of the member opposite, but I don’t believe 
it would be proper to go into details on the anticipated outcome 
or the activities to date as far as that litigation is concerned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 
not asking you to speculate on the outcome or . . . I’m asking you 
to state the fact: is there an outstanding claim launched by 
Northern Pines Enterprises Ltd. against the Government of 
Saskatchewan? And does it rest upon dealings between the 
plaintiff and the Department of Tourism and Small Business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The answer to the first question would 
be yes, and the answer to the second question, no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, we then have it clear that 
the government is being sued for the $9 million. 
 
I turn now, Mr. Chairman, to the Christopher and Emma lakes. 
Is there any proposal outstanding with respect to Christopher and 
Emma lakes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The answer, Mr. Chairman, is yes, 
there is a proposal before us on that. Several of the regulatory 
steps have been gone through, and that project is going through 
the normal processes that development proposals go through. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, who is the 
applicant in this case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the proponents are 
Christopher Land Company. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, what 
is the present state of that proposal as far as the department is 
concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I suppose the things that have 
happened to that, Mr. Speaker, an engineering study for sewer 
and water systems has been completed. Support for the project 
and the sewer and water system continues to come from the 
village. The rural municipality has approved an amended 
development plan which will permit the appropriate zoning when 
a firm proposal comes forward. So I think that on the municipal 
level they have approval. On the engineering side they are well 
along. 
 
I believe the question was the position of this proposal. As far as 
our department is concerned, I think it’s safe to say that our 
department is in support of this proposal at Christopher Lake. 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1229 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is the 
minister aware of the position of the R.M. of Lakeland with 
respect to this resort; are they opposing it, supporting it, or 
neutral with respect to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, my indications are that 
the rural municipality has approved an amended development 
plan and are, in fact, supporting this project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
returning to La Ronge, would you give us a status report on La 
Ronge, indicating what additional approvals are necessary 
governmental approvals are necessary, if any, and what you see 
as the next hurdle to be overcome if that project is to proceed? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the proposals, I 
suppose, the developmental hoops, for the most part, have been 
gone through. I think that the only remaining job to do is to 
finalize the financing for the project. I indicated in an earlier 
answer that the federal government has approved the funding 
under the tourism sub-agreement. So that clearly is a start. The 
rest of it, of course, remains with the developer. And once that is 
in place I would assume the project would go ahead. But the 
regulatory aspect of the proposal, for the most part, has been gone 
through, and the proposal has cleared those regulations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, to the 
knowledge of the department, and with respect to . . . I’ll ask first 
about La Ronge: is it proposed that the Government of 
Saskatchewan or any agency of the Government of 
Saskatchewan provide financing for the project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, under the tourism 
subagreement the federal government, as I indicated, has, with 
some conditions based on other financing coming into position, 
have approved financing. There’s no . . . it’s not provincial 
money, but we are involved in those discussions and approval 
processes. I suppose the only other possibility of provincial 
funding, and it’s a bit of an, I suppose, indirect — I’ll use that 
word — would be if venture capital moneys were invested in it. 
Obviously the tax benefit that the investors in the corporation 
receive could be construed to be provincial money, but that 
would be the extent of provincial involvement in that project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I ask 
the same question with respect to the proposed Christopher Lake 
project. To the knowledge of the department, is it proposed that 
any provincial government money, from the province or any of 
its agencies, be used in the construction of that project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — At this time, Mr. Chairman, we’re not 
aware . . . or there is no request in front of the department for 
funding for that project. Again, however, venture capital could 
be a funding mechanism that he might choose to use, and that 
indirect benefit could

apply. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
concerns I’d like to express, as well as a few questions I’d like to 
ask of the Minister of Tourism and Small Business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To start off with, I want to dispute the open for big business 
philosophy of this government. They have a policy, Mr. Speaker, 
that does not jibe with the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
There is high unemployment in northern Saskatchewan, and 
many of our communities in the North have become very isolated 
with this government. 
 
I look in front of me at a northern paper that says in huge form, 
“Uranium City’s survivors.” There’s only one person in this 
picture, Mr. Minister. And then another paper states that, “In 
Uranium City, if you listen very carefully, all you can hear is the 
silence.” A third page over here says, “Lonely priest devotes life 
to a tiny flock.” And the again another headline, Mr. Minister: 
“Town promoter convinced that the only way is up. They have 
hit rock-bottom. So says Paul Bogie.” 
 
And he’s a very influential, very respected man in northern 
Saskatchewan who has had a tremendous amount of dreams to 
try to bring some social and economic prosperity up North. 
 
With these type of headlines, Mr. Minister, and the fact that the 
unemployment rate in northern Saskatchewan is as high and 
going extremely into dangerous proportions . . . We heard just a 
few days ago mention of a 99 per cent unemployment rate in 
northern Saskatchewan. And I concur with that figure, Mr. 
Minister. You boast about our economic development program, 
and I look at the documentation of your estimates, Mr. Minister, 
I will give you comparative figures, Mr. Minister. 
 
How can we believe you, Mr. Minister? When I look at the Public 
Accounts for 1984-85 and I see before me what you have 
earmarked for your department in terms of expenditures for that 
particular year, you have cut back on spending for employment 
and development, cut back on the northern economic 
development fund, and you have also cut back on the grants for 
northern economic development — three areas, Mr. Minister 
These are statistics that come from your departments. These are 
estimates that we’re reviewing today and in the course of the past 
few days. 
 
The figures here state that . . . And I look at the actual 
expenditures for 1984-85, and I find, Mr. Minister, that your 
government had earmarked $3.1 million for the northern 
economic development program. But in actuality, Mr. Minister, 
all you spent was 1.4. That’s less than 50 per cent. You have only 
actually spent $1.4 million in that department to help alleviate 
the high unemployment and the high welfare dependency rates in 
northern Saskatchewan. What happened to the other $1.6 
million? What actually happened to that money? 
 
And then I go further on and I see grants for northern economic 
development. And that figure, you earmarked 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1230 
 
 

$1 million fund, but you actually spent only $5,357 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . If the member for Moosomin wants to enter the 
debate, you can get off your seat and enter the debate now. I’ll 
give you that opportunity. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Yew: — I didn’t ask for a response from the minister yet, 
Mr. Speaker. I asked the member . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member for Cumberland has the floor. 
Would you proceed. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When I look 
at these stats, Mr. Minister, I look at the actual expenditures. 
When you earmarked $1 million and you actually spent only 
$5,357.66, that tells me that you have neglected and abandoned 
and ignored the social and economic needs of people living north 
of Prince Albert, north of Meadow Lake, and north of Nipawin 
and Carrot River — your government . . . These messages and 
these statistics and the papers that I refer to tell me today that you 
have deliberately neglected the needs of the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You cannot dispute the figures, Mr. Minister. I have them in front 
of me. The three items that I referred to are the Employment 
Development Agency . . . That’s another item that I referred to 
but didn’t give you the stats. You earmarked $1.4 million for that 
department, but you only actually spent $56,296.26. Now does 
that make sense, Mr. Minister, with all the rhetoric that we’ve 
been hearing here in this House about open for big business? 
 
I ask the minister: does he actually believe that the capitalist 
system works for the people in northern Saskatchewan? Does it 
work? Has it helped alleviate the high unemployment, the high 
welfare dependency rates, and the high incarceration of our 
native people in provincial jails and correctional centres in this 
province? I want you to answer that question, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I find it somewhat 
unfortunate. It’s probably unavoidable, but last week I responded 
to all those questions to his colleague, the member from 
Athabasca, who asked them in a slightly less confrontational 
term, if I could use that. The simple answer is that the Public 
Accounts that you’re using are two years old, which gives me a 
little concern since we are doing this year’s estimates. The fact 
of the matter is, of course, that those reductions are a result of the 
realignment of the services offered to northern Saskatchewan, the 
fact that those moneys went into other departments, and that 
northern Saskatchewan was brought into Saskatchewan. And 
there is an important point, a very important point on the 
economic side, and I’ll just make it very quickly. 
 
Since the realignment of northern Saskatchewan, all of the 
business programs in southern Saskatchewan are now available 
for the North. In other words, things, like venture capital, interest 
rate protection, all those programs . . . in fact our consulting 
services, our business resource centres, all those things are . . . 
Northern Saskatchewan has become part of Saskatchewan, and I 
think in this particular area that has been extremely important.

And I will, Mr. Chairman, take the time to do a very brief 
comparison on the northern revolving fund which is, I’m sure the 
member is very aware of, on its performance under this 
administration and under the previous one. I think it’s useful, Mr. 
Chairman, to compare the performance of the northern revolving 
loan fund under the NDP administration with that that has taken 
place since the change of government in 1982. 
 
When you make that comparison, you can readily see how 
dramatic the turnaround has really been. Under the old system — 
this is important, and I know the member from Quill Lakes wants 
to hear this — under the old system, loan approvals were subject 
to all sorts of political and special interest group pressures. And 
several times I know that the member who asked this question 
has questioned my colleagues in their responsibility for northern 
Saskatchewan about the various interest groups in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s clear that political pressure was used. People had little 
business experience, and I know that there has been many times 
in this House — I won’t go into them — of various pool rooms 
and other things that were begun in northern Saskatchewan. 
People with little business experience were getting involved in 
the loan approval process. And the minister — this is important 
— the minister was approving all loans over $25,000. As a 
consequence, loans were made which never should have been 
granted. The losers, in strict financial terms, were the taxpayers 
of the province. Losers, in financial and emotional and human 
terms, were the business men and business women who received 
the loans who obviously were not in a position to benefit from 
them in a positive way. 
 
(1615) 
 
In 1982, the last year of the NDP administration, the total loan 
portfolio consisted of 1,755 loans worth nearly $8.3 million. I 
think the member would want to take that number down — 8.3 
million. Mr. Chairman, 36 per cent of those loans with a dollar 
value of $2.9 million were in arrears in 1982. By contrast, our 
total portfolio — and this is important, Mr. Chairman — our total 
portfolio in 1986 consists of 2,010 loans as compared to their 
1,755. Those loans are worth over $12 million as compared to 
their 8.3 million. Three per cent of those loans — 3 per cent — 
amounting to slightly over $121,000 are in arrears today. That 3 
per cent is, I must note, a better figure than those generally 
reported by banks and credit unions. 
 
So I think that when you look at some other figures, our 
allowance for doubtful accounts was $183,567 in ’84-85 and 
$34,000 for ’85-86; obviously that’s still a projected number. The 
allowance for doubtful accounts in 1981-82 — the allowance for 
doubtful accounts, the last year of the NDP administration — was 
$1,710,000.44. Our allowance is, well, obviously less than 6 per 
cent of that, I would say. We continue to pay for those loans that 
were made under the NDP, and we estimate that by the end of the 
next fiscal year we will have had to write off over 660 loans for 
over $5 million. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we won’t see such write-offs on the loans 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1231 
 
 

approved since we took office. For one thing, we’ve taken the 
loan approval process out of the political arena. The approval 
process is no longer in the political arena. Our district loans 
committee has proportional public and private sector 
representation, and people on it have mandatory business 
experience. Senior civil servants, not the minister — and that is 
a very significant difference — senior civil servants, not the 
minister, make the final decisions on loans. All lending decisions 
are based on solid business plans. 
 
As I previously indicated, we had record loan approvals under 
this better-manned fund. The loan program as of March had 
reported $163,000 profit, and we’re projecting a profit of $60,000 
at the end of last fiscal year. In his reports to the legislature in ’84 
and ’85, the Provincial Auditor gave the department full marks 
for the management of the fund, and he certainly didn’t do that 
for the years that preceded. 
 
The bottom line of all this is a point that I made earlier. We now 
have an effective instrument for northern development in the 
fund. The business-like approach taken with respect to lending 
has made, and will continue to make, significant contribution to 
a stable and diversified northern business community and 
economy. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, that’s not to indicate for one minute that this 
administration is in any way satisfied with the levels of 
unemployment that exist in northern Saskatchewan. That’s 
simply not the truth. 
 
I think of several things: the Weyerhaeuser project in Prince 
Albert is in a position to have an impact on northern employment. 
The paper plant will employ many people both in the bush and at 
the plant. When you see the activities that have taken place that 
could never have taken place under the previous administration 
because of the back-in provisions that SMDC had, for instance 
. . . The gold activity in northern Saskatchewan is already — and 
I believe that’s primarily in the member’s seat — beginning to 
have some significant impact and will have growing impact over 
the years. 
 
Now that is but two examples, and when you compare that to the 
policies of the NDP which would lead to the closure of the 
uranium mines, for instance, the largest employer in northern 
Saskatchewan, I have some trouble accepting the sincerity of the 
member opposite when he stands in his place and questions. 
 
But I want to emphasize very clearly that unemployment in 
northern Saskatchewan is a major concern; it is one that we will 
continue to try to address in a reasonable, rational manner. I think 
what has happened with the northern revolving fund indicates 
some strides in that area. I think the development of the 
Weyerhaeuser paper project, the gold activity, a number of other 
things that are happening in northern Saskatchewan . . .Wild rice. 
The wide rice processing plant, Mr. Chairman, comes to mind; 
has had significant impact and put many people to work. 
 
And I will only mention on more, but we’ve had a lot of 
discussion in this estimates about the expenditures of this 
particular department on tourism advertising in the United States. 
and the effects that that advertising has had

on the outfitters’ business, which I’m sure the member opposite 
is as well aware as I am, would indicate that we are in fact 
working hard to make things happen. And I think all I can do is 
commit to the member opposite that we will continue to work 
very hard to see northern Saskatchewan grow in concert with the 
rest of the province. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m glad that the 
minister concurred with me and with members on this side of the 
House with regards to the high unemployment rates that are 
prevalent in northern Saskatchewan. He concurred with me and 
the members on this side of the House that those figures are 
extremely high, and that they certainly coincide with some of the 
arguments that I have made in this House, and the fact that your 
government is not dealing with the issues that confront people in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
You have also concurred that you have underspent moneys 
allotted for the northern area. The Employment Development 
Agency has been underspent; I gave you the figures. The 
northern economic development fund has been underspent, and 
grants for northern economic development have not been spent 
appropriately, as was called for by this legislature. Those are the 
very things that you concurred with, Mr. Minister, in the 
presentation or the response that I got from you. 
 
You keep referring to the northern revolving fund. Fine. I’ll get 
into details later. But I want to ask at this point in time, Mr. 
Minister: what major developments are you referring you? Let’s 
get an outline, a detailed outline of what major developments 
you’re referring to. Give me the specifics, give me what kind of 
public involvement, participation, and jobs have been provided 
for the people in northern Saskatchewan. I want to know how 
your government has committed itself to tackling some of the 
very dire social and economic problems confronting the 44 
northern communities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, very quickly, the 
member is definitely misleading the House when he talks that I 
did not explain the underexpenditures in those columns in the 
two-year-old Public Accounts. I explained those very clearly, that 
they have to do with the realignment. And I would suggest that 
if he’s not listening the first time, I will say it again. If he didn’t 
get either of those, he could check Hansard when I explained that 
in some detail to his colleague. 
 
He talks about the initiatives of the department in northern 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, I’ll have to apologize because this 
will take some time. But he wants details; I will go through them. 
I’ll send him one that he can be looking at. 
 
Recently department officials returned from Rendezvous 
Canada, which is the most prestigious tourist conference held in 
Canada. We at that prepared a special catalogue for use at the 
convention. People at that travel show, that tourism centre, were 
indicating that this publication is as good an example of private 
and public sector co-operation and working together as it’s 
possible to find in the tourism industry. And the majority — the 
majority — of this information applies directly to northern 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1232 
 
 

Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll just send that over. I might . . . You can keep it, if you’d like, 
send it back. But you can review that, because it does indicate 
one of the major elements we’ve gotten into. 
 
Department program involvements in northern Saskatchewan 
Community economic development program. Community 
economic development program. All right. Together with the 
community economic development branch, we have jointly 
initiated this program with La Ronge, Air Ronge, and the La 
Ronge Indian band in November of 1984. 
 
A local economic development committee has been formed and 
participated in January 1985 in the Saskatoon workshop on 
community economic development. Committee has now 
completed an inventory of the committee’s resource and 
development ideas. A sustained attempt to initiate development 
councils on the west and the east side of northern Saskatchewan 
are under way. And initial development is under way also in 
Creighton and Buffalo Narrows. So that’s in the community 
economic development program. A specific thrust that has — a 
number, in fact — that have been taken in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The management assistance program. Again I emphasize that 
these are programs that were previously, for the most part, 
available to southern Saskatchewan. Interest in and commitment 
to the program by La Ronge and area businesses has been high 
with all 20 available slots filled by the October 1984 kick-off 
date. 
 
The program was successfully completed January 11th, ’85, with 
businesses reporting high satisfaction levels regarding outputs 
and costs; continued interest in the program with potential 
interest for east side management assistance program this fall. 
 
I might indicate the management assistance program has been 
discussed in this House. That’s the program where we bring 
private sector consultants, and they go to the community; the 
chambers of commerce in that area or the local business groups 
sign up the participants, and we are experiencing considerable 
increases in management skills in small business as well as 
developing a group of private sector consultants who can deal 
with small business. And that is something that was never in 
place in this province before, and in fact again we have had some 
discussions about Associated Business Consultants. They have 
been one of several groups who have undertaken one of these 
programs. 
 
In the venture capital program we have field offices continuing 
to promote an awareness of the program amongst clients 
considering northern economic development ventures. and we 
talks about a couple with the member from Regina Elphinstone 
just a few minutes ago, where some destination resorts in 
northern Saskatchewan were in fact considering using venture 
capital. We have had only one inquiry for further details received 
to date, and generally a lack of investment capital exists in 
northern Saskatchewan, so this could be one area where we could 
help. 
 
The revolving fund I’ve gone through. I don’t know if you

want me to go through in detail the numbers of loans and the 
millions of dollars and the strong position that that fund is in. I 
indicated a few moments ago the difference between the northern 
revolving fund under the NDP administration and this 
administration where we have taken the political involvement 
out. The minister no longer gets involved in the decision making, 
but an independent group make the decisions and the senior staff 
have the final approval. 
 
In the Special ARDA, we have a steady increase in numbers of 
proposals developed that are completed, and projects 
implemented since October ’84, due in large part to advisory and 
assistance efforts of our field staff who do a great deal of 
outstanding work. 
 
The northern economic development subagreement, both DRIE 
(Department of Regional Industrial Expansion) and other 
provincial officials have reacted positively to the range and scale 
of the department’s suggestions as to funding initiatives. 
 
Northern development projects, and I’ll be a little briefer here — 
the wild rice industry, tremendous increases in the economic 
activity involved in the wild rice industry. University SRC — the 
University of Saskatchewan have been involved — we’re seeing 
considerable increases there. 
 
Agricultural industry: five contracts totalling approximately 
$40,000 have been let in support of production of northern 
agricultural industry proposals. A fish hatchery development at 
La Ronge; assessing northern Saskatchewan crayfish harvest 
potential for export, something that has been looked at. And 
we’re actively supporting the formation of the Saskatchewan 
agriculture association with other members of the research 
community — the preparation of a Saskatchewan agriculture 
association industry sectorial study. So things going on there. 
 
New resource-based business development opportunities. Things 
happening with mushrooms. Gold exploration. I talked about 
tourism development. And we can go through the list. But I won’t 
read the entire thing into the record. 
 
I think, safe to say, that the amount of time that I’ve been on my 
feet and the amount of information I’ve provided with suggest 
that the department and the government are, in fact, spending a 
considerable amount of time and effort in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I will very quickly indicate some numbers which the member 
may find interesting: new business starts, expansions or 
modernizations in the fiscal year ’85-86. I’ll give you the 
numbers overall; I can give you specific details if you want. But 
in the central region there have been 34 projects with a dollar 
value of $5.602 million, which have created 132 jobs. In the west 
side region there have been 31 projects with a total of $3.391 
million, nearly 100 jobs there. On the east side region, 18 projects 
— I’m not sure why the east side seems to be lagging a little bit 
— 18 projects, $1.147 million and about 50 jobs. The totals then 
— 83 projects, $10.14 million invested, and somewhere in 
around 280 jobs have been created in 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1233 
 
 

those projects. 
 
I won’t go into detail but I hope that assures the member that this 
department, as with many others in government, are spending a 
considerable amount of time in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I apologize for the length of the answer, but it was 
a rather general question and there was certainly a lot of material 
to cover. I hope it answers the question that the member put 
forward. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask the minister, 
in more detail, to provide me with the information that he has 
outlined in general form. I caught some of the information but 
not in detailed writing and I’d like to have the opportunity to look 
at those figures and check those projects out. He’s mentioned a 
number of new business starts have been initiated in the North. 
And I certainly would like to find out for myself where those 
specific projects are that he’s referring to, as I see very little 
evidence and substance in northern Saskatchewan when I’m 
travelling in my constituency, that’s for sure, Mr. Minister, and I 
want to get more detailed information on those projects. 
 
Prior to that I was asking you, Mr. Minister, what major 
developments has your government undertaken in the past year 
in northern Saskatchewan. And I wanted to know, as well, aside 
from those major developments — not the new business starts 
that you’re referring to here — but major developments, I want 
to know, along with the question, the number of Northerners 
employed in those major projects and a breakdown of how many 
native Northerners are there in those projects. 
 
Finally, Mr. Minister, my fourth question to you — and I want 
you to answer this one as well. The estimates before us pertain to 
your department, Tourism and Small Business. I want to know 
specifically, Mr. Minister, how many people work under your 
department. And I would like to find out in proportion how many 
native Northerners you have employed under your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll start with what I’ve 
already answered. I think I’ve been over in detail some of the 
major projects. I read many into the record that are under way in 
northern Saskatchewan. I won’t repeat that. 
 
I could repeat the number of business starts, expansions, or 
modernizations that I indicated: however, I think I’ll leave it for 
the member to get that out of Hansard when it comes out 
tomorrow. It clearly indicates the number of projects, the number 
of dollars, and the numbers of jobs. 
 
For his information, I then have in this informational sheet the 
names of all those projects. I’m not prepared to share them with 
him in this forum. However if he would like to come to the 
department, sit down and visit, we will show him. Obviously 
these are commercial ventures. People may not be particularly 
pleased with having them put forward in this forum. I think the 
behaviour of the members opposite in question period today and 
any

number of other incidents, you can understand that. But I’m 
prepared to share them with you. If you would like to come and 
discuss them, we will certainly indicate to them. But I don’t think 
I want to make all the number of commercial projects public. 
 
In terms of the staff in our department, the blue book clearly 
indicates, I think as you can tell, that we have 146 people in the 
department for this year, plus 16 people who operate the 
revolving fund. So I guess that’s 162 with my rather quick math, 
but I think that’s correct. 
 
In terms of the people in northern Saskatchewan, I’ll give you 
these numbers. You’ll have to keep track of them. In La Ronge 
we have eight consultants and one secretary; Buffalo Narrows, 
four consultants, one secretary; Creighton, two consultants and a 
secretary. The member asked, I believe . . . plus the 16 in the 
revolving fund to work in northern Saskatchewan. So we have a 
significant representation of our personnel in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If I understood the member’s question, difficult as it was to hear, 
I think it was the proportion of native Northerners in those jobs. 
I obviously don’t have that type of information. I will indicate 
that those consultants’ positions in northern Saskatchewan, we 
looked for northern people to fill them. We want that northern 
experience. That’s obviously a benefit to the department, a 
benefit to the people who they deal with. In terms of how many 
are native Northerner though, I don’t have that. We tend to treat 
all our people on an equal basis. And again, if you’d like to come 
and visit with myself or the deputy, we can take the time to go 
through that and look that up. But I don’t have that information 
with us. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I conclude, Mr. Minister, 
seeing as how you will not disclose the information in this House, 
I can only concur that you don’t want the public out there, the 
people of this province and the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
to know what figures you have, Mr. Minister. This forum, the 
Assembly here is the only instrument that people, the general 
public of Saskatchewan can learn and know the policies of the 
government on that side of the House, the policies of the 
government of the day. The progress and the performance of this 
government, as I far as I can conclude, Mr. Minister, it’s been a 
disaster. It’s been a disaster after disaster after arrogancy. It’s 
been a complete . . . Your philosophy of being open for big 
business has been a complete disaster for the people of this 
province. 
 
I want to know those figures, Mr. Minister. I want them disclosed 
in this Assembly. I don’t want to go meeting with you behind 
closed doors. That is not my policy. That is the policy of the 
government on that side of the House. I want to know those 
figures, and I want those figures here tonight, today if possible. 
 
We’re not out to witch-hunt. We’re out to try and get the 
information from the government of the day so that the people of 
this province can judge for themselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I assume that the 
member opposite is discussing the detailed list of projects that 
make up those numbers that I gave him earlier. If that 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1234 
 
 

is the case, then I accuse the member of a little political 
grandstanding again. 
 
People who come to government to do business, who get 
involved in something like the northern revolving fund, do not 
get involved on the assumption that that is going to be totally 
public knowledge. All right? We respond and I have given you 
exact numbers in terms of job creation, in terms of dollars 
invested, and in terms of projects. And I’m fully prepared at any 
time to do that. I will even, if you are sincere, sir, and I have 
already, give you an offer to come and sit down, and I will let 
you have a look at this. My deputy or our officials are prepared 
to invite you to the department to look at it, but we’re not 
prepared to make it totally public, and I don’t think that’s 
unreasonable. 
 
I know people who come to the government for help don’t expect 
their case to be bandied about, and that’s one of the concerns that 
has been expressed to me over the weekend by people in the 
tourism industry. The complete lack of understanding, and I 
realize that you were not involved in it, and possibly being from 
northern Saskatchewan you have a greater understanding of what 
those tourism ads are doing in Saskatchewan than your 
colleagues. But the fact is that people indicated some concern 
that they wanted to work with government to see progress, to see 
tourism develop to the type of industry that it had the potential to 
become. And the type of questions and the slanderous comments 
made by the opposition bothered them a great deal. 
 
And I certainly am not going to provide all the names and all the 
projects. I’ve given you the numbers. I stand by those numbers, 
and I invite you to come and sit down and discuss them in some 
detail, but I’m not prepared to release them here. If there’s 
something the member from Quill Lakes wishes to get into, we 
can discuss that as well. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I again want to reiterate what I said 
earlier. The Legislative Chambers, Mr. Minister, and the session, 
the legislative session of this province are such that this is the 
only forum that the people of this province can know what the 
performance of your government . . . know the performance of 
your government and the policies of your government. That is 
the reason why, Mr. Speaker, that we have an opposition over 
here raising the kinds of questions that we are raising. 
 
We are raising questions that are vitally important to the people 
of this province, to the people of northern Saskatchewan. We are 
raising social and economic issues. We are raising issues that are 
important to the public. And as I understand the system, Mr. 
Minister, as I understand the system of government, it is our job 
to ask questions and to get answers so that the people of this 
province will know — will know what in effect you have done 
to try to help alleviate the high social and economic problems of 
the constituents that we represent in this House. 
 
You invite me to go to your office and look at this information in 
confidence, but that does not guarantee that the answers that I 
find will be made public. We can make them public. The member 
for Moosomin asks me why can’t we make them public; when I 
come behind

closed doors to your office, why can’t we make them public then? 
Well I ask the member for Moosomin, why can’t we make them 
public now right in this House? 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, those people on that side of the 
House, the PC government of this day, have got no answers to 
our questions. They’re floundering around in desperation. They 
don’t have a clear-cut policy for helping to alleviate the high 
social and economic problems that we have. 
 
Otherwise, if they had, if they had appropriate and adequate 
policy to help alleviate those problems, they would willingly 
provide that information, wouldn’t they now, Mr. Speaker? They 
would provide that information in writing. In fact, they would 
publicize it, like they publicized that they spent $2.2 million on 
tourist advertising in this province. They would willingly and 
very gladly publicize information pertaining to the . . . you know, 
if they did have a policy that helps alleviate the social and 
economic hardship of people that are faced in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I asked the minister a while ago: in debate over your estimates 
there is mention that $2.2 million was spent in tourist ads. 
Tourism is fine, Mr. Minister; tourism is fine. We get new money 
generated and brought into our province. But the big question, 
Mr. Minister, is how much is your government spending in terms 
of keeping that renewable resource alive, that environment? How 
much money has your government earmarked, you know, to help 
replenish, to help enhance that natural environment that people 
come up here to spent their . . . bring their families into the North, 
spend some personal time away from their homes; people come 
from out of the province to look into our wilderness. But just how 
much money, Mr. Minister, is your government spending to help 
keep that wilderness, that natural environment, as it is? 
 
That is a good question, Mr. Minister. You spent $2.2 million on 
tourist advertising, and a lot of money on the side for PC 
propaganda. But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: just how much 
have you actually spent; how much commitments do you have to 
retain what we have today? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the member did in fact 
for a while have a good question, but then he went and ruined it 
by adding that ridiculous comment at the end. And I would 
challenge him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll challenge you 
too, sir, to go out and find one piece — the same as I challenged 
the member from North East on the InfoCentres — find one piece 
of political propaganda in those tourism ads. 
 
The member indicated that he wanted to know how much money 
was spent preserving northern Saskatchewan. I think that was the 
question. I think that’s an excellent question, but I think it 
belongs when the estimates of Environment, and Parks and 
Renewable Resources come forward. It’s not very reasonable to 
expect me to have the answer to that. And I would suggest that 
he write that question down and keep it for my colleagues when 
they in fact come forward. 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1235 
 
 

To get back to the first part of the question on the information, I 
want to make it very clear, the northern revolving fund in 
northern Saskatchewan is there because there’s no banking 
services. And I think the member knows that it’s very difficult to 
get banking services in northern Saskatchewan. So we fill that 
void. Now I don’t think any other bank takes their loan 
information and makes it public, and we don’t propose to make 
our loan information public. and the people who came and 
applied for and received those loans, and those who applied for 
and were rejected, do not expect to have that information made 
public. 
 
I indicated the general numbers on new businesses; I indicated 
the numbers in terms of the money that is being made, how much 
is in arrears, the amount that is out under loan in the northern 
revolving fund, and that information, I think, legitimately and 
realistically should and is public. However, details on individual 
loans is not. We have worked very hard to remove the excessive 
amount of political involvement that was there when your NDP 
administration was in place. Ministerial approval has been 
completely removed. We take that out. And we’re not prepared 
to provide that type of information. 
 
I think the member fully realizes that he made a mistake when he 
asked for that information. And I’m not suggesting when you 
come to visit — if you are sincere, and you ever do — that we 
will provide detailed information on people’s loans. But we will 
provide some detailed information on business openings, 
business expansions, and those types of things, but not detailed 
information on the loans. 
 
But as far as preserving the North, once again I think that those 
questions should be asked. And as soon as Tourism and Small 
Business is done we’ll get on to one of those departments and 
you can ask that question. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I just want to correct a statement or a portion of your 
response that was misunderstood. I wasn’t asking for personal 
information pertaining to the loans or whatever grants that you 
may have disbursed out of our provincial treasury. I was referring 
to the projects that you were referring to — the 83 or so new 
business starts. 
 
In general I wanted to know what kind of projects they are; how 
many people are employed; what kind of training components 
you have in those programs or projects; and how many 
Northerners are involved; and what kind of participation there is; 
what kind of consultation. Certainly that is a must, Mr. Minister. 
And I really can’t see why you’d dispute public involvement, 
public consultation. 
 
We had public consultation in the earlier days, with the former 
administration. I’ll bet the minister of the day cannot say that he 
has local loans committees. We need local loans committees. We 
had local loans committees, Mr. Minister, in the old days and 
then on up from the local loans committees, which represented 
the communities themselves, people right from the communities, 
we had district loans committees which represented large regions

in the North. And those people were locally elected officials. 
They had the opportunity for public participation. They were able 
to decide policy and the terms of reference for the northern 
economic development program of the former administration. 
People at the grass roots level were involved, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I doubt very much if you have any public, local grass roots 
involvement because you just said a while ago, Mr. Minister, that 
you don’t. You, yourself, don’t get personally involved in terms 
of authorization, or in terms of deciding the recommendations of 
the loan applications, but that senior civil servants make the 
decision. Yes, that was your very words, Mr. Minister. I jotted 
and took a mental note of that: senior civil servants now make 
the decisions. 
 
I want to ask the minister: where is that public involvement? 
Where is the public consultation process that we had with the 
former administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, in reference to the final 
comments of that session I will simply, once again, go over the 
comments that I made previously. 
 
Our district loan committee has proportional public and private 
sector representation, and the people on it have mandatory 
business experience. Period. Senior civil servants, not the 
minister, make the final decisions on loans, and they are all based 
on solid business plans. 
 
The difference in what you are relating to was that in the previous 
system — and people in northern Saskatchewan, I think, 
understand it very clearly — was rampant with political 
involvement. The minister was constantly involved and in fact 
made all decisions on everything over $25,000. We make no 
apology for removing that political component from the approval 
process of the northern revolving loan fund. And I think that the 
results, as I indicated, where we’ve had record loan approvals, 
where we’re less that 3 per cent in arrears compared to the 
numbers under your administration . . . I won’t read them again; 
they’re already in Hansard. But I think they make interesting 
reading. 
 
You asked for the types of projects that make up that 83 new 
businesses, expansions, or modernizations. I’ll just run down the 
types. I won’t get into any more detail than to indicate the types 
of businesses that we are talking about in that 83 sector. And I’ll 
go one page, I think there are one . . . There are four, five pages. 
I’ll give you one because I think it’s representative. 
 
There’s a fish hatchery, a logging expansion, gymnasium rental, 
houseboats, logging, florist gift shop, ambulance service, raw fur 
buyer, post cutting, bakery, convention centre, road construction, 
restaurant, cement contractor, garbage disposal, modernization, 
RV centre, mushroom exporting, photo finishing, helicopter 
charter service, meat processing expansion, woodworker, 
housing contractor, charter bus service. And I can go through the 
other four or five pages if you think that would serve some 
benefit. 
 
The point is: in northern Saskatchewan in ’85-86 we had 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1236 
 
 

83 businesses that were either starts, expansions, or 
modernizations. We had an investment of $10.14 million, and 
somewhere around 280 jobs created by that. So, I mean, I can’t 
get into the names of the people. You indicated you understood 
that. But that’s some types, and if it’s of value I’ll give you the 
other types as well. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just take . . . noted with 
interest that there’s been 280 jobs created under this new business 
starts program. And I concur with the minister: I don’t want the 
specifics pertaining to the individuals that did receive the loans 
or grants or whatever. But with regards to any major or any 
substantial progress of helping to alleviate the high 
unemployment conditions in the North, the high welfare 
dependency rates in the North, I must say that your government 
certainly has not, you know, made an effort, a really sound 
commitment to meet the needs of the people living in those 
isolated areas. 
 
I remember distinctly when you dismantled the department of 
northern Saskatchewan. You did it so hastily, Mr. Minister, that 
your ministers of the day were making empty hollow promises 
for the people of the North. I remember distinctly one letter dated 
July 16th by the minister of the day, the member for Meadow 
Lake, indicating that there would be a self-sufficient economic 
strategy in northern Saskatchewan. But to this point in time we 
have not seen that program, that self-sufficient economic 
strategy. The unemployment rates tells us that there is no 
program in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Just recently there was a series of articles done of northern 
communities by the Star-Phoenix dealing with issues such as 
welfare in the North. And it says in the heading of each report 
that the welfare is claimed to be killing native people, and that 
there is nothing by way of concrete economic development 
opportunities available to people in northern Saskatchewan. 
There are social disparities, and you can see for yourself the 
charts — social assistance rates — and the charts have been 
going up and up and up. Welfare dependency is going up, for 
ever increasing, Mr. Minister. And while this is happening, you 
have underspent in the three areas that I questioned, employment 
and development, northern economic development, and grants 
for northern economic development. A total of $7.7 million was 
underspent. 
 
Now you’re not dealing with those three specific questions that I 
had referred to earlier. Your response has been with the northern 
revolving fund. That’s fine, Mr. Minister. 
 
Another question I put to you earlier was: how many people of 
native ancestry are employed under Tourism and Small 
Business? Because tourism plays a major part in the lives of 
Northerners. That is the reason why I asked that question, Mr. 
Minister. Because the only remaining natural environment that 
we have, I mean a majority of it, is in the northern constituencies. 
 
I also ask you, Mr. Minister, can you name me in detail — when 
you referred to major developments in northern Saskatchewan — 
name in detail what major developments you’re referring to. 
You, in general terms,

talked about gold, uranium, and the Weyerhaeuser deal in P.A. 
— recently announced but of which information was not 
disclosed. 
 
A while ago we debated with the Minister of Urban Affairs, and 
he also patted himself on the back for some of the initiatives that 
he had taken, or his department had taken, and he talked about 
gold, uranium, forestry. 
 
And when I asked him just how much revenue is going back to 
the people in the North, and how many jobs his department had 
created, when I asked him just how much gold is in the pockets 
of the people living in the northern administration district, when 
I asked him for specifics about the rate of unemployment in the 
North, when I asked him about the rates of the welfare 
dependency problems related to the people living in the northern 
administration district, he simply didn’t have any answers. He 
reiterated and reiterated . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Being near 5 o’clock, this House now 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


