


















































December 10, 1986 Hansard


  
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 10, 1986 
 

123 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour today 
to welcome the principal and vice-principal of St. Gregory 
Elementary School, a school that is in the constituency of 
Regina North, right here in Regina. This is a grade 8 class that 
has come today, and there are 35 students here. 
 
The principal’s name is Mr. Ted Zurowski, and the 
vice-principal is Mr. George Smadu. 
 
They have also with them a special guest from China, a visiting 
professor from — and please forgive me if I pronounce this 
wrong — Ning Xia Province, Mr. Zhang, Shuxiang. Please 
welcome our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 
you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, 47 grade 
12 students from my home, the city of Yorkton, and the 
Yorkton Regional High School — the law class that is on there 
at this term. And I would like to also welcome their teacher, Mr. 
Ed Magis. 
 
And I’d like to compliment Mr. Magis for consistently bringing 
his grade 12 class to observe the goings-on in our Assembly and 
to show our young people and our youth how the democratic 
process works — the future leaders of our society. 
 
And I would like to invite them to room 218 following question 
period — approximately 3:00 — for pictures and some 
refreshments. And I would ask all members to please welcome 
these people from Yorkton in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Deficiency Payment to Farmers 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, at the risk of getting another 
recorded announcement . . . I’d like to ask the Premier if — and 
this deals with the announcement from Ottawa yesterday — that 
the grain price deficiency payment will be equivalent to about 
50 cents a bushel or less, I think, when the farmers of this 
province need $3 a bushel. Can the Premier tell us whether 
yesterday’s announcement represents a deficiency payment for 
this crop year or for the last crop year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the deficiency payment is 
based on the 1986 crop which will be marketed, some in 1986, 
mostly, I suppose, in 1987. But the export subsidy that took 
place in the United States is applying in 1986 production and so 
it applies here, if we are going to defend against it, on our 1986 
crop. So it’s 1986 production and then the crop insurance yields 
to  

average it out over the best of the last five years, and that’s the 
formula that is applied to the ’86 production. So not to belabour 
it, it’s about 48 cents a bushel for wheat, 28 cents a bushel for 
barley, 50 cents a bushel for flax and so on. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Just so I can get this straight, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, the people of this province were asking for a 
deficiency for the 1985-86 crop year. Are you telling me now 
— because the ’86 production starts after the 1985-86 crop year 
ends, the ’86 production starts after that point of August 31 — 
are you telling me that there’ll be no deficiency payment for last 
year and that this payment that we’re getting is actually going to 
go up to August 31, 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the ’86-87 crop year starts 
on August 1st and goes to July 31st. As I understand the 
announcement by the Prime Minister yesterday, the payments 
will start as early as December for western Canadian producers 
who will receive some money, about 33 per cent of it now, and 
66 per cent in April during seeding. And that’s in the ‘86-87 
crop year. If you would want it on the ‘85-86, you would have 
to have the payment last June or last July. So we said that we 
would like to have the payment made associated with the export 
subsidy in the United States, which is obviously on the ’86 
crop. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — About one-third of this payment is to be in the 
hands of the farmers by January, and can the Premier tell us 
whether the remainder of the money is likely to be sent out 
prior to seeding, or just when is this money . . . the final 
payment going to be out? It is imperative that it comes out 
before seeding. Can the Premier assure us this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have an example 
before me if . . . It would just take about a minute, maybe two 
minutes. If you take an average farmer at Rosetown who had 
400 acres of wheat and 200 acres of barley and 80 acres of flax 
seed in 1986 production, the wheat, taking in the crop insurance 
and so forth, would yield about 32 bushels. The payment would 
be about 48 cents, for $6,140; barley, 200 acres at 45 bushels to 
the acres times 28 cents is $2,520; flax seed is 80 acres, 17 
bushels at 50 cents is $680; for a total of $9,340. Approximately 
one-third of that would be paid between now and, say, January, 
or some time early in the new year, or now. And about 
two-thirds of it, Mr. Speaker, would be paid April 1987, in the 
new year. So about one-third in the very near future and about 
two-thirds either prior to seeding or during seeding. 
 

Appointment of President of SPC 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct a 
question to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. It deals with the appointment of the former 
Progressive Conservative Party president, Mr. George Hill, as 
the president and chief executive officer of Saskatchewan’s 
largest Crown corporation. A few days ago, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier took notice of questions respecting Mr. Hill, and I’ll 
direct them now to the minister. Can the minister now tell us 
when Mr. Hill  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

124 
 

assumes his duties, and what will be his salary and other 
remuneration in his role as president of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, you’re right, the Premier 
did take notice of a question, in my absence, from the member 
for Lakeview, I believe, and I will answer all of those questions 
at this time if it’s the will of the House to hear the answers at 
this time. 
 
The first question is: when will Mr. Hill assume the duties as 
president and CEO of Sask Power? The answer to that question 
is January 5, 1987. There is some overlap in the duties of Mr. 
Hill and Mr. Campbell to facilitate the transition, and that is 
roughly December of this year through to January 5th when the 
transition will take place. 
 
As to the name of the executive search organization that 
recruited Mr. Hill, it is B and R Associates of Toronto. They 
received 146 resumes. They interviewed 21 of the most 
promising resumes, from which they selected Mr. Hill. 
 
How much money? Mr. Speaker, in keeping with the 
long-standing tradition of this legislature, and I say 
long-standing meaning significantly more than four or five 
years, we will be happy to provide the aggregate of the 
management team during Crown corporations committee, or if 
the hon. member would like to put the question on the order 
paper in the form of a return, we can deal with it at that time in 
the aggregate way of the management team. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll 
refrain from dealing with the B and R Associates from Toronto 
and their selection and whether they arrived by reindeer and 
whatever other myth you want us to believe. 
 
I want to ask whether, in view of the fact that Mr. Hill is 
assuming his duties on January 4, 1987, whether you thought it 
appropriate that Mr. Hill should fire a long-time professional 
public servant from a senior executive position with the 
corporation, Mr. Don Moroz. Can you indicate whether you felt 
that was appropriate and what the reasons were for the 
dismissal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the hon. 
member should ask Mr. Moroz. The arrangement that exists 
between Mr. Moroz and the Sask Power Corporation obviously 
was arrived at in a mutual fashion and Mr. Moroz has, in fact, 
tendered his resignation. He is no longer in the employ of Sask 
Power, and if Mr. Moroz is willing to tell you, that’s fine with 
me. I don’t intend to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. I take it 
you don’t deny that Mr. Hill asked Mr. Moroz for his 
resignation. Will you give the reasons why Mr. Hill asked Mr. 
Moroz for his resignation? I’m not asking for Mr. Moroz’s 
reasons — Mr. Hill’s reasons. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t conceded 
that Mr. Hill asked Mr. Moroz for his resignation. I haven’t 
conceded that I have any knowledge of that. All I’m saying is 
that obviously they have arrived at an arrangement, and Mr. 
Moroz is no longer in the employ of Sask Power. 

An Hon. Member: — SPC. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I mean SPC, right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Are you 
denying that Mr. Hill asked Mr. Moroz for his resignation? And 
if you are not, are you saying you don’t know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying is that 
the arrangement arrived at between Mr. Moroz and the 
management of Sask Power is an arrangement that they arrived 
at and agreed to mutually, and that’s it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Do you 
acknowledge that the reason why an arrangement came to be in 
place was that Mr. Hill first asked Mr. Moroz for his 
resignation. Do you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I do not deny it, nor do I 
confirm it, because I have no firsthand knowledge of it. Mr. Hill 
and the management team at Sask Power were put there to 
manage and operate Sask Power in the most efficient and 
effective way possible, and there are certain things that 
happened at the behest of the management team and so on. One 
of those things apparently was an arrangement arrived at 
between Mr. Moroz and the management team. Mr. Moroz is no 
longer at Sask Power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Are you 
suggesting that the president of Sask Power had anything to do 
with this, or do you acknowledge that the president was not 
involved and that only Mr. Hill was involved when he was not 
president? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, the short 
answer is that I don’t know. If I can extend that just a couple of 
words, Mr. Speaker, I suppose it is possible that I could find 
out. But I just invite the member to raise it in crown 
corporations . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well I may know then; that’s why. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is quite simple. Mr. Moroz and Sask 
Power came mutually to an arrangement, and the rest is history. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Can the 
minister assure SPC customers and other senior management of 
SPC that the dismissal of Mr. Moroz will not be followed by a 
string of dismissals designed to replace professional managers 
with political managers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. All managers 
at Sask Power are considered to be professional in every way. I 
concede that the incoming president, Mr. Hill, may have been 
tainted with a blue brush at one time, but that doesn’t detract 
from his professional credentials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary. Who considers Mr. 
Hill a professional manager and not a political manager? 
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

125 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Almost anyone who knows him, Mr. 
Speaker, and all fair-minded people. 
 

Implementation of Accessibility Regulations for 
Physically Handicapped 

 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, as members of the House will 
know and you’ll know, today is International Human Rights 
Day and I have a question that I wish to direct, I believe it’s to 
the Minister of Labour, who’s the minister in charge of 
accessibility. On January 1, 1984, the government passed 
legislation which endeavoured, amongst other things, to 
guarantee accessibility to people with physical handicaps, but 
key portions of that legislation, as you know, Mr. Speaker, have 
not yet been proclaimed because the government has been 
saying ever since that time that it’s working on regulations. 
 
My question is a very simple and straightforward one to the 
minister and that is this: can he advise the House when it is that 
we can expect to have the regulations proclaimed so that the 
standards and the code can become fully operative for all 
people, including the physically handicapped, surely a basic 
right for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I can answer some of that question 
because I’m only partially responsible and the reason for that is 
that the Minister . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The Minister of the Environment is 
taking over that portion of my responsibilities and we are in a 
transition stage. He may be able to give you the exact details. 
But it seems to me that you can’t believe everything you hear, I 
say to the hon. member opposite, nor can you believe 
everything you read because when I was finished with my 
campaigning and the election I had time to read the news-letter 
of the Human Rights Commission and they quoted me as saying 
that the regulations wouldn’t be available until the fall of ’87, 
and at no time did I ever say that. 
 
It had been my objective to have them ready much sooner. I’ve 
indicated publicly that we were trying to have them ready for 
this coming spring. I don’t personally draft these regulations 
and we have officials who are doing that, and you asked me 
what I should do with those officials if they can’t get them 
ready any faster. I will follow your suggestions, but they are 
doing their best, and when they are ready they will be 
implemented, and as to the exact day, I will give the new 
minister responsible the opportunity to pick and fix that day. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, a supplementary. I’ll direct 
this to the Minister of Labour, but if he wishes to direct it to the 
new minister in charge, fair enough. All that the House wants is 
an answer. And may I say by way of supplementary that I could 
certainly agree with the minister in his answer, that you can’t 
believe everything that you read because I have here in front of 
me a 1982 Progressive Conservative policy manual saying that 
there  

is a better way, and on page 14, it says the following: 
 

The Progressive Conservative government will ensure that 
all facilities are available to the handicapped, i.e., have 
easy access to public buildings. 

 
So judging by the fact that this is 1982, the promise made, and 
we’re now 1986, I agree with the minister that you can’t believe 
everything that you read. 
 
My question is to you, sir, or to any other minister who cares to 
answer this on the front treasury benches. Will you tell the 
House and the physically handicapped and disabled people 
whether or not we can get those regulations by December 31, 
1986, this year, and if not, why not, especially since you’ve 
made the promise ever since 1982? Tell us that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I enjoyed very much the 
question put by the hon. member. The member may recall that 
some 11 years while he was on the government benches this 
same topic was raised, and when I was in opposition I raised it 
with him; I raised it with a number of others. And up until this 
point in time we haven’t had any response from him through his 
11 years . . . I guess through the first four we were not able to 
fully comply with the promise that was made. 
 
I do see, Mr. Speaker, that in the very near future those 
regulations will be brought forward. I won’t guarantee that they 
will be here by the end of December but I would expect during 
the spring session that likely those resolutions can be brought 
through. We’ve been looking at it, but it’s not prepared, and I’m 
not ready at this time to okay what they have been preparing. 
But we are looking at it very closely, and in the near future we 
will bring forth the regulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Deficiency Payment for Farmers 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question to the Premier, and if I could go back to the subject of 
the deficiency payment announced yesterday. 
 
In analysing the various responses from farm organizations, 
some of them, in approving the deficiency payment is so far as 
it went, made the comment that they had the impression that 
this would not be just a one-shot effort on the part of the federal 
government, but might in fact be repeated in an ongoing way 
for a number of years. And I wonder if the Premier has any 
specific information that would lead to that conclusion that this 
is not just a one-shot payment, but in fact has some life beyond 
1986 and ’87 to it carrying on into the future, for as long as the 
trade war continues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it might. I 
responded to a newspaper today saying that at a minimum we 
now have a mechanism that the provinces agreed to, and the 
federal government, and most of the producer organizations. So 
that if we did need it in  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

126 
 

subsequent years as we address the international trade 
problems, we have a mechanism that to a very large extent will 
be in place. 
 
So we will be obviously monitoring and working together 
across the provinces and with the federal government in trying 
to resolve the international subsidy problem. If it takes some 
time, and it obviously will, then we can look to this or other 
mechanisms to provide some support for farmers as we see fit. I 
mean, obviously I can’t speak for the federal cabinet, but this 
has been a very large payment, if you will, in ’86-87, and we’ll 
have to take it form this point on. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, one supplementary. Bearing in 
mind the uncertainty of the future, I wonder if any specific 
initiatives are being pursued or if the Premier is pressing for 
them to be pursued by the federal government, in relation to the 
negotiation now of a new international grains agreement, 
especially since we seem to be in a window of opportunity 
between U.S. elections when some of the political fever in that 
country might be reduced just a little bit, and bearing in mind 
the expense of the kind of a program announced yesterday, even 
though it is not adequate to totally solve the problem. What new 
efforts would be undertaken by the Government of 
Saskatchewan to encourage the federal government to proceed 
now in the next 12 to 15 months, while that window of 
opportunity might exist, to try to get a new International Grains 
Agreement on the books that might make further deficiency 
payments in the future unnecessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what is taking place 
now, and I’m sure well in the new year and through ’87 and 
’88, are international negotiations that our Minister of Trade has 
been involved in, I have been involved in, and the federal 
government and others, to get agriculture in the discussions at 
the multilateral trade negotiations. 
 
I’m not so sure that we can . . . Perhaps we could get lucky and 
have a new grains agreement that would just fix it. I’m not so 
sure that that necessarily can happen. I would like to think it 
could, but I believe to get GATT or to get the GATT 
negotiations, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, to 
consider agriculture, which includes grain and some of these 
other things, would be extremely important. 
 
It wasn’t in the negotiations in the past; it was traded under the 
table. We now have the United States and a good deal of 
Europe agreeing with Canadians that we should have 
agriculture on the table as we discuss this. And I believe that’s 
the long-run solution that may lead to some changes with 
respect to an international grains agreement. 
 
So we’re involved with the federal government, with provincial 
governments. As chairman of the Canadian premiers meeting 
with United States governors, we will be discussing that and 
other things, perhaps here in February and March, with an 
international meeting. I’ll be involved in some other 
international meetings which will be dealing specifically with 
this. 

So I could concur with the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, that this 
is not the solution just to keep providing subsidy 
internationally, either in Canada or the U.S. or other places. 
And if we can rearrange this internationally, and collectively 
back away from it, then it means a more national market-place, 
and in fact the prices would rise and we would all be much 
better off. 
 

Political Freedom of Public Servants 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the minister response for 
the Public Service Commission. I believe he’s absent, therefore 
I guess it falls to the Premier. On International Human Rights 
Day I ask the Premier if your government will, in the coming 
months, guarantee a fundamental freedom for thousands of 
Saskatchewan residents. I am speaking of the political freedom 
of Saskatchewan public servants. 
 
Your government’s intimidation tactics in recent years have run 
roughshod over those public servants’ rights and would have 
embarrassed any government except yours. Will the 
government table a clear, unequivocal statement in this 
Assembly, setting out the basic rights and freedoms to all 
Saskatchewan public servants, something you promised about 
four years ago? And will you call off the political henchmen 
who have threatened public servants for expressing their 
political beliefs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, that question, in all 
seriousness, really doesn’t deserve a response because the hon. 
member knows me well enough, let alone how the public 
service operates. I mean, under the same rules that applied then 
apply now in the sense of providing professionalism. I mean, I, 
as a former professor and other people who are in the academic 
area or in the private sector, can come in and out of the public 
service. We did before, and we do now. And for the hon. 
member to stand there and make implications and innuendoes 
about an unfair public service, that is somehow unfair . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Unfairly treated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, it’s a partisan question, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the public service in Saskatchewan, 
raised by a member that used to be a cabinet minister. Mr. 
Speaker, I will say that the Public Service Commission in the 
province of Saskatchewan is professional, and everybody in 
Saskatchewan has access to it, and that’s the way it will stay. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. New question. Mr. 
Premier, you may recall about four years ago the current 
member from Regina Victoria coming to the attention of this 
Assembly. You may recall him being banished to your idea of 
Siberia, and that was Prince Albert. And you may now take an 
opportunity, I assume, to welcome him back into this 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — On that occasion, Mr. Premier, you 
promised this Assembly a statement of what the rights of public 
servants would be in this area, and it has never  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

127 
 

been received. So it may be a partisan question, but you’ve 
made it a partisan issue. I ask you, Mr. Premier, four years later, 
have you any thoughts at all on what the rights of public 
servants should be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I mean, I will debate about 
the member that was just elected for Regina Victoria and the 
kind of professionalism that I expect, and indeed, when the hon. 
member was a minister, expected from me as a professional. 
And he did. And he expected me to have integrity. I didn’t go 
around when I was working for him, for the Department of 
Consumer and Corporate Affairs . . . I did, Mr. Speaker. And he 
expected professional . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! Order, order. Please 
allow the Premier to finish answering the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You want to get into the topic. You 
expected professional behaviour from me. You expected 
professional behaviour from me, and you received it. 
 
When the hon. member was working for the government during 
the day, designing marketing policies that we had to take to the 
public, and then at night going downtown and kicking the pants 
off the government at the same time, it’s a little difficult. And 
you can understand that. 
 
So all we ask for, and you know and I know, all anybody asks 
for is professionalism in public service. And if you will provide 
professionalism in public service, which you can get in the 
province of Saskatchewan, you’re treated as a professional. 

 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 
Anniversary of Universal Declaration of Human Rights 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to mark the 38th 
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The 
declaration was passed in the wake of World War II as a 
resolution of the General Assembly of the United Nations, this 
internationally recognized statement of the fundamental 
principles necessary for the protection of individual freedoms. 
 
Since the universal declaration was passed, the people of 
Saskatchewan and of Canada have extended human rights 
through such vehicles as human rights commissions and the 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. We continue to be 
concerned about the preservation and the protection of 
fundamental rights in all countries, not just ours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce that today, 
December 10th, has been declared in Saskatchewan, Human 
Rights Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I join in with the minister in 
commemorating this day, and I’d like to also point out that I 
will be seeking leave under rule 39 to pass a motion with 
respect to this anniversary of the Universal  

Declaration of Human Rights. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — An Act to amend The Farm Land Security Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading on a 
Bill to amend The Farm Land Security Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Farmers’ Counselling 
and Assistance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Farmers’ Counselling and Assistance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 3 — An Act to establish a Mortgage Protection Plan 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to establish a Mortgage Protection Plan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Commemoration of Human Rights Day 
 
Ms. Simard: — Before orders of the day, I rise pursuant to rule 
39 of this Assembly and seek leave to move a motion 
commemorating Human Rights Day. I seek leave of the 
Assembly to move an appropriate and non-partisan motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Would the member please read her motion so 
that members may know what they’re giving leave to. 
 
Ms. Simard: — The motion is: 
 

That this Assembly commemorate Human Rights Day by 
reaffirming its endorsement of the United Nations 
Universal Declaration on Human Rights by reaffirming its 
determination to protect and extend the fundamental 
human rights of Saskatchewan people, and by affirming its 
solidarity with oppressed men and women across the 
world whose basis human rights are being violated. 

 
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

128 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
a day of great significance. It is the 38th anniversary of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This declaration was 
passed as a resolution of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations 38 years ago. This declaration is a statement of 
fundamental principles necessary for world peace and for the 
protection of individual freedoms. 
 
The human rights declaration recognizes, Mr. Speaker, that all 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. It 
states that everyone has the right to life, liberty, and security of 
person. Everyone is entitled to equal protection against 
discrimination. It talks of the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression and the right to hold opinions without interference. 
These are only a few of the many rights contained in the text of 
the declaration. 
 
It is with great pleasure that I stand before this Assembly today 
to commemorate this anniversary. It is fitting that once a year 
we take time to reflect on the meaning of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, and review and assess our own 
record over the last year as a country, a province, and as 
individuals. And when we make this review and assessment, let 
us keep in mind the words of F.R. Scott: “No citizen’s right can 
be greater than that of the least-protected group.” 
 
The guarantee of freedoms around the world and in Canada is a 
tenacious and fragile thing indeed. And we must establish 
stronger and more effective safeguards to protect our minorities. 
Because when we protect minorities, we are not only doing the 
right and just thing to do in a civilized society, but we are also 
protecting all citizens from future infringement of their rights 
and freedoms. 
 
Fundamental rights and freedoms are under constant threat in 
many countries. People in many countries around the world are 
denied the right of freedom of expression and the right of 
freedom of association and the right to choose the political 
party of their choice without fear of reprisals or condemnation. 
Indeed, many people are imprisoned, terrorized, and tortured 
today for believing that countrymen should be free. 
 
That’s why we in Canada have much to be thankful for. But just 
because we live in a country free of many of these problems and 
practices does not mean that we can take our civil and human 
rights for granted. They must be protected. They must be 
advanced in every situation that calls for it. 
 
Saskatchewan people recognized this, Mr. Speaker, many, 
many years ago. Saskatchewan was the first province to pass a 
Bill of Rights. Then in 1972 a new Human Rights commission 
was established, and later on in the 1970s a new Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code was made law by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. This code recognized and recognizes 
fundamental civil liberties and basic human rights. It gave the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission the job of  

enforcing those laws and protecting us as citizens. 
 
This code was an example to the rest of Canada and was 
applauded in the United States. I know this because at the time I 
was deputy chair of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission and it was talked about at a conference in the 
United States on human rights. The code was said to be fair, 
progressive, and enlightened. 
 
So today I ask myself why. Prior to October 20, 1986, the 
Progressive Conservative MLAs unanimously told the 
Saskatchewan human rights association that in order to bring 
the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code in line with our new 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms they would prefer to bring in a 
new Act rather than simply amending the present code. 
 
I hope this opportunity is used by the members opposite to 
strengthen human rights in Saskatchewan, and I hope that the 
PC government does not turn back the clock on human rights in 
Saskatchewan by dismantling the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission or by diminishing the powers and investigative 
functions of the commission. 
 
These concerns are not figments of my imagination, Mr. 
Speaker, because events of the last year tell us that already the 
doors of one branch office of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission have closed — those of the Prince Albert office. 
The closure of the P.A. office means that the Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Commission will have no visible presence in 
northern Saskatchewan, and it substantially diminishes the 
enforcement capacity of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission. 
 
The events of the last year tell us that an already overburdened 
and tightly budgeted Human Rights Commission in 
Saskatchewan was asked to cut back on its budget last year by 
one staff position and $30,000, despite a 40 per cent increase in 
work-load since 1981, without any budget or staff increase. As 
a result it has become more difficult, if not impossible, for the 
commission to adequately perform its function of protecting our 
fundamental rights. 
 
These events have caused concern for those of us who want to 
preserve our basic freedoms and who want to promote the 
dignity and inalienable rights of all citizens. In fact, so much 
concern has been generated the Saskatchewan Association of 
Human Rights felt compelled to pass a resolution at their 
convention in April 1986 which condemned the PC 
government’s deplorable and unacceptable record and reckless 
disregard for human rights in this province. 
 
These are harsh words, Mr. Speaker, and it is with deep regret 
that I feel compelled to bring these words forward today, but I 
do it in the sincere hope that this government will take note and 
halt any further deterioration of our system, because it’s a good 
system and it does protect all our fundamental freedoms and 
human rights. 
 
I would like to see this government step forward and once again 
show that Saskatchewan can be a leader in this area and do what 
has to be done to strengthen and improve  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

129 
 

our fundamental freedoms and rights in Saskatchewan. It’s only 
through the protection of these rights that all Saskatchewan 
citizens can fully participate in our great Saskatchewan society, 
and surely this is what we all want, on both sides of this House. 
Surely this is the only road we travel. Let us set an example 
then, not just in Canada but around the world, and as Thomas R. 
Berger has said: 
 

Our own successes and failures, our own attempts to 
accommodate minorities are important, not only to 
ourselves; if people of different races, religions, cultures, 
languages can live together harmoniously within a great 
federal state, perhaps they may learn to live together 
harmoniously in the wider world. 

 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move the motion that I read earlier, 
seconded by my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I second this motion that’s before the House 
with a good deal of pride. I won’t take much of the members’ 
time, but I do think a number of things deserve to be said on 
this occasion. 
 
The first is that we must never be complacent in this province 
or anywhere in Canada or indeed anywhere in the world about 
our rights and our freedoms. We can never think that the 
protection or enforcement of these rights deserves less than our 
full attention. 
 
A violation of the rights of any person in our society is a threat 
to the rights of all of us. If an Indian is discriminated against by 
a landlord who refuses to rent an apartment, that is an affront to 
all of us. If a black is denied a job because he or she is black, 
that is an affront to all of us, and if a woman is denied 
promotion in a work place because she is a woman, that is an 
affront to all of us. These are simply examples of affronts that 
cannot be tolerated in this province or anywhere in this country, 
and our laws quite properly make such conduct illegal and we 
have strong mechanisms by which to enforce that law. Nothing 
less than full vigilance is required with respect to the 
enforcement of these rights. 
 
(1445) 
 
I can do no better, Mr. Speaker, than to quote from a German 
by the name of Martin Niemoeller who wrote the following 
words: 
 

In Germany they came first for the Communists, and I 
didn’t speak up because I wasn’t a Communist. Then they 
came for the Jews, and I didn’t speak up because I wasn’t 
a Jew. Then they came for the trade unionists, and I didn’t 
speak up because I wasn’t a trade unionist. Then they 
came for the Catholics, and I didn’t speak up because I 
was a Protestant. Then they came for me and by that time 
no one was left to speak up. 

 
And it was of course in the aftermath of the holocaust that the 
instruments passed by the United Nations came into existence 
and international human rights were sought to be guaranteed by 
the documents that were referred to by my friend, by my 
colleague, the minister from Lakeview. 

These mechanisms of the enforcement of human rights need 
continuous monitoring and upgrading to ensure that we are 
putting forward a full effort in enforcing human rights laws. 
 
I finally want to just remind members of the work of Amnesty 
International, a world-wide voluntary organization monitoring 
certain kinds of human rights violations across the world. The 
work of this organization is indeed impressive, and I know that 
members on both sides of this House have, in the past, had 
occasion to support their work. They are concerned particularly 
with the imprisonment of people for their political beliefs, and 
for their treatment while they are incarcerated, including, of 
course, the use of torture. As I said in my opening remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, it is with pleasure that I second this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 
commemorate this day, a day which governments and 
institutions world-wide reaffirm their commitment to the 
universal declaration of human rights. I am pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have this motion before us today because we 
too can share with the people of Saskatchewan our united 
declaration of these fundamental rights and freedoms. 
 
Keeping this in mind, Mr. Speaker, I know that members 
opposite will support political rights and freedoms for 
Saskatchewan citizens, particularly Saskatchewan civil servants 
when they introduced changes to the Saskatchewan human 
rights code, changes that they talked about in the past election. 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, are concerned about human 
rights and human justice. They were very pleased, however, 
when the government took up their proposal to remove South 
African wines and spirits from the Saskatchewan Liquor Board 
store. Mr. Speaker, they would like a similar action with respect 
to products the Saskatchewan government continues to market 
from oppressive regimes such as the Chilean dictatorship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the time has come for members opposite to 
introduce affirmative action legislation that would provide 
equal access for native people, women and people with 
disabilities. In addition, Mr. Speaker, the women of 
Saskatchewan are anxious to see pay equity legislation 
introduced that would ensure equality of wages. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, when we think about human rights, we 
tend to think about civil and constitutional rights. Let us not 
forget that we should be striving for a world where every child 
is able to grow up in a world free from ignorance, free from 
fear, fear from hate and want. Thus, I am pleased to rise in 
support of the motion, and I hope that all members of the 
Assembly will join me in supporting it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise on this 
motion, and whereas I haven’t had the opportunity to  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

130 
 

speak in this session, I wish to congratulate you on your 
appointment as Speaker, and I am certain that you will do an 
excellent job to uphold the dignity of this Assembly, and I 
know very well that you have the confidence of all of the 
members of the Assembly. 
 
With respect to the motion before us today, on behalf of the 
government it is truly a pleasure for us to endorse the United 
Nations Universal Declaration on Human Rights. We clearly 
think that it should be reaffirmed, and we also think that it 
should be followed, not only in Saskatchewan, not only in 
Canada, not only in democratic countries, but also in socialist 
countries throughout the world. 
 
We believe that the rights of individuals are fundamental — 
truly fundamental regardless of the colour and religion, the 
nationality, or any other visible distinction among people of the 
world. All people in this province agree on those principles. 
We, on behalf of the government, as the Government of 
Saskatchewan, intend to follow and live up to those principles. 
 
I’m pleased to join in to this non-partisan debate and I hope to 
keep it non-partisan as much as possible. 
 
With respect to some of the initiatives of this government, we 
have heard earlier today in question period that after many years 
this government has introduced accessibility legislation, and we 
await the regulations. And we may quibble about the day on 
which they are implemented, but I can tell you that even 
without the regulations, the new Act is being followed. 
 
There is a major improvement in the plight of the handicapped 
in this province. And I have seen in rural Saskatchewan, which 
I represent, that people do not have to be legislated into helping 
the handicapped, in particular in this area; that churches, that 
communities with public halls and skating rinks are voluntarily 
putting in accessibility standards without being required to do 
so by law. 
 
And therefore that suggest to me that the citizens of this 
province have a basic feeling of fairness and that it is not 
necessary to hold the long arm of the law over our citizens to 
require that they be fair by law. 
 
However, the accessibility standards law is important; the 
regulations are important. As we’ve indicated earlier today, this 
area will be covered by the government as soon as the 
regulations can be drafted in an appropriate manner. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I am the minister responsible for the 
proposed new department, the department of human resources, 
labour, and employment, which will have in it at least five 
divisions. One of them will be the seniors’ division, which will 
pull together all of the services to seniors. And I met with their 
council this morning. They’re very enthused about 
improvement of the life of senior citizens. 
 
There’s also a division, the women’s division, which will 
continue working toward economic equality for women. This 
government strongly believes, as does the  

Government of Canada, as was recently confirmed at the first 
ministers’ conference in Vancouver, in the economic equality of 
women. And therefore you will see measures in the next four 
years that will work towards this principle. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, my new department is responsible for 
Indian and Métis affairs. I use the term “Indian” because I have 
consulted with the chiefs and they do not wish to be called 
natives. They indicate they wish to be called Indians, and the 
Métis wish to be called Métis. So the division is known as the 
Indian and Métis division of the Department of Human 
Resources. 
 
With respect to other elements of the department, labour is also 
a crucial element. This government will ensure that workers in 
this province are treated in a fair manner and are entitled to 
practice their democratic rights in a free society. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, this new department has a division of 
youth and employment which is in its formative stage and will 
address the problem of unemployment among our young people 
.I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, it is a long-standing problem, it 
will be difficult to address, that the unemployment rate among 
people under the age of 24 is approximately 15 per cent. It was 
approximately 13 per cent in a period when we were considered 
to have full employment in the glorious days of high 
commodity prices in the mid and late 1970s. 
 
So while there is a change in unemployment across the sphere 
of society, it has not changed very much from good economic 
times to difficult economic times. It has changed very, very 
little among young people, and we have to address new 
initiatives to have young people get into the work force. 
 
Therefore, I am very enthused that the new department for 
which I will be responsible will be helping with the human 
rights of Saskatchewan citizens, trying to grant equality to all 
and more opportunity to those people who are having a difficult 
time competing in a competitive society. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I voted in favour of leave for this motion on 
the basis that it would be a non-partisan debate. And when I 
heard the member from Lakeview, I began to wonder about the 
question of agreeing to a non-partisan debate and then dealing 
with this matter in a very partisan way. 
 
And part of the problem with human rights throughout the 
world is that every country, or almost every country, has agreed 
to the United Nations’ principles and that some countries in the 
world have the best-written constitutions and constitution that 
have the greatest guarantee of human rights. 
 
But unfortunately they are not followed in practice. In addition, 
today I see that the member from Lakeview, who has asked for 
a non-partisan debate, has not followed that same topic and 
practice and has got into the question of the Human Rights 
Commission, and has indicated that at one time she was a 
deputy chairperson of the Human Rights Commission. I would 
certainly hope that that was not a patronage position. 
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

131 
 

In any event, I deplore the fact that certain members of the 
opposition would try to use human rights for their own political 
purposes to suggest that only they stand for human rights, to 
subvert an issue as important as human rights to petty politics. 
Mr. Speaker, when someone calls for a non-partisan debate, it 
should be non-partisan. 
 
Therefore, on behalf of the government, I reaffirm the 
government’s position to do everything possible to improve and 
continue protecting the human rights of our citizens. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, want to rise 
today, and together with the other members discuss some of the 
aspects of what I believe to be important as it relates to the 
human rights and the people of Saskatchewan, and also to the 
people who I represent and who have in a sense come away 
from those kinds of oppressed parts of the world. 
 
I just want to indicate that my family is a Mennonite family, 
and through various ways and means the people of my family 
moved form the Soviet Union; moved out of there — some in 
haste; some had to leave in various ways. I just want to point 
out a couple of things that I see as reasons why we need to 
support the United Nations and every facet of human rights that 
we possibly can. And things like religious freedom are very 
important to me and to my family. Political freedom is a very 
important part of that freedom that we have. 
 
The other thing that so often strikes me is the freedom of 
opportunity that we so often neglect to think about in relation to 
the kinds of things that give us an opportunity, for example, to 
assemble here, to do it freely, to have the opportunity to discuss 
various aspects as it relates to politics, but also the freedom that 
we have to take on a different political stance. 
 
The other thing that I think is important, and one of the reasons 
of the two that the people of my family came to this country, 
the first was the religious freedom — that was fairly obvious. 
The second was the right to own property or the freedom to 
own property. And that, for my family, was extremely 
important. Over in the Soviet Union they were allowed to own 
property. They did it. They were an agrarian type people and 
they did it, and they did it with a great deal of pride. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, they were asked by the Soviet Union, the 
tzars of the Soviet Union, to move from Germany into Russia to 
deal with the marshes in the southern part of Russia. They were 
asked to move in there and they felt that that was a part of their 
contribution that they could make to the kinds of things that 
were happening there and not happening there; and they had the 
right to own that property. And in the years from the 1860s to 
the 1920s, that right to own that property was eroded and that 
became a very important feature of why the people of my 

background decided to come to this country. They didn’t only 
come here; they came to the United States, and this offered a 
great deal of opportunity for them. 
 
The second thing that I want to say — and I’m going to be brief 
— the second thing that I want to say is that as I travelled to 
Africa some two years ago in relation to the grain that the 
Saskatchewan government sent over to the people over there to 
deal with some of the problems in starvation, I saw evidence of 
some of the real needs o the people of the world who are in a 
situation where they cannot help themselves. 
 
And the reason why they cannot help themselves is because 
they do not have some of the basic human rights that we believe 
in. They don’t have the basic human right of being able to 
decide which political side of the fence they want to be on. For 
example, I visited the Sudan. There were political refugees 
there from Ethiopia, from Chad, from Libya, from Uganda, all 
the countries around that part of the African country. 
 
And they lacked that political freedom that we often consider as 
a part of our natural heritage. And I believe we must be in a 
position where we are prepared to defend it, where we are 
prepared to live by the kinds of things that we have grown 
accustomed it. But learn how to defend them. 
 
And in my opinion, I would like to support this motion and I 
would like to have the Government of Saskatchewan continue 
its role as the kind of government that would give solid support 
to the United Nations in its role in the human rights and the 
development of human rights in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak in favour of 
this motion in a non-partisan way. I believe I have some 
authority to speak about it, and I have the accent to prove it, 
because everybody seems to be talking about their parents 
coming from Germany or Europe, and I, as most of you know, I 
came to this country 32 years ago, just for three years, just to 
explore the country. It only took me three months to make up 
my mind to make my living here and stay here. 
 
As most of you know, I was raised through the Hitler regime, a 
dictatorship. I am only 20 miles from the Czechoslovakian 
border where they have socialism, and I really did appreciate 
what we have in Saskatchewan. As I said, after three months I 
made up my mind and six months later I started my own 
business. That’s opportunity no other country has. We seem to 
take so much for granted in Saskatchewan which other people 
in other countries in the world just dream of. Small things like 
fishing and hunting — most of the people in other parts can 
only dream of. 
 
We heard so much about how bad we have it in Saskatchewan; 
no doubt there is some improvement in human rights, but in my 
opinion Saskatchewan is the best province to live in. We have 
the highest standard of living of anybody in the world. Every 
time I go travelling and come home, I am really appreciative, 
and I come back to  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

132 
 

this Saskatchewan and I think it is just the greatest place to live 
in in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to nemine contradicente. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that 
Motions for Returns (Not Debatable), items 1 through 177, be 
converted to Motions for Returns (Debatable). 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau and the amendment 
thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, when the debate adjourned 
yesterday, I had a few remarks that I wanted to conclude in my 
first speech to the legislature on the throne speech debate, and at 
the point of adjournment I was talking about some of the things 
that I was especially keen on that were contained within the 
throne speech, and I had just wrapped up talking about tourism 
and hospitality institute which has been promised by the 
government through the throne speech. 
 
Another thing that I am very interested in seeing coming about 
in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the 
government is gong to establish a Saskatchewan entrepreneurial 
institute. And I think that small-business people, 
owner-operated businesses within the province have looked 
forward to something like this for a long period of time, 
because quite often they aren’t able to acquire the training that 
they need, and since they are the backbone of our economy, we 
certainly wouldn’t operate in the style that we do now if we did 
not have small business and the many entrepreneurs throughout 
the country that make our system a very vibrant system for the 
most part, and certainly give it stability over the long term. And 
I’m sure that many small businesses will look forward with 
some interest, as I will look forward with interest, about what 
actually comes down with the Saskatchewan entrepreneurial 
institute. 
 
I now would like to refer to something that the hon. member for 
Melville in his address today was talking about. He was 
referring to himself, if I understood it correctly, already as the 
new minister for the department of human resources which I 
didn’t know was in the works yet. I understood that he was the 
minister for almost everything, but I did not understand that he 
was already the new minister of human resources. 
 
And that brings me to an area of some grave concern, is when 
this government starts talking about major realignments and 
major reshuffling of government departments. We’re very 
hesitant to give much support to  

that until we see what’s actually coming down from the 
government in terms of the realignment. The Department of 
Health and the Department of Social Services, and I believe that 
the Department of Supply and Services are in for some very, 
very difficult and trying times over the coming months and over 
the coming years of this legislature. 
 
In the throne speech it’s been alluded to about a review to meet 
the changing requirements of our health services within the 
province. And they talked within the same paragraph in the 
throne speech, Mr. Speaker, about reviewing the costs of 
administration of the province’s health care system. And that 
tells me that we’ll be having maybe some upgrading of the 
technology, but also very heavily centralizing our health care 
systems more than they are now, and not hiring the adequate 
number of health care professionals that we need within the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In terms of income support and the Department of Social 
Services, there’s a review here, and they’re talking about a 
change of the delivery system. And certainly, if I was an 
employee of the Department of Social Services, I would be very 
inquisitive to my supervisors as to what that means to my job. 
And it seems to me that there is a lot of talk from the 
government side about putting the control of income support 
programs back into the hands of municipal governments as it 
did operate under a number of years ago. And I would caution 
that this could well be a mistake on the part of the government 
and would be a nightmare for municipalities. And I don’t think 
that they would be very anxious to take over the income support 
programs within this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the Department of Supply and Services, it gives me 
another area of concern over this government consolidation, 
streamlining. It’s referred to in some places as efficiency, 
effectiveness, and reorganization. The federal government often 
rephrases it a little differently — talk about efficiency, 
effectiveness, and economy, which basically means the same 
thing. And I don’t want to see this government put all of the 
problems for the province of Saskatchewan on the backs of 
public employees. 
 
And where I’m concerned, Mr. Speaker, with the Department of 
Supply and Services is that everything there seems to be 
changing over to this new property management corporation. 
And of course the property management corporation can 
mortgage assets as a Crown corporation, whereas the 
Government of Saskatchewan cannot mortgage those assets. 
And I’m very fearful as we get into difficult economic times in 
the province of Saskatchewan, if that Crown corporation can’t 
pay their bills, then a financial institution can actually seize the 
assets that are actually belonging to the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan, and that causes me a great deal of concern, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of employees who will be under the new property 
management corporation, I’m deeply concerned because in the 
throne speech they’re starting to talk about where savings are 
apparent, and I quote: 
 

. . . individuals and firms will be invited to  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

133 
 

compete for the delivery of specific government services. 
Impediments which preclude the effective delivery of 
services to the public will be identified and addressed. 

 
And that tells me, Mr. Speaker, that people that have given long 
and good service as public employees to this province are in 
danger of losing their jobs. If someone has worked as a janitor 
for a number of years, if a janitorial firm all of a sudden wants 
to bid a dollar an hour cheaper than that person has been doing 
it and built up their seniority over a number of years, that 
person could lose their job because they’re being contracted out 
to the private sector. And although I want to see the private 
sector be buoyant within Saskatchewan, I don’t want to see it 
being done on the backs of public employees. 
 
And this whole consolidation, the new government department, 
and the changing of the departments that are there, caused a 
great deal of fear, certainly at least on this side of the House, 
and I think should cause a great deal of fear in terms of 
provincial government employees in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t want to go on too unduly long, Mr. Speaker, but I would 
like to say that I think we’re in for some challenging times in 
the province of Saskatchewan. I know that just during my 
lifetime we’ve seen more technological change than all of 
mankind, all of the human race, I suppose I should say, Mr. 
Speaker, since the beginning of time. It has displaced a lot of 
people, but people still like the benefits of technology, but 
sometimes that technology moves very, very fast and it seems 
that governments, whether provincial or federal or even 
municipal, have a hard time in keeping pace with that 
technology in the view that it displaces an awful lot of people in 
our society, and we have to give some rethinking to that. 
 
(1515) 
 
I also think that on my first address to this Legislative 
Assembly I would like to mention briefly that the world is often 
a tinder-box situation. I think that we all have a responsibility, 
even though some members would say that the nuclear arms 
issue is something that’s outside the purview of this legislature, 
it’s certainly something that should be of concern to all of us, 
because we do want to be guardians of this great planet of ours 
and hopefully pass it on to the next generation in a better state 
than what we’ve come into it. And these changing times all 
present great challenges for members of the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I think that we have to look very 
carefully at alternates in the future. We have to look at building 
a future for the future generations. 
 
And I would like to acknowledge, as a member from Fairview 
did last night, my family and the support that they’ve given me 
in the term that I have been in a political career and now a 
member of the Legislative Assembly, and I would like to also 
acknowledge a few individuals, former members of the 
Legislative Assembly that have served The Battlefords 
constituency since I have been born, at least, and that is Mr. 
James Maher, who formerly represented The Battlefords as a 
Liberal, and Eiling Kramer, who represented The Battlefords 
constituency  

between 1952 and 1981 when he resigned his seat in the 
legislature. And I would also like to acknowledge David Miner, 
who spent a short term from the by-election when Eiling 
Kramer had resigned to cause that by-election to come about, 
until the great onslaught of the Conservatives in 1982 when 
many of our members of the New Democrats were not elected 
or re-elected in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to say in closing that it’s, I think, a day for all of us 
to reflect on International Human Rights Day. I think that 
people have some basic rights that governments must assure, 
but as the member from Melville, I believe it is, was referring in 
his remarks on the special motion that we had here this 
afternoon, that anything that is written on paper is only as good 
as the political will of the people who are there to enforce that 
and carry it out. And there are some very good charters of rights 
around the world in many countries where peoples’ rights are 
not preserved, and they do not have the freedoms that we enjoy 
in Canada and that we enjoy in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the political will and the way that we deal with people will 
always be very important, and I think that people in 
Saskatchewan should always have a right to income, they 
should have a right to food, they should have a right to shelter 
and clothing, and they should have a right to freedom from 
persecution because of whatever they might do or what they 
might say that is within the legal limits, that others should not 
put down what they have. The great philosopher, Voltaire, once 
said that he may disagree with what one has to say, but he 
would defend to the death their right to say it. And I think that 
you have a great role to play in that in this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, as we have as members of the legislature, to preserve 
that for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I look forward certainly through my term in this 21st 
session of the Legislative Assembly of the province of 
Saskatchewan to serve my constituents well and to serve the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I look forward to a lot of 
consultation and constructive work with members, not only in 
my own caucus, but also on the government side. I thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
privilege to rise in this Assembly today to participate in the 
throne speech debate of Saskatchewan’s 21st Legislature. Mr. 
Speaker, I like my colleagues before me, take this opportunity 
to congratulate you on your election as Saskatchewan’s 18th 
Speaker of this Assembly. 
 
Having worked with you for a year and a half to two years in 
the ministry of Education, I can attest to your capabilities and 
your ability to get the job done. You have a very unique ability 
to listen. Your honesty and a sense of fair play will serve this 
Assembly and its members well, with some co-operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also congratulate the mover and the seconder of 
the throne speech on their presentations. I was impressed as 
new members as they stood in this House with a great deal of 
confidence. I also want to congratulate the members on their 
success in the recent  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

134 
 

election and particularly, Mr. Speaker, the new members. 
 
As competitions go, Mr. Speaker, which elections are, there’s 
always winners and losers. And while we congratulate the 
winners, I believe that congratulations also go the losers in a 
democratic process to ensure that that process indeed stays 
healthy and that people, in fact, have a choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I want to take a moment to express 
congratulations and appreciation to the newly-elected women of 
the NDP caucus. Progress for women in politics often seems 
slow at the best of times. Mr. Speaker, it is encouraging to see 
women in the opposition as they are on the government side of 
the House. It is with appreciation that I say this for they have 
accepted the challenge of political involvement and with that a 
degree of risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each new and old member of this Assembly 
provides very important ideas and viewpoints and preconceived 
opinions and ideas when they come into this House. Some of 
them don’t last long; however, some of them stay around for a 
long time. They also come in with some values, and each new 
member brings to this House, and as a consequence to this 
province, new talents and abilities. They bring strengths and 
weaknesses and yes, Mr. Speaker, we bring our own biases too. 
 
But essentially, Mr. Speaker, we come with a willingness to 
listen and to learn, and that must be maintained if we are indeed 
to be servants of the people as we are duly elected to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity also to thank the 
people of Swift Current, my constituency. They have placed in 
me a degree of trust and confidence and they have worked hard 
in seeing the democratic process through its time on October 
20, and for that I thank them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Swift Current, which I am honoured 
and proud to represent, is in the heart of what we call the great 
South-west. The member from Morse, the member from 
Shaunavon, and the member from Maple Creek will readily 
identify with that. We are the major trading centre for one-tenth 
of this province’s population. Like most urban centres in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we are largely dependant on 
agriculture as our economic base. But we are aware of the ever 
increasing need to develop and diversify our economy. 
 
While our base is agriculture, Mr. Speaker, we have been 
fortunate in that area of the province to build a major secondary 
industry and that is in the oil and gas area. I say that with some 
caution, Mr. Speaker, given the plight of the oil and gas 
industries and the world commodity markets today. 
 
New industry and the continued growth of our small business 
sector are very essential to Swift Current for its growth and its 
prosperity and its people. Since 1982 our Progressive 
Conservative government has laid out a path, Mr. Speaker, and 
it is a broadening path for the development of Saskatchewan 
through our resources, our people, and our small businesses. 

It has also included a commitment to provide opportunity for 
people to improve the quality of their life through government 
incentives and initiatives, and of course, Mr. Speaker, the 
encouragement of the private sector. 
 
A few examples, Mr. Speaker, of these commitments at work in 
my constituency are perhaps best described as the 
pharmaceutical plant — a $12.5 million plant. This plant will 
create 100 new jobs. And interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, 
when you take a look at the spin-offs, they add up to something 
more than impressive. 
 
City council not too long ago had looked at it, and with that 
type of a project they estimated that Swift Current would see 
245 more people; 60 more families; 75 more school children; 
$1.75 million more in personal income on an annual basis; $1 
million more, Mr. Speaker, in bank depositions on an annual 
basis; $750,000 more in retail sales per year; two more retail 
establishments; and $250,000 more in municipal property taxes 
yearly. 
 
While it’s an estimate, Mr. Speaker, it’s also a good indication 
of the spin-offs that come from growth in this province. Further 
development in my constituency include such projects, Mr. 
Speaker, as a new $3 million senior complex, about to be built. 
Construction has started on a new $1 million building to house 
the new SaskTel switching station. And, Mr. Speaker, 23 new 
jobs and related benefits will also be felt with the establishment 
of the agriculture credit corporation in our fair city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many other communities in Saskatchewan, 
Swift Current residents have benefited from many of our 
government programs over the last while. And I think of some 
examples such as the Saskatchewan home program, which has 
provided some new jobs and also improved the security element 
for our home owners. I also think of the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan which allows not only home makers, Mr. Speaker, but 
part-time employees. It gives farmers and small-business people 
and employees of those businesses an opportunity o participate 
in a pension plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne continues the 
direction that has been developed and fine tuned to a degree, 
since this government was first elected in 1982. It is a direction 
that recognizes the realities of the world and the structural 
changes that have been taking place. 
 
Our major priorities through the throne speech continue to focus 
on agriculture, job creation, education, health, economic 
development, and increased government efficiency and 
effectiveness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is building this province on its 
two main strengths — people and our resources — thus, the 
vital need for continued protection for our people and increased 
opportunities through economic development and an emphasis 
on education. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we must continue to protect the 
farming community against things like drought, grasshoppers, 
low commodity prices, those things caused by the measures of 
other countries that are  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

135 
 

taking place. We have a record of protection in agriculture that 
indeed establishes precedents for other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the money that is destined for our farmers, as 
announced by the federal government yesterday, is coming to 
Saskatchewan because of the commitment of our Premier to 
agriculture. Mr. Speaker, through the leadership of our Premier, 
agriculture for the first time ever is on the national agenda. 
While our track record in agriculture is good, Mr. Speaker, we 
will continue an emphasis on it. 
 
We also have a fairly good track record, Mr. Speaker, in areas 
like education, health care, and job creation. Mr. Speaker, the 
development funds that were created in each of the latter three 
areas are unmatched by any other jurisdiction right across 
Canada, and it further demonstrates a commitment to protecting 
and providing opportunities for people, young and old. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I noted with interest the emphasis on education in 
the throne speech. As a former minister of Education and 
spending three and one-half years there plus 10 full years with 
the school board, it was gratifying to see a government put an 
emphasis on the education system. In the education system, Mr. 
Speaker, we embarked three, four years ago upon a process of 
renewal and development in the primary and secondary schools 
and universities. We did the post-secondary first and then 
turned our emphasis on the primary. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, increased education funding was up 
since 1982 by 52 per cent. We committed $400 million over 
five years to both the education development fund and the 
university renewal fund. At the same time we offered a 
lowering to 6 per cent for student loans. I would also add, Mr. 
Speaker, for the first time on those students loans, as announced 
from the hon. member from Meadow Lake at that time, was 
extra moneys for single parents to recognize the added costs 
that they may have in continuing their education. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the recent throne speech we have identified the 
importance and the need for excellence in education. We also 
identified the need to revise the subjects taught in our schools. 
There has been a major review in the past. It is now time to look 
at those subjects and make a decision. Mr. Speaker, we are 
required to put into order an assurance that our children will 
obtain the skills that they will need to compete in a very 
increasingly complex world. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, also recognizes the key role of 
education in our province’s future economic and social 
development. We understand the need to provide quality 
education more efficiently and effectively. I am reminded, Mr. 
Speaker, that the quality of our education system must never, 
ever be measured by simply the amount of resources flowing 
into it, but rather by the educational achievements of the 
students that are coming out of our system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to deal briefly with my new  

responsibilities, the portfolio of Energy and Mines. Since 1982 
our government has advanced these resources as a basis, simply 
a basis for growth and diversification for this province through 
changing the tax and regulations in order to transform the oil 
and gas industry into a new strength for this province’s 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve already begun to develop our massive 
heavy oil deposits through the NewGrade heavy oil upgrader in 
Regina. An agreement with Alberta and the federal government 
for a second upgrader in the Lloydminster area will further 
develop this province and further develop opportunities for our 
people. 
 
We have stimulated the demand for natural gas production with 
in Saskatchewan through the development of the rural natural 
gas distribution program, reducing costs for rural and small 
urban users, and no longer, Mr. Speaker, must we rely on 
Alberta for our gas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the oil price collapse of early 1986 has drastically 
reduced the drilling activity and the job opportunities that 
created record revenues for Saskatchewan. Those revenues, Mr. 
Speaker, a short while ago provided as much as 25 per cent of 
our total revenues. 
 
The oil field employment program that was created earlier this 
year was put into place to offset the uncertainties surrounding 
the world oil prices and was extended to October 31st of this 
year. However, Mr. Speaker, we must develop a long-term plan 
to take over when temporary programs end. And we are 
working towards that end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I will continue the consultation 
process and co-operation that has been established by previous 
ministers to me in this portfolio. We will consult with 
individuals and the industry officials in search for long-term 
solutions. Mr. Speaker, this is a commitment we must ensure in 
order to sustain the livelihoods of the many families that are 
involved in this industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some very positive aspects regarding my 
portfolio despite the low prices on the world markets. Despite 
the lower prices and surpluses in potash, Mr. Speaker, our 
aggressive marketing strategy in potash has led to recent sales 
in China and elsewhere around the world. The development of 
our gold mines and our resources through increased exploration 
and development will provide new revenues. But more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, it provides new jobs and new 
opportunities for our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I conclude, I would like to point out the 
outstanding leadership provided to Saskatchewan by our 
Premier, the hon. member from the constituency of Estevan. No 
government in the recent history of this province, and no leader, 
Mr. Speaker, has been forced to deal with some of the problems 
and the situations that this government has faced over the last 
four and a half years. 
 
We’ve had good times, and we’ve certainly seen some bad — 
crises such as drought, the market falling out on  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

136 
 

oil, potash. But through all that, his belief of the strength and 
wisdom of this province and its people never wavered. His 
tenacity, his will, and his vision for what this province can 
become will continue to move our province forward. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to support the throne 
speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to participate in 
this throne speech debate. And with many of the other members 
who have already done so, I would congratulate you on your 
election to the Speaker’s chair. And I, too, look forward to 
working with you. And as a rookie MLA, I look forward to 
learning from you of the procedures and operations of this 
legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if it was through your good offices that the 
Regina Bell Ringers were present here in the rotunda the day of 
the opening of the legislature, then I would wish to thank you, 
and through you to thank them, for the outstanding performance 
we all enjoyed that day. 
 
I’ve had some experience with bell choirs and bell ringers, and I 
know what a difficult performing art it is. And their outstanding 
performance that day, I’m sure, was appreciated by all 
members. Just in fact, Mr. Speaker, as I look back on it now, I 
think perhaps I enjoyed more of what I heard in the rotunda 
than what I heard here in this Chamber that same afternoon. 
 
I would also wish to congratulate all members on their 
re-election or election to this House, and I suppose particularly 
all those who, like myself, are here for the very first time. But, 
Mr. Speaker, whether we are veteran members or rookie 
members, I’m sure we all again have a sense of the 
responsibility that has been given us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not particularly gifted individuals; we’re 
not particularly gifted men and women. There’s nothing really 
all that special about us, and yet the people of Saskatchewan 
have chosen us to represent them. A million people have chosen 
us to represent their interests and their hope and their dreams 
and their concerns, and they expect us to govern for the good of 
the many —not for the good of the privileged few, but for the 
good of the many. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And that is, Mr. Speaker, an awesome 
responsibility. We in opposition have a particular responsibility, 
it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, a particular task. It is our 
responsibility to ensure and to be vigilant in ensuring that this 
province is governed fairly and competently and, in the 
tradition of Saskatchewan, compassionately. 
 
And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that we are ready on this 
side of the House, ready and willing, and I might say able, to 
undertake that responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Calvert: — If the members opposite do not know that 
already, they soon will. This is a different House, Mr. Speaker, 
and because it is a different House, it will be a different 
Saskatchewan and a better Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the time that I have today to participate in this 
throne speech debate, I would like to relate it particularly to the 
constituency I am privileged to represent, the constituency of 
Moose Jaw South. 
 
And I might say that in the early days of this century, my 
grandmother and grandfather immigrated to this country and 
they immigrated to the constituency of Moose Jaw South. My 
father was born and lived and laboured and died in the 
constituency. I was born there, grew up there, and I am pleased 
to make a home for my family there. And it’s a particular 
honour to represent one’s home and to represent people whom 
one has known over a lifetime. I would want to sincerely thank 
the people of Moose Jaw South who offered me their support, 
and I want to pledge myself to the working for all of the people 
of Moose Jaw South, be they political friend or foe, in my term 
of office. 
 
And might I say to members present that had it not been for a 
quirk of history, I might well in this speech be welcoming you 
all to the constituency of Moose Jaw South. With all deference 
to my Regina colleagues, the natural capital for the territory is 
40 miles west of here. We already had a river; we didn’t need to 
build one. Had it not been for some little arrangement between 
somebody named Dewdney and the CPR railroad, this building 
might very well have been in the constituency of Moose Jaw 
South. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or Saskatoon South. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Or Saskatoon. 
 
Well I suggest that there are some folks wiser than Mr. 
Dewdney, about 35,000 people who choose to make their home 
in Moose Jaw, and I’m privileged to represent about half of 
them. 
 
As you will know, Mr. Speaker, and other members will likely 
know, of all the communities in this province, Moose Jaw is 
home to a higher percentage of senior citizens than any other, 
and my constituency is home to a good many of them. The 
constituency of Moose Jaw South, four out of the five large 
senior citizens’ housing developments are located there. We are 
home to two major nursing homes. 
 
We often speak of the contribution that seniors have made out 
our past and to our history, and well we should, but let us also 
recognize the contribution that seniors are making to our 
present. In Moose Jaw, organizations of and for seniors are 
active; they’re flourishing. Seniors have significant financial 
impact on our community. Seniors are fully involved in 
volunteer organizations and churches, in culture and recreation. 
They are a dynamic part of my constituency, Mr. Speaker. And 
in many cases these seniors have chosen Moose Jaw for the 
quality of retirement life that is offered in our community. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the seniors of my constituency have  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

137 
 

concerns, and concerns they have asked me to bring to this 
House. They were concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the silence of 
this government when the Mulroney government threatened to 
de-index their pensions. And they were concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, when they heard the throne speech, listened to the 
throne speech, and heard nothing in that speech about the 
Mulroney government’s plans to inhibit the generic drug 
industry in this country. And some of them were frankly 
appalled when they heard the Premier say that his government 
now supports that direction being taken in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the seniors of my constituency know that this 
legislation will mean higher drug prices for them. They know 
that and no one argues it. They have good company in their 
belief. Last night it was reported in the Star-Phoenix that Dr. 
Harry Eastman, chairman-elect of the proposed patent drug 
prices review board, has made it quite clear, “Prices will be 
higher than they would have been had the legislation not been 
changed.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the seniors of Moose Jaw cannot understand this 
government’s position on the drug patent legislation. It’s only 
natural, Mr. Speaker, that seniors do have a concern for the 
whole area of health care, and in my constituency seniors are 
asking why it is that in this throne speech mention is made of 
increasing technology for health care, when in the city of 
Moose Jaw we have a hospital with an entire floor that goes 
unused, simply due to lack of funding, lack of staffing. 
 
Seniors in my constituency want to see their hospital fully 
utilized and fully staffed, and I might say they don’t want to see 
it done by lotteries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — It’s also natural, Mr. Speaker, that the seniors 
of Moose Jaw South are concerned about nursing home care 
and nursing home beds. And we in Moose Jaw were very 
pleased when this government announced the rebuilding of St. 
Anthony’s Home, an existing nursing home facility in Moose 
Jaw that at one point offered 180 nursing home beds. It’s a 
facility that’s in desperate need of rebuilding. We welcomed the 
announcement. 
 
But then, Mr. Speaker, half-way through the planning, the 
government changed the rules, changed the rules on the 
funding, so that the Sisters of Providence who are responsible 
for the administration of St. Anthony’s Home, these sisters were 
then forced to go out and raise another million dollars in 
addition to the million dollars they’re already contributing to 
the rebuilding. I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that through the 
generosity of Moose Jaw people, that million dollars is almost 
completely raised now. 
 
(1545) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when the rebuilding is complete, the new 
facility we will have in Moose Jaw will have 20 fewer beds 
than previously offered at St. Anthony’s Home -—20 fewer 
beds. The government is building a small nursing home than the 
one that was in existence. As we look around at an ageing 
population and an ever-growing  

demand for these beds in Moose Jaw, it simply makes no sense 
to me, Mr. Speaker, and so I would call upon the Minister of 
Health to authorize now, before construction begins, another 40 
beds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, like my grandparents and my 
parents, the vast majority of my constituents are working 
people. They work on the railways; they work in packing 
plants; they work in industries related to agriculture; they work 
in retail and service. Some time ago I might have said they 
work for Highways, but they were freed up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the working people of my constituency are people 
who take pride in their work. They are people who ask only for 
a decent return and reward for their labour. They only ask for 
some security in their jobs, some security in their retirement, 
some safety and equality in their work place. Mr. Speaker, the 
working people of Moose Jaw South are not all that interested 
in Jacuzzis and hot tubs. They only want a decent life for 
themselves and their children. 
 
In the past four years, four and a half years, Mr. Speaker, the 
working people of my constituency have been hurt. Many of 
them have seen their jobs disappear entirely, and they have 
learned the cycle of unemployment and then social assistance. 
Many of them have seen job cut-backs. They have learned the 
cycle of part-time and temporary and no benefits. 
 
The people of my constituency have watched many of their 
protections in legislation being eroded. They feel unprotected, 
unprotected against technological change. They feel their 
pension benefits are unprotected. Mr. Speaker, the working 
people of Moose Jaw South feel betrayed by this government, 
and they feel betrayed by an economic system that treats them 
as pawns. They feel betrayed by an economic system that seems 
to provide more and more to the few, and less and less for the 
many. 
 
Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker, of how working 
people in Moose Jaw South have felt betrayed and unsupported 
by this government. You will know, Mr. Speaker, that the CPR 
and the CNR railroads are proposing and seeking to remove the 
caboose from the freight trains that cross this province — trains 
that carry a good deal of dangerous and hazardous 
commodities. The railroads wish to replace the caboose and its 
conductor with a little black box which is called the end of train 
unit, the ETU, or the end of train information system, the ETIS. 
It’s a little black box that’s supposed to replace a human being. 
If the railways are successful in their bid, Mr. Speaker, it seems 
to me there will be three results. The first will be an immediate 
threat to the safety of every community on a rail line in 
Saskatchewan, and the environment. 
 
The second result — and this is not even hardly debated by the 
railways any more — it will mean that freight train crews will 
be reduced from a three-member crew to a two-member crew. 
In the city of Moose Jaw that could mean the loss of up to 90 
jobs. That’s 90 family incomes. 
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

138 
 

And the third result, of course, Mr. Speaker, will be an increase 
in the profits of the railways. As you well know, very recently a 
hearing was held in Moose Jaw of the Canadian Transport 
Commission for the case of the railways was to be tested. Mr. 
Speaker, intervener after intervener at that hearing opposed the 
removal of the caboose — opposed the removal of the manned 
caboose. 
 
I noted, Mr. Speaker, that the federal MP, Bill Gottselig, who 
represents Moose Jaw, came to the hearing and made a strong 
presentation in favour of keeping the caboose. I noted, Mr. 
Speaker, that the member from Melville was present at the 
hearing, and my constituents would thank him for being there 
and bringing a case in support of saving the caboose. I was 
there to bring that same case. Intervener after intervener brought 
the case. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Melville was present, 
he made it very clear that he was not there in his capacity of 
Minister of Labour; he was not there to represent his cabinet; he 
was not there to represent his government. Now I understand, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Highways and Transportation 
was scheduled to appear at the hearing and bring forward, I 
would assume, the government’s position. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Highways did not show up. 
 
And so we therefore, in Moose Jaw, do not know the position of 
the government on this crucial issue, an issue that affects the 
safety of people across the province, that directly affects the 
safety of my constituents and their economic livelihood. It’s 
one example, Mr. Speaker, of why working people in my 
constituency do not feel supported, but rather feel betrayed, by 
their government. 
 
Working people in Moose Jaw South — perhaps I should add, 
people who are looking for work — were anticipating this 
throne speech. They were looking for something in it that they 
could applaud. They were looking for something in it that 
would tell them that their concerns, which they so loudly 
expressed in the election, looking for something that would tell 
them their concerns had been heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were looking for a winter works program, 
and they heard nothing. They were looking for a comprehensive 
job strategy, and they heard nothing. They were looking for 
some tax relief — property tax relief, income tax relief. They 
heard nothing. And what they did hear, Mr. Speaker, was that 
the department charged with representing their interests in 
government, the Department of Labour, they were shocked to 
find it’s been dumped into a vast conglomeration of 
departments, and they feel betrayed. 
 
And if it’s only for the interests of the working people in the 
constituency of Moose Jaw South and those who desire to work, 
I could not support this throne speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is in my constituency a small but a very 
significant facility. It is named the Angus Campbell Centre, and 
it’s primarily a detox facility for those who are trapped in 
alcohol and drug abuse. Mr. Speaker, a very valuable work is 
happening in the Angus Campbell Centre in Moose Jaw, and I 
want to very publicly support their endeavours to obtain a new 
facility. And, Mr.  

Speaker, I am ready to support the government on many of the 
current initiatives that have been taken through the 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission — 
through SADAC — even if it took an election to bring them 
forward, I’m glad it’s happening. 
 
As one who has been involved in family counselling and 
working with young people over these past seven years, I can 
assure members present that the problem is real and very 
destructive. But, Mr. Speaker, as good as they are, and as good 
as they can be, all of our efforts in rehabilitation are simply not 
enough. 
 
I liken them to a Humpty-Dumpty approach. You know 
Humpty-Dumpty gets pushed off the wall and then we try and 
put the pieces together again. And sometimes all the king’s 
horses and all the king’s men can’t put Humpty-Dumpty 
together again. And as good as they are, Mr. Speaker — as 
good as they are — our efforts in rehabilitation cannot exist 
alone. We need to be looking at what put Humpty on the wall in 
the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the young people that I have worked with 
over the course of the past few years — those young people 
have known family disintegration. And much of that has 
happened due to economics — job loss, unemployment, both 
parents forced into the work place. Those are not issues 
unrelated to this legislature. I’ve observed among young people 
that they have lost their hope — lost the hope of finding a job 
for themselves — finding a long and lasting and secure career. 
And they live in a world that they, very accurately, perceive as 
being threatened. There’re all sorts of pressure upon them, Mr. 
Speaker. It puts them on that wall and only takes but a push to 
push them over. The easiest form of escape, Mr. Speaker, for 
our young people is in the bottle of beer that’s right before 
them, or that pill. 
 
And so it seems to me an issue that is closely-related to this 
discussion. It’s in regard to the beer and wine ads on television. 
The minister’s advisory committee received dozens and dozens 
of submissions from teachers, from parents, from churches, 
from family counselling agencies calling for these ads to be 
pulled. Now I know that members opposite will say that these 
ads have no influence on consumption, and only a few days ago 
we were told that, in fact, consumption levels in the province 
have declined. So clearly, the ads are not increasing 
consumption. Well there’s some little contradiction here, Mr. 
Speaker, some little contradiction because in the throne speech 
the Premier said to us: “My ministers have viewed with 
growing concern the increasing abuse, particularly by young 
people, of alcohol and drugs,” and he goes on to describe that as 
a growing tide of abuse. Well for once I agree here with the 
Premier. Overall consumption may be declining, but it’s not 
declining among the young, not declining among those who are 
most influenced by television. 
 
Now if it’s argued that alcohol ads have no affect on 
consumption, then how can it, at the same time, be argued that 
ads promoting the reasonable use of alcohol will have an effect? 
If members opposite do, in fact, believe that these beer ads have 
no effect on young people, then I invite them to read the 
comment of the 17-year-old high school student, the high 
school football  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

139 
 

player, as it appeared in this supplement to the Regina 
Leader-Post on November 22 of this year. He said, and I quote: 
“I wish my life was a beer commercial”. I invite members 
opposite to read the entire text of his remarks. I invite them to 
listen to the teachers, parents, to the churches that are calling for 
the removal of these ads. I’m not suggesting that they are the 
root of the problem, but they may be just that little push that’s 
needed to get Humpty-Dumpty off the wall. And if we’re really 
sincere . . . if we’re really sincere in our efforts to stem the tide 
of drug and alcohol abuse, we will take every option available 
to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me begin to move to some 
conclusion in this by turning once more to the constituency that 
I represent and lay before the government a few of the very 
many specific ways that they may act to serve the people of 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Yesterday afternoon the member from Moose Jaw North, very 
eloquently described the exciting downtown redevelopment 
program that is being undertaken in Moose Jaw. It’s perhaps the 
most exciting downtown redevelopment that this province has 
ever seen, and I’m confident, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
will want to be a partner in that redevelopment. 
 
Members will also be aware, perhaps, of the Wakamow Valley 
Authority, an authority-formed under the former New 
Democratic government and charged with the task of reclaiming 
the Moose Jaw river valley for its natural habitat and for 
recreation. Mr. Speaker, in its first term of office this 
government changed the funding formula for the Wakamow 
Valley, substantially reducing the province’s contribution. I will 
be pressing this government, Mr. Speaker, to at least restore the 
former level of funding; restore to a least a matching situation 
with the city of Moose Jaw; restore the funding so it’s at least 
fair in light of the other like authorities across the province. 
 
(1600) 
 
Closely related here, Mr. Speaker, is a current . . . a very 
recently completed task force report on the entire Moose Jaw 
River. It, too, will invite the provincial government’s assistance 
in reclaiming this very valuable economic and environmental 
resource. And I’m sure I will be joining with the member from 
Thunder Creek in the not too distant future in calling upon the 
government to lend their assistance. 
 
There are other opportunities in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, for 
this government to show its good faith and its interest in our 
community. Opportunities at the Western Development 
Museum, opportunities on our exhibition grounds, and perhaps 
in the not too distant future, opportunities to share with us in 
developing a geothermal project which could be one of the most 
exciting projects, not only for Moose Jaw, but for this province. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, let me if I may — I am preacher by trade 
— so let me if I may, end with just a little bit of a  

sermon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I would like to simply share with members 
present, and all members present, a little reflection on our role 
as members of this Assembly. There is an ancient Indian poem, 
Mr. Speaker, that when translated reads: 
 

I fell asleep and dreamed that life was happiness, 
I awoke and found that life was service, 
I served and found that service was happiness. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re here for one purpose, and it’s one purpose 
alone, and that’s to serve — to serve the constituents who 
elected us; to serve the people of this province; and in so doing 
to serve our nation and to serve the hurting world of which we 
are a part. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when our days are done in this place, 
whether we’ve been a back-bencher, a member of the front 
bench, a member of government, or a member of opposition — 
when our days in this place are done we’ll be judged, not on the 
accolades or the honours that we’ve taken for ourselves; we’ll 
be judged not on the slickness of the image we’re presented to 
the press; we will be judged not on how eloquent or uneloquent 
we were in this House, we will be judged on how we have 
served, and judged on not how well we have served the 
privileged, but on how well we have served the very least 
among us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
supporting the amendment before us, for I do not believe that 
this Speech from the Throne well serves the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a proud day for me to 
be able to rise in this House to address yourself and this august 
body. Mr. Deputy Speaker, like my fellow members of this 
legislature who have spoken before me, I would like to extend 
my congratulations to the Speaker on his election as Speaker of 
this legislature. As a member of this House, sir, I have every 
reason to believe he will conduct the proceedings of this 
Assembly in keeping with our parliamentary traditions. Please 
extend my best wishes to him in his new role as Speaker of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to congratulate the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview and the member from Pelly, the mover and 
seconder of the Speech from the Throne. And at this time I’d 
like to join with the previous Progressive conservative members 
in expressing confidence in the leadership of our Premier. The 
member of Estevan has distinguished himself in the office of 
Premier as a contemporary, dynamic, versatile leader. Our 
Premier exemplifies the meaning of leadership. He is the man 
for the times. 
 
As the Progressive member for Regina Wascana, I’m honoured 
to be part of the government caucus in support  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

140 
 

of the Premier. Saskatchewan’s first minister is a man who has 
made all of us who know him proud to be part of his team. I 
want to thank the constituents of Regina Wascana for allowing 
me this privilege. As members before me on both sides of the 
House have stated, we’re all proud to be part of this democratic 
process that has become so fragile around the world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Regina Wascana is a large constituency. It 
has within it Wascana Park, the largest urban park in the 
world—a beautiful park used by thousands throughout the year. 
Regina Wascana has a growing, vibrant university and technical 
school within its boundaries that has old established 
neighbourhoods like Douglas Park and Hillsdale, and it has new 
and growing neighbourhoods like University Park and Gardiner 
Park. It is a residential neighbourhood, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that houses government employees, shopkeepers, 
small-business owners, workers in the service industry — an 
interesting constituency with a mix of ethnic groups., 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are three senior citizens’ 
homes in Regina Wascana constituency. Many of the residents 
of these homes have expressed their support to me of the 
policies of the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a youngster, I grew up in this area close by the 
Legislative Building, and spent many hours with my friends 
watching the proceedings of the Saskatchewan legislature. As 
we sat in the gallery and watched those stimulating debates of 
yesteryear on issues of health and education, of economic 
development and agriculture, little did I realize that some day I 
would be sitting on the floor of this House involved directly in 
the discussions of the public good. And recently, Mr. Speaker, I 
had the great pleasure of being able to watch our Premier, the 
member from Estevan, continue to lead that tradition of earnest 
debate. 
 
These remain interesting times, Mr. Speaker, times when young 
people can still watch the democratic process in which we all 
participate. I consider it an honour myself to be part of this 
process. 
 
I’m proud also, as is my family, because election day, October 
20, 1986, was the 70th anniversary of the election of my uncle 
as premier of this province. That was the first session of the 
Fourth Legislature which sat from 1917 to 1921. I am proud to 
follow in his footsteps and it is my fondest hope that some day 
another member of our family will care enough about 
democracy to seek public office themselves and serve the 
people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina has prospered because of the 
programs of the Progressive Conservative government. Since 
1982, home ownership and new home construction has 
increased dramatically in Regina, and part of the reason of this 
is the mortgage interest reduction program protecting home 
owners. Another reason was the $3,000 first-time home owners 
grants. These programs have created more jobs than any winter 
works program ever designed. 
 
Now in the Speech from the Throne there is 9 and three-quarter 
per cent mortgage at 10 years on the  

principal residence. Many Regina home owners will benefit 
from this as indeed will thousands of others throughout the 
province. Protection, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We see it in so many 
ways — protecting home owners, protecting the elderly, 
protecting the handicapped, and protecting the rights of 
individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can cite countless examples of Regina home 
owners who’ve taken advantage of the $1,500 home 
improvement matching grant from this province and an equal 
number of Regina home owners who have improved their home 
with a 6 per cent, $10,000 loan. Roofing, insulation, an extra 
room for a growing family, Mr. Deputy Speaker, jobs, jobs as 
promised and jobs as delivered. 
 
Building a better Regina has been a commitment to this city 
unequalled by any other provincial government. It has meant a 
commitment for the Regina heavy oil upgrader. It meant a new 
carbon filtration plant for Regina. It meant nearly $41 million in 
new school construction in this city and over $95 million in 
health care projects for Regina. Because of the job creation 
record of the PC government, Regina has one of the best job 
creation records of any city in western Canada. Young people 
with new ideas, Mr. Speaker, among others. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, small business in Regina has grown 
because of this government and many of them owned by 
women now having an opportunity build their own future and 
add to the economic strength of this province. Under the PC 
policies, women have responded to the challenge of small 
business. As a consequence, Mr. Speaker, women play a major 
role in Saskatchewan’s economy and the future growth of this 
province. It is interesting to note, but not surprising, that the 
success rate for women in new business is three to one for men. 
As a father of four daughters I understand, respect, and support 
their determination. 
 
There’s been a dramatic increase in housing for seniors in 
Regina because of this government. Just the other day, Mr. 
Speaker, I attended a ground-breaking ceremony for a new 
senior citizens’ home as part of the St. Basil’s Ukrainian 
Catholic complex in the city, jointly funded by the province, the 
city, and the church. Another example of this government’s 
concern and commitment to the elderly, the pioneers and the 
builders of this province. 
 
There has been increased funding to the University of Regina 
through the university renewal and development funds since 
this government came into office. The total package in 
Saskatchewan is $125 million over five years. In addition, the 
educational development fund for kindergarten to grade 12 
totals $275 million for the five-year package. Funding in 
Saskatchewan since 1982 has increased as we heard earlier, by 
52 per cent. Government construction in the city has included a 
new campus at the Wascana Institute on Winnipeg Street North. 
Four new SGI centres have been built throughout the city. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the construction on the new Regina fieldhouse for 
the 1987 Western Canada Summer Games is well under way, 
and what a boon that will be to the sports and recreation for 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1982 the Progressive Conservative  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

141 
 

government has worked to help the city of Regina in so many 
positive ways. And in the next four years this government will 
keep up its record of building Regina. As MLA for Regina 
Wascana, I want to make it clear to this legislature that I shall 
work for programs, buildings, and policies that will help the 
city of Regina and the people of Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — But, Mr. Speaker, we must always remember 
that the people of Regina, for the most part, have rural roots. 
One of the most unusual outcomes of this recent election was 
the artificial division of town and country made apparent by the 
present seating arrangements in the House. As an urban 
Progressive Conservative member of this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, I intend over the next four years to make every effort 
to bring to the attention of this government the needs of citizens 
of the Saskatchewan cities in relation to the development in 
rural areas. 
 
A healing process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is needed between the 
city and the rural towns of this province and between those 
towns and the surrounding districts and I, Mr. Speaker, will 
champion their cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the themes outlined in the Speech from the 
Throne was quality of life. A simple phrase really — quality of 
life — but a phrase with considerable meaning. It brings to 
thought, education to recreation to time together with our 
families. 
 
I was fortunate as a youngster to spend time walking the hills of 
the Qu’Appelle Valley, discovering the first flowers of spring, 
watching the migrating water-fowl returning to the spring 
nesting sites. Important times to me, Mr. Speaker. This had a 
lasting influence on me and an influence that Louise and I have 
carried on with our four children, our four daughters. We have 
shared good times together. It’s been a important part of our life 
and will continue to be. In recent years the members of our 
family have canoed the magnificent Churchill River, the 
historic Churchill, which carried the canoes of early fur traders 
like Alexander Mackenzie, Peter Pond, Simon Fraser, and 
others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these moments of life quality with our family have 
presented opportunities to talk of many things with our children 
— to talk of the future; to talk of the province; to talk of our 
lives. And what of that future, Mr. Speaker? How will our 
families get along in this changing world economy? What 
opportunities will be available to them since economic 
influences have shifted from the provincial and national scenes 
to the world scene? Will they be forced to leave this province as 
many of my friends were in the ‘50s and the ‘60s because 
opportunities were not available? Well, certainly not if I and my 
colleagues of this government can prevent this from happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne  

spoke of economic diversification, a prospect I find both 
exciting and necessary. And it has been happening. New 
industries are now operating and businesses are hiring 
Saskatchewan people. And as we set our course over the next 
four years and on to the 1990s, the prospect of even greater 
diversification of the provincial economy is exciting indeed. We 
must change with the times. We must react to the changing 
world economy. 
 
The protection of jobs and the possibility of opportunity 
through economic diversification is what we’re talking about, 
Mr. Speaker, and we will deliver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province must be adaptable. And education 
also will play a key role in this respect. As we said in the 
Speech from the Throne, our educational system must be more 
than just acceptable; we must strive for excellence. Direction 
from the Departments of Education and Advanced Education 
will be a part in development of our people. But equally 
important, advice and input will be needed from our educators, 
our parents, and equally important, our students. We must 
continue to listen to our young people. They too must have a 
say in their future. They do and want to have something to say. 
All we have to do is listen. 
 
In my previous occupation as a sports commentator for the 
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, I had numerous 
opportunities to travel to many parts of the world and to watch 
and report on the performances of the world’s finest athletes, 
including many athletes from Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a thrill for me to have this experience. How 
proud I felt when our Saskatchewan athletes did so well against 
the world’s best. With the assistance now available to them 
from the Department of Culture and Recreation and the better 
coaching available to them through the Saskatchewan First 
program, I know we will see even more of our young athletes 
make their mark on the international scene. 
 
But let us not limit our assistance just to athletes, and of course 
we haven’t. The arts too must be and have been supported and 
indeed highlighted. Many Saskatchewan artists have 
international reputations. World-renowned tenor Jon Vickers 
from prince Albert; saxophonist Paul Brodie from Regina; jazz 
guitarist Red Shea from Prince Albert, the lead man for Gordon 
Lightfoot for many years; and Shea’s brother, Les Pouliet, now 
with Johnny Cash; and more recently, Mr. Speaker, jazz pianist 
John Ballantyne from Saskatoon; and classical pianist Audry 
Andrist from Estevan; Boyd McDonald, and the list goes on. 
Sculptors like Joe Fafard and John Nugent. Artists like Allan 
Sapp, Dorothy Knowles, Art McKay. Mr. Speaker, exceptional 
people in Saskatchewan are out there by the hundreds. We must 
continue to provide an opportunity for artists, for actors, for 
athletes, and we will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of Saskatchewan. This is where I grew 
up. This is where I want to be. I want to be part of shaping its 
future. We, the people of Saskatchewan, have so much 
potential. There is so much more we can be — so much more. 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion, the Speech from 
the Throne, and thank you. 
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

142 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to 
congratulate you on your position as the Speaker. A lot of 
people do not know that in regards to your input into the 
education of Indian and Métis people. A lot of people knew of 
the Tusa report in regards to the importance of involving people 
of small minorities. Your name is quoted already in the 
academic field. So, Mr. Speaker, I again congratulate you. 
 
I would also like to extend my congratulations to the people 
who in one short week I’ve found to have the greatest 
composure in this House, and that’s the pages and the clerical 
staff. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I also would like to extend my congratulations 
to the hard-working staff on both sides of the House. I also 
would like to congratulate all the elected members of this 
province on the 21st Legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud and honoured to be elected 
representative of Cumberland constituency. I will start out, Mr. 
Speaker, by expressing myself in the language that I know best. 
I would like to express myself in the first ways that I have 
learned how to recognize friendship and recognize debate and 
recognize the importance of politics. 
 
I will therefore, Mr. Speaker, deal with the issues of the throne 
speech and also of the North and also of aboriginal people, in 
my own language. I will provide the translation for it, right 
after. 
 
(1630) 
 
(The hon. member spoke in his native language.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I would like to say it is an honour for me to 
be standing in this legislature. I would like to say that as a 
young rookie MLA I had a lot to learn, first of all from the 
people of my constituency. As I travelled around, I gained some 
knowledge and greater insight into the issues that affected the 
daily lives of the people. And they showed me the importance 
of the belief in the system, that no matter how tough the 
situation was, that you still had to give your voice in this 
province. 
 
When I examined the record, Mr. Speaker, 14 per cent more 
people voted in Cumberland constituency this year. And that 
was the message that they gave me. There was a sense of 
perseverance. With the record-high unemployment rates of 80, 
90 per cent in certain communities, there has to be a 
tremendous amount of perseverance. 
 
(1645) 
 
The other thing that I have learned was the importance of 
standing up for your rights. You could not back down on your 
rights. You had to stand up for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, this type of knowledge that I 
gained has provided me with a strength and the conviction of 
standing up for rights, especially in this important day of the 
United Nation as declaration. 
 
I will now turn my remarks to the throne speech. In the throne 
speech it states: 
 

My government is firmly committed to the protection of 
its citizens from forces beyond their control and intends to 
continue to back them in difficult economic 
circumstances. 

 
It also states: 
 

My government will continue to improve the protection 
available to individuals . . . 

 
Note that it says to individuals. It doesn’t say to all individuals 
of this province. 
 
When I examined the throne speech in regards to the North, 
there was nothing specifically mentioned for the North, so I 
could not share the optimism of the House. 
 
When I look back on the record of the past four years, there was 
very little that was done in northern Saskatchewan. When I 
examined one of the best public records, the Saskatchewan road 
map of 1983, I recognized that the government policy and 
practice at that time . . . and I was amazed at that time. I thought 
it was an error; I thought it was a mistake. It said: 
 

The northern half (and I quote) is rugged, wild, beautiful, 
populated with lakes, not people. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when I looked at that statement, as I said before, I 
was amazed. But now, as I look four years later, and I look at 
the increased unemployment rates and the increased social and 
cultural problems, I recognized it was not a mistake. 
 
A lot of the throne speech does not specifically relate to the 
issues of northern Saskatchewan, so I will proceed now to deal 
with some of the important issues that are of direct concern to 
the people. 
 
Number one concern, of course, is jobs and economic 
development, specifically in the area of mining. We had made 
some successes in the ‘70s and the very early ‘80s in regards to 
the employment of people in the North. We had up to 50, 60 per 
cent of the people employed, for example, in Key Lake mine. 
As I looked at the record in the past four years, this figure 
dropped in the 20 per cent realm. 
 
A lot of people wondered why. And a lot of people did not 
know that the monitoring committee which was supposed to 
look after the mine in regards, not only to the employment of 
people but also to workers’ health and safety, also to 
environment and benefits to small business in the North, these 
were automatically done away with and withheld form the 
public. And what I saw was the return of an old system at the 
time when I was a child. There were very few people that got 
hired, maybe 5 per  
  



 
December 10, 1986 

 

143 
 

cent at the most. There was a return to this system. There was 
no commitment; there was no concrete way of getting at an 
issue. When I looked at concrete measures, in a short period of 
time you can get over a thousand pages of very specific 
documentation in regards to a big corporation. When it comes 
down to a monitoring committee which is supposed to look 
after jobs in northern Saskatchewan, it’s hidden; it disappears. 
 
When I see the members opposite talking bout optimism, Mr. 
Speaker, make sure that you realize that I am a very optimistic 
person, otherwise I would not be in this room. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I saw the optimism, the openness to big 
corporations such as Weyerhaeuser. But the openness and 
optimism for ordinary people in northern Saskatchewan was not 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Much of the same occurred in the forestry area. 
As I looked into the specific area of fishing, again I saw the 
same process occurring. The process was this: greater 
regulations and restrictions on people who wanted to make a 
decent living out of fishing in the North. This fall, in August, in 
La Ronge, there was helicopters flying around picking up nets 
from fishermen. There was even VCR’s checking on fishermen. 
When I talked to the fishermen, they said, it seems that there is 
a great effort to clamp down on us and nothing, not too much, 
on other people who are making a living in the North. 
 
They felt that in regards to the tourist industry, which a lot of 
them wanted to get involved in, that there was too much of a 
conflict situation being created between tourist outfitters and 
commercial fishermen, and the balance was swinging highly in 
favour of tourist outfitters. And it needs to be re-created to a 
greater balance. 
 
In regards to trapping, I would like to talk about the issue of 
compensation. For many years the trappers have been saying 
our areas have been clear-cut. I talked to a specific individual 
just a little while ago and said, as I went home to my family, I 
come back to my trap line and all the area was cleared out. He 
asked me to bring the message, which is a message for a lot of 
trappers. 
 
We would like to get compensated for our loss of livelihood in 
some of the most finely and ecologically balanced locations and 
areas in the North where we trap — that we want compensation. 
Pioneer Trust will get compensation like that, but the trapper 
will not. When it comes again to big corporations or people 
who are a great deal more wealthy than most of ordinary 
citizens, government is quick to act. When it comes to trappers 
and people of the North, they become very vague and general. 
 
I would like also to present the issue of housing. A lot of elders 
and seniors have approached me in the past while and felt the 
stress of life in not being able to get housing. I looked also at 
the youth and the young families, and very few were getting 
houses. Some of them  

were now forced to live three families in one house. And when I 
looked at that, that wasn’t enough. They were pressured by the 
system to pay up or leave, and there was this threat and pressure 
and great stress upon them. And because . . . It’s now getting to 
five, I beg leave to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 


	Appointment of President of SPC
	Political Freedom of Public Servants
	MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS
	INTRODUCTION OF BILLS
	Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Farmers’ Counselling and Assistance Act
	Bill No. 3 — An Act to establish a Mortgage Protection Plan
	Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act
	MOTIONS
	Commemoration of Human Rights Day

