













































August 7, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 7, 1987 

  

 

1621 

 

They Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next move: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 

Saskatchewan for cutting provincial funding for legal aid, 

and for its policy of imposing deterrent fees on the poor 

who need legal aid services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that on Tuesday next I shall move: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 

Saskatchewan for its unfair flat tax, and for thereby 

increasing the unfairness of the tax system in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rise in Unemployment Rate 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a 

question to the Premier, and it has to do with the startling 

unemployment figures released earlier this morning by 

Statistics Canada. 

 

These figures show that between June and July the number of 

unemployed people in Saskatchewan jumped from 32,000 to 

38,000. The actual unemployment rate jumped from 6.4 per 

cent to 7.5 per cent. In light of these figures, Mr. Premier, do 

you propose to reinstate the Employment Development Agency 

and the employment development fund that you cut out of your 

budget just seven weeks ago? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member 

knows, actual employment increased by 1,000 over last month. 

And he knows, in fact, that the labour force is increasing very 

rapidly, particularly in the month of July, because farm labour 

dropped from May and June, so we have 1,000 more people 

employed than we did a month ago. 

 

And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the number of 

unemployed this July was the same as it was a year ago. So he 

knows, it’s cyclical. We have the third unemployment; last 

month it was the second unemployment best record in Canada. 

And despite wheat prices and potash prices and oil prices and 

anti-dumping cases and so forth, we still maintain a very, very 

enjoyable and preferable employment rate across Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr.  

Premier, the facts are that Saskatchewan has one of the worst 

job-creation records in Canada. Shortly put, are you aware that 

over the last 12 months Saskatchewan is one of only two 

provinces to see the number of people employed actually drop, 

to see the number of people with jobs actually go down over the 

last 12 months in this province, unlike every other province in 

Canada except one? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition can play games with it if he likes. We are the third 

lowest unemployment in Canada. Last month we were the 

second lowest unemployed, so we had created a better 

environment, working environment and employment 

environment, than seven or eight out of ten provinces in 

Canada. Now he can go to other jurisdictions if he likes, he can 

compare them, but the facts are we are either number two or 

number three, and that’s been the case across the last 12 

months. In fact, it’s been that way for several years. 

 

So I just point out that because of our industrial economic 

activity, because of expansion in projects, despite difficult 

economic times, that we have maintained an enviable record 

with respect to employment. And we’re going to continue to 

provide incentives for investment and economic development in 

diversification here in Saskatchewan to sustain the record. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In the 

light of the Premier’s remarks, could he explain why, in the last 

12 months, Manitoba gained 2,000 jobs, B.C. gained 16,000 

jobs, and Saskatchewan lost 2,000 jobs? 

 

Do you, Mr. Premier, regard that as an acceptable performance 

on the part of your government? Do you not think that we could 

create as many jobs for our young people as are being created in 

other comparable provinces like Manitoba? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when we provide incentives 

to invest in Saskatchewan, when we provide incentives to build 

new projects, when we consider building, and actually build 

things, like upgraders, or paper plants or packing plants, the 

opposition are against it. They’re against every single, solitary 

project that we try to do which encourages employment. 

 

They’re against international economic trade. They’re again 

trade with the United States. They’re against uranium 

development. They’re against the potash development that 

they’ve seen here in the province of Saskatchewan. And 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, every single solitary thing we try to do to 

increase employment, the opposition’s against. When we rank 

number third in the country down from number two, then they 

say, well, maybe you should do something about development. 

 

I think they should get their song sheet together so that at  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1622 

 

least they’re consistent - either create economic development 

and jobs, or not, Mr. Speaker. Our objective is to do that. We 

look at, in our province, the labour force has increased by over 

8,000 - by over 8,000 since June. That’s the fourth highest 

growth rate in Canada, and one of the highest growth rates in 

western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier has spoken of his proposals for economic development 

and job creation. I refer you, sir, to the 1985 provincial budget 

in which you announced your program, “Partnership for 

Progress”, and promised to create a $600 million, five-year 

employment development fund. That was a five-year plan to 

create jobs. 

 

Mr. Premier, where is that five-year plan? Where is the 

economic development fund? And what happened to the plan - 

the five-year plan you announced in 1985? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition knows that 

well over 19,000 people have been employed in Saskatchewan 

as a result of the new home program that we brought in in 1986. 

And the opposition obviously endorsed that program. They 

think it’s a very good program because they proposed one 

similar, and they were going to provide, I think, 1.2 billion 

towards public housing in the province of Saskatchewan. Now 

that amounts to several hundred million dollars, Mr. Speaker, 

which is part and parcel of the entire employment program for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

At the same time, when we get outside companies prepared to 

spend 100 million, 300 million, or $500 million, creating 

brand-new, long-run projects like a paper mill, for example, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s 25 to 30 years of employment. An upgrader 

here, just short of a billion dollars, is 30 to 40 years of 

employment, not only in the city of Regina, but across the entire 

oil belt here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Youth Unemployment 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to address my questions to the Premier specifically about 

youth unemployment in this province. 

 

Despite the Premier’s political rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, the facts 

that were produced today by Statistics Canada shows the kind 

of social tragedy that his lack of long-term economic planning 

is bringing to the province. The figures this morning show that 

the number of young people working in Saskatchewan has 

fallen from 115,000 to 108,000. Now that’s a drop of 7,000 jobs 

- 7,000 jobs for young people in one year. And at the same 

time, the youth unemployment rate has jumped from 13.2 per 

cent to 14.5 per cent - 14.5 per cent. 

 

Mr. Premier, in light of these figures, how do you justify the 

fact that your government has cut youth job employment 

creation programs by 70 per cent, by 70 per cent in this year’s 

budget? How do you justify that? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The hon. member knows that the 

opposition didn’t raise the questions with respect to 

employment last month because we did so well with respect to 

women and youth. I’ll just remind the hon. member that the 

. . .with respect to youth, employment increased by 4,000 over 

last month, Mr. Speaker - increased by 4,000. 

 

Saskatchewan had the third lowest unemployment rate in 

Canada, generally, for youth. Saskatchewan had the third lowest 

unemployment rate for women in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

And as I just pointed out to the hon. member, obviously it had 

something to do with the seasonal variation with respect to 

employment in Saskatchewan. 

 

If the hon. member would get outside of Regina once in a while 

and look at agriculture, he’ll find in May and June and in the 

fall there is a large degree of employment, particularly among 

youth in agriculture in the summer holidays, and obviously 

between the spring and the harvest there isn’t, and you will see 

that natural increase. And I would advise the hon. member to be 

aware of those kinds of information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it very odd that the 

Premier of Saskatchewan would stand here and advise members 

of the Legislative Assembly to take their vacations outside 

Saskatchewan. Perhaps he likes travelling to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order. Now the 

hon. member knows that preambles to supplementaries should 

be short, and certainly should not provoke debate, and I think he 

realizes that perhaps he was engaging in a little bit of that. 

Order, order. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is to the Premier. In light of the fact that, in fact, what 

he has done is cut the Opportunities ’87 student summer 

employment program and the youth Access employment 

program, the two main job creation programs for young people 

that this government put forward, and he’s cut them by 70 per 

cent - they’ve seen their funding drop from $14 million to $4 

million; that’s a cut of 70 per cent. I ask him again: how do you 

justify, how do you justify to the young people of Saskatchewan 

your cutting their opportunities for summer employment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

should know that the single, largest project in the history of the 

province of Saskatchewan and the largest project in the history 

of Regina is going on right now. 

 

People in his riding, and people in the city of Regina, and youth 

across the province are being employed at the NewGrade 

upgrader being constructed in the province of Saskatchewan in 

the city of Regina, and it’s the largest, single project that any 

administration has put together anywhere. 

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1623 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And the member opposite has never seen 

a project like that; he’s never seen that many people work on it, 

and he stands here in Regina and condemns this province for 

having the third lowest unemployment in Canada - sometimes 

the second lowest unemployment - when he’s never seen 

economic activity take place in the city of Regina like that. 

 

It shows, Mr. Speaker, not only does the member not get 

outside of Regina to find out what’s going on in rural 

Saskatchewan, he doesn’t even know what’s going on in the 

city of Regina when he purports to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 

Premier. The Premier just said several minutes ago that last 

month we didn’t ask him questions concerning Saskatchewan’s 

decline in employment rate in this province. 

 

Well I want to tell him that on July 3 I asked a question in this 

House of the Minister of Labour, and I quote the answer from 

the Minister of Labour who said: 

 

. . . we felt that the home program was a better alternative 

for creating youth employment. 

 

Now the Premier has mentioned the home program here today. I 

wonder if the Premier will tell me how many young people 

under the age of 25 are employed as a result of your much 

vaunted home program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that in 

excess of 19,000 people are employed as a result of the program 

that we’ve put together to repair homes, and in every single 

community, rural and urban. And a large percentage of that is 

young people. So they’re employed in Weyburn; they’re 

employed in Lloydminster; they’re employed in Saskatoon; 

they’re employed in Davidson; they’re employed all across the 

province as a result of this program. 

 

And the young people, particularly, enjoy . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 

Order, please. The Premier is answering the question. The 

Premier is answering the question; he is on the topic, and please 

allow him to finish the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. The hon. members know that the question is being 

answered. The Premier is on the topic. They may not like the 

exact answer they’re getting, but he is on the topic, and I will 

ask you to allow him to finish that answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will just make the 

observation to the members opposite that under this  

program a higher than normal percentage of young people are 

being employed because they’re starting their own businesses. 

They’re providing new economic entrepreneurial packages that 

are going and taking place all across the province. 

 

So when you have a normal job creation project for the 

province of Saskatchewan under this particular one, there is 

more than the average number of young people employed and 

sustained new businesses that are going to be there for some 

time, even after the program is finished. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. The Premier has 

just said that there’s a higher number of average of young 

people working. Simple question: how many young people 

under the age of 25 are working? Never mind the rhetoric. How 

many? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I told the member opposite 

that there are more than 4,000 people, young people, working 

this month than there were last month. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we know that we have one of the best 

records in Canada and we’ve got jobs that are . . . projects that 

are creating - 2,000 construction jobs right here in Regina, 

19,000 jobs all across the province as a result of the home 

program. The youth in this province obviously are doing very 

well. It’s not perfect, and we wish it was better, Mr. Speaker, 

but I’ll say, compared to other jurisdictions, it’s one of the 

finest records you’ll find any place in Canada. And we’re going 

to continue to provide economic incentives and investment so 

people will be able to build and construct and to have those 

kinds of jobs here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to The Income Tax Act 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, you have 

served notice that later today you’re going to be moving first 

reading of a Bill to amend The Income Tax Act. Can the 

minister tell us whether this is the long-awaited amendment to 

The Income Tax Act which will finally make good on your 

1982 election promise to cut provincial income taxes by 10 per 

cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. 

member should know the rules, that there’s ample opportunity 

to debate the legislation when the legislation is before the 

Assembly, and that’s the traditional practice. I simply remind 

the hon. member again and again and again . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

This morning there’s a little higher than average activity in the 

House, and I would like to ask you to allow the minister to 

finish his response. 

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1624 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I know, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition 

opposite does not want to be reminded again that Saskatchewan 

is the second-lowest taxed province in Canada. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister is understandably embarrassed, and too embarrassed to 

comment on the Bill which he will be introducing later today - 

unless he has decided not to - on a Bill which is another in the 

long line of tax increases that have been introduced by this 

government. 

 

Will the minister, Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Finance 

then admit to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that your election 

campaign promise to cut provincial income taxes by 10 per cent 

has gone by the way of your promise to eliminate the sales tax, 

your promise to eliminate the gas tax, and your promise to 

improve health care, and your promise to provide senior 

citizens with free telephone service, and that is, Mr. Minister, 

straight into the trash can of broken campaign promises? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I remind the hon. member 

that there are several categories under the changes to the 

Income Tax Act in the budget this year of people paying no tax 

in the province of Saskatchewan. We have categories of people 

that are the lowest taxed people in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve brought in this year the first tax deduction for single 

parents, Mr. Speaker. We have removed the sales tax on 

clothing. We have the most exemptions of any province in 

Canada imposing a sales tax for individuals. Mr. Speaker, we 

have removed extra billing, something that the NDP refused to 

do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I indicate as well, and repeat again, Mr. Speaker, that 

the people of Saskatchewan are the second-lowest taxed people 

in Canada. The members opposite don’t want to hear that. They 

don’t like to hear that, Mr. Speaker. I happen to like reminding 

them, and I appreciate the questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, new question. I say to the 

minister that the only insignificant tax which certain people 

don’t pay is the $300 million a year oil royalty that the oil 

companies don’t pay because of the policy of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member is being 

interrupted. He’s having difficulty asking his question, so 

please allow him to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you for calling the government 

members to order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Premier keeps telling Saskatchewan people 

that these are tough times. And he keeps telling us about the 

need to keep our economy moving forward in a period of severe 

restraint. Unemployment statistics  

mentioned in the House today show the result of taking out of 

the pockets of Saskatchewan consumers unemployment for 

young people. 

 

Can the minister then explain why he thinks that the best way to 

keep our economy growing is to take hundreds of dollars more 

this year out of the pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers and 

consumers with this further increase in the unfair flat tax - 

hundreds of millions dollars that will not be spent in the shops 

and the stores of our small-business people in Saskatchewan. 

How do you . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m afraid your question 

got lost, but there was a whole series, and I was just wondering 

if you are finishing or not - apparently you were. But your final 

question got lost, so I’ll give you the opportunity to repeat it if 

you so wish. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the final question 

got lost I’m not surprised, because the Minister of Finance 

seems to have been lost in all of the questions that have been 

asked so far. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I repeat again: how do you 

expect Saskatchewan consumers to spend more money to keep 

our economy rolling when you’re taking somewhere in the area 

of $300 million out of their pockets with your tax increases this 

year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite interesting that the 

sales tax went on prior to July 1. It went on budget night. And 

yet the unemployment rate went down subsequent to that, Mr. 

Speaker, in the month of June. There was an overlap. His 

argument doesn’t hold water, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again, I simply repeat to the hon. member, on the one hand 

they criticize us for giving tax incentives, tax incentives, and an 

opportunity for Saskatchewan people to invest within the 

province, create jobs, create opportunity, create new businesses, 

and then turn around and criticize us for putting taxes on which 

he says will slow down the economy. I wish, Mr. Speaker, that 

he would be consistent one day from the next. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, it is abundantly clear that the tax 

increases that we are imposing still put Saskatchewan in the 

second-lowest taxed province category in the Dominion of 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to use the tax system, as 

we have stated, consistently, as a matter of policy, to try and 

stimulate employment and job opportunity and investment in 

the province, notwithstanding the opposition of the members 

opposite. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member knows full well 

that the sales tax is exempt for most basic commodities in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. I do not believe that any change on the 

retail sales tax from 5 to 7 per cent has caused anybody not to 

buy clothes which are exempt under the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1625 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the tax bite of the flat tax 

only began to take place in the latter part of July, and already 

the unemployment rate has increased by 1 per cent in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, your own Local 

Government Finance Commission has stated in its final report a 

few months ago that Saskatchewan residents are taxed more 

heavily than people in any other province west of Quebec. 

That’s your report, Mr. Minister. And that was before this new 

increase in the flat tax and the increase in the provincial sales 

tax and the introduction of your gasoline tax. This year’s 

increases alone, Mr. Minister, are the equivalent of a 19 point 

increase in the personal income tax rate for the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. How can you tell Saskatchewan taxpayers that 

they are better off under those circumstances? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the endless inconsistency . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. All hon. 

members know that the last few minutes the noise level has 

been rising by the decibels, and I would like to ask each of you 

to please allow the question period to continue in an orderly 

fashion, notwithstanding the fact that you might have opinions 

from your seats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The endless inconsistency of the NDP 

position . . . on the one hand today, Mr. Speaker, they say that 

they are so proud of their NDP cohorts in Manitoba because 

they’ve moved from third to second place, and they have 

imposed a 2 per cent flat tax, Mr. Speaker. So the inconsistency 

of their position to relate the two is rather strange. 

 

Now the member from Regina North East wants to shout from 

his seat, Mr. Speaker. The fact is that Manitoba in their last 

budget, I think, had the highest tax grab of virtually any 

province in Canada . . . and they don’t like to hear that, Mr. 

Speaker. Today they stand up and hold up the employment 

figures as something to be approved of. 

 

Again, I refer the hon. member, as it’s been debated on a couple 

of occasions and in the budget address of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, at page 54, and we put in the tables, Mr. Speaker, that 

overall, Saskatchewan has the lowest personal taxes and 

charges at the 20 and $35,000 income levels and the second 

lowest in Canada at $50,000 level . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I think the minister has made his point. 

Next question. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that the 

Minister of Finance obviously has spent too much time in 

Saskatchewan, and he should take the advice of the Premier and 

get out for a while. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I remind the minister that the Manitoba 

tax is a tax that is geared to fairness and is geared to ability to 

pay and not . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I think if 

we keep our supplementaries short and we keep our answers 

short, we’ll get through this question period much better. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, but I could not 

resist the temptation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I will get to my 

question. Mr. Minister, you may try to dismiss the findings of 

your own Local Government Finance Commission, and you 

might do that. You spend hundreds of millions of dollars on 

these commissions, and ignore them. But I wonder if you will 

dismiss the finding of your own buddies at the Fraser Institute. 

 

I have here a Fraser Institute report, and this report shows that 

Saskatchewan people are more heavily taxed than people in 

New Democratic Manitoba. Is the minister aware of this report 

which shows that the total taxes of an average Manitoba family 

are nearly $300 a year less than their counterparts here in 

Saskatchewan? And will you not admit, Mr. Minister, that the 

tax burden facing the average Saskatchewan family has been 

growing steadily since 1982, and the flat tax increase you will 

introduce later today will serve only to worsen that burden? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again the inconsistency, Mr. Speaker. The 

New Democratic Party hates the Fraser Institute and then will 

selectively quote from it from time to time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — And I would really have hoped, Mr. 

Speaker . . . The hon. member says that I should go away for a 

while. The more I see of the questions from the hon. member, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the Leader of the Opposition is going 

to announce today that for the sake of his party he’s going to 

stay on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suggest to the hon. member . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I remind the hon. member from 

Quill Lakes, I remind the hon. member from Quill Lakes that he 

doesn’t sit and holler from his chair as he likes to do, and I’d 

ask him to stop doing that. 

 

Order. Order. Order! I’d also remind the hon. member from 

Regina Rosemont. The minister is answering the question, and 

I’d ask him to conclude his remarks quickly. But I do not want 

members hollering at the Chair from their seats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated now on four different 

occasions and I’ve recited to the hon. member and to the  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1626 

 

House, because members opposite are wont to not read the 

budget address, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has the 

second-lowest taxes in the province. I know the member from 

the Quill Lakes, the member from Quill Lakes does not want to 

hear that, Mr. Speaker, but they are the second lowest in 

Canada. We are the second lowest. We have the broadest 

exemptions of the sales tax of any province in Canada. We are 

not intending to impose . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the minister has made his point. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 27 - An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 

to amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 28 - An Act to provide for the Postponement of the 

Tabling of Certain Documents (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to provide for the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain 

Documents (No. 2). 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Deputy Chairperson, yesterday in the House 

I referred to an order in council to the effect that the 

Saskatchewan Library was disestablished, and I was asking 

specific questions about this matter. I have the documents that I 

said I would table here today. But before I put them across for 

the minister, I want to just take a minute to address this issue, 

because for me it’s quite serious in three particular areas. 

 

One is: this disestablishment of the Saskatchewan Library is a 

direct result of Bill 5, which was the Bill that put for the Act to 

reorganize the government, The Government Organization Act. 

It’s the Bill that we opposed so strongly last Christmas, saying 

that it would have a lot of really devastating effects on 

government organization, where departments can be 

amalgamated and disestablished by order in council without 

debate here in the legislature. And that’s exactly what’s 

happened to the Saskatchewan Library. 

 

It’s sad that it’s happened. It’s happened without people 

knowing about it. But it’s particularly shocking that the  

Minister of Education, under whose department the library has 

now been put, didn’t realize or know that this had happened - 

wasn’t aware of those orders in council. It raises very serious 

questions for me about what is going on with the Department of 

Education, and the Minister of Education, with the tremendous 

changes that have been made in education across the province - 

not just with the libraries but with the universities, the technical 

institutes, the community colleges. I wonder what else he 

doesn’t know about in particular details. 

 

And it’s amazing for me to realize that he didn’t know about it 

when he’s the one that’s pumping up the value of the 

information age, the value of knowledge, the fact that we must 

be informed about what’s going on and how important it is. 

And here we have an example of a lack of information. And we 

have an example of the disestablishment of government 

services without anyone really knowing what’s been happening. 

 

May I now take these documents . . . I’d like to have these 

documents taken across to the Minister of Education so that we 

can discuss them in detail. 

 

I’ve sent across a document signed by the Lieutenant Governor 

and by Grant Devine. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I’ve asked members not to refer to 

members by name . . . by constituency or by position in the 

House. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I apologize. It was signed by the Premier and by 

the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The order in council transfers and assigns the part of the public 

service and all moneys appropriated in connection therewith 

related to the administration of the Saskatchewan Library or to 

the administration of powers, duties and functions of the 

minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Library as the case 

may be, to the Minister of Education. 

 

And the regulation in The Government Organization Act, 

quoting Section 4 (2): 

 

The central library for Saskatchewan, known as the 

Saskatchewan Library and continued pursuant to The 

Public Libraries Act, 1984, is disestablished. 

 

These regulations came into force on April 1, 1987. 

 

My question to the minister is: what does he mean by . . . what 

is his understanding of the library being disestablished? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I thank the hon. member for the 

documents and clarifying in fact what the hon. member was 

referring to. And just so that her mind is put at ease and any 

others in the library system . . . and in fact I think there is no 

confusion in the minds of the board members or the trustees or 

anybody else out there because I’ve met with them on more 

than one occasion. 

 

And if I was to pick up the clause you referred to relative to 

disestablishment, in essence what it’s saying there is  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1627 

 

that albeit the central library for Saskatchewan, known as the 

Saskatchewan Library, and continued pursuant to The Public 

Libraries Act, 1984, is disestablished; what in fact it is saying is 

it’s disestablished as an independent agency but continues to 

exist. 

 

And as I said last night in this legislature, there’s no need to 

fear, because it’s business as usual. And although it’s 

disestablished as an independent agency, it continues to exist 

under the umbrella of the new Department of Education. And in 

fact I would add to that, the strong, new Department of 

Education. 

 

Ms. Smart: — There’s a very great real need to be worried 

when you say that the library has lost its independence. That is 

one of the very corner-stones of a public library system is to 

have autonomy - autonomy of administration, autonomy of 

organization; not to be under a particular government 

department; to be able to stand on its own so that it can provide 

the resources for people on a variety of topics and in a variety 

of ways. 

 

And it’s the issue of autonomy, of self-government, of 

independence for the public library that is so very important and 

so very worrisome when you say it’s been disestablished and 

amalgamated into the Department of Education. 

 

One of the roles of the library, under The Libraries Act, is to act 

as the central library for Saskatchewan. You have taken away 

that role, you have put it under the Department of Education. 

What are the functions now, then, of the Saskatchewan library 

as you see it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The role is unchanged, and I can 

advise the hon. member as well that Saskatchewan has now 

joined the ranks of the nine other provinces and two territories 

that make up this great dominion, and that all . . . we now have 

moved to the same place as they have in so far as not having the 

library as a single agency. 

 

Ms. Smart: — The fact that Saskatchewan has its library as a 

single agency was a point of real interest for everyone in North 

America. The library system in this province was a progressive 

and a very creative one. It fulfilled all the ideas that you had 

about having a real good information network, and people came 

from all over the country to see what was going on in 

Saskatchewan, and you are destroying that system. You are 

going backwards in time, not going forwards. You say the 

library is unchanged - why then did you disestablish it? What is 

it . . . why, if you say it is unchanged, have you disestablished 

it? Why didn’t you leave it the way it was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The amalgamation, I would argue, 

strengthens the role and the ability of the library to function and 

to be part of a process that has this integration, as you so rightly 

pointed out in last evening’s remarks. 

 

Ms. Smart: — The amalgamation has wiped out the 

Saskatchewan library, and the fact that you sit there and you 

consult with someone who is not the provincial librarian makes 

my point even stronger. The provincial librarian is sitting on the 

other side, and you have not consulted with her about what you 

mean by the  

disestablishment of the library. 

 

The provincial librarian’s position, I understand, has been 

demoted as a result of . . . As a result of disestablishing the 

Saskatchewan library, the provincial librarian’s position has 

been demoted; is that not true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Formerly, she was a . . . the provincial librarian 

was at a deputy minister’s status; that no longer exists, I 

understand; is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, she has 

the same status as she has had previously. 

 

Ms. Smart: — When you disestablished the central library, and 

yet you say things are unchanged, one of the roles of the 

Saskatchewan library was to act as co-ordinating agency for 

public libraries within Saskatchewan. Why . . . I still haven’t 

gotten an answer to my question as to why you have 

disestablished the central library if you say it has remained 

unchanged. That’s a very important role for the regional 

libraries, acting as a co-ordinating agency. Why have you taken 

that out of the Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well perhaps an analogy that might, 

with a few words, describe what we believe is happening as a 

result of moving from a single agency to under the umbrella of 

the Department of Education. And we view it more as a 

marriage, and a very good marriage, as opposed to divorce, 

which I think is the picture that you would . . . are trying to 

paint. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I could probably make some comments on that 

analogy of marriage, but I don’t want to explore it any further. 

 

One of the things that happens when the library is 

disestablished is that the library no longer presents a separate 

annual report. That’s another example of a lack of autonomy 

and a lack of self-government and a lack of providing 

information specifically related to the public library for the 

people of Saskatchewan to understand. 

 

(1045) 

 

Will there still be an annual report? Or has that been 

discontinued? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t know as there’s a 

definitive decision been made one way or the other. It may well 

be that there’ll still be an annual report. I guess I can say there’s 

been no decision not to have an annual report. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Has there been an annual report printed for 

’86-87? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s at the printer’s now, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Ms. Smart: — The Saskatchewan Library Trustees’ 

Association, in a brief to you, expressed their concern that the 

cheques to the regional libraries were no longer  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1628 

 

issued by the provincial library but by the Saskatchewan 

Department of Education - that being another example of the 

lack of autonomy, when the funds that were controlled by the 

provincial library are now going through the Department of 

Education. That’s another example of what’s happening when 

you disestablish this particular body. 

 

And I still don’t think that I’ve had a clear answer to my 

question as to what your plans are for the Saskatchewan 

Library, now that you’ve disestablished it. Can you please be 

more specific as to why you’ve disestablished the library? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I guess I want to give - in answer to 

this question again, because I would like to put to rest the 

member’s fears relative to what’s happened to the library - and I 

will give you my sense as the minister, I think, which is 

obviously what you’re interested in and, I think, what the 

people are interested in. 

 

As I sit back and watch what’s been able to happen since 

Saskatchewan libraries and the K to 12 system and advanced ed 

are . . . have all been united under the one new strong 

department, my sense, very much so when it comes to the 

libraries, is that we’ve got the best of all that we had, with it as 

a single agency. 

 

And I have this very, very strong feeling from what I see in 

terms of what my neighbour who lives down the street two 

doors from me, in terms of her role as provincial librarian in 

this province, I see her very much involved, and with her, I 

suppose, that entire library system very much involved in the 

mainstream of a department that now doesn’t deal with merely 

5 or 6 or $7 million budget, but now a three-quarters of a billion 

dollar budget. 

 

And I’ve been very heartened, I must say. And I share this with 

my officials. I’ve been very heartened to see this synergistic 

relationship, how they’re pulling together, how it’s operating as 

a team, and how my Provincial Librarian is in the mainstream 

and the forefront of some of these initiatives. And we talked last 

night about literacy and the dimension and the perspective and 

the leadership role that the librarian is showing in that area. I 

see nothing but good coming out of it. And I think maybe the 

hon. member is getting tied up in some legalistic, jingoistic 

stuff - section 3, subsection (2), part (a), part (b) . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You certainly wouldn’t understand it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And the hon. member, Regina 

Centres, talks about how I wouldn’t understand that legal stuff, 

and he’s quite right. Because what I understand is what the 

people want us to understand and that is that this library system 

is as fine as you’ll get anywhere in Canada. It’s been made 

stronger, I would argue, by being pulled into this new 

department where there’s really access to some resources that 

just weren’t available in a six or $7 million budget in isolation. 

 

I’m very excited by what I see, and I think if you could sit in 

my chair - and perhaps in 20 or 25 years you’ll have the 

opportunity - you would be equally excited, I’m  

sure. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well I find it quite amazing to hear a Minister 

of Education refer to legal matters as somehow not important, 

or a mere detail. That’s what we’re about here in this House, is 

deciding on the legislation that governs institutions in this 

province. It’s a very important issue and one that we should 

well question you on. 

 

My question to you yesterday had to do with the Saskatchewan 

Library Board and what the relation of the board would be to 

Saskatchewan Library, since Saskatchewan Library has been 

disestablished. I want to go back to that question and see if you 

can be any more clear to me about the role of the Saskatchewan 

Library Board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It has been in the past an advisory 

body to the minister, and it continues to be an advisory body to 

the minister. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well I have been advised that the part of what 

has been superseded when you superseded the Saskatchewan 

Library was the section in the Saskatchewan . . . in The Public 

Libraries Act that allowed for you to appoint advisory councils 

and advisory committees. So presumably you now see the 

Saskatchewan Library Board as the equivalent of an advisory 

committee, one that will not have the same powers then as it has 

in The Library Act as it exists now. It’s to be merely an 

advisory board, rather than one that would act as a board 

overseeing an independent organization, such as the 

Saskatchewan Library used to be. 

 

I would like to find out, please, if you could tell me, the staff 

complement of the Saskatchewan Library from 1985 to 1986. 

Can you tell me how many staff were at the library in all of 

those years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — This year’s blue book would show 41 

positions . . . person-years rather. And last year the same 

number was 45, and this excludes the Provincial Librarian and 

office administrative staff that she might have. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I asked for the figures going back to ’82. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I think 

you referred to ’85 and I’m sorry I didn’t pick that up. We don’t 

have ’85, ’84, ’83, ’82 with us, but we can get them for you and 

provide them as soon as possible. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, I would like to get those figures. 

 

The cut from 45 staff to 41 staff for this year excludes the 

Provincial Librarian and the office staff, I understand, and it 

also adds on to it the staff from the bureau of statistics. Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, this doesn’t include that branch. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I would like to go back, I think, to questioning a 

bit more about the role of the Saskatchewan Library because of 

its real co-ordinating and facilitating  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1629 

 

inter-library loan co-operation between the regions. 

 

I’d like to understand how that will be connected to the regional 

libraries and also working through the Department of Education 

with the school libraries. How do you see that library being able 

to continue the amount of work that it was doing in the past 

with the cut-backs in the staff and the amalgamation in the 

Department of Education, which to me suggests that you have 

some roles for the library, the central library, as it used to be, 

connected with literacy and distance education which may well 

cut back on the co-ordinating role and the inter-library loan 

facilities that they had with the regional libraries. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well in response to the hon. 

member’s question, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me, in terms of 

co-ordination and in collaboration and the facilitation, the 

words that the hon. member used . . . I mean what better way to 

have Sask Library hooked into what’s happening in the K to 12 

system or what’s happening in the post-secondary system or the 

literacy initiatives or the $3 million fund in the distance 

education, than if we’re all under one roof and one big happy 

family and the Provincial Librarian part of the executive team. I 

mean, the very words you used - co-ordinating and facilitating. 

It seems to me what we have done meets every index that you 

might establish for improvement and for bettering the system, 

not only in so far as it’s independent nature, and in that role, but 

also in terms of its collaborative role and the leadership role it 

can provide in some of these other areas. 

 

As you yourself will know, for example, the Regina Public 

Library system has been very proactive in literacy. Well, now 

we’ve got a chance here with this literacy initiative in the 

post-secondary education blueprint to have our Provincial 

Librarian play a very much a leadership role in developing that 

initiative, along with all these other volunteers and 

professionals and organizations that I’ve mentioned earlier. 

 

So by every measure that one could use in terms of concrete 

measurements, I’m very excited by what I see. But more than 

that, as I said earlier, I’m very, very excited about what I sense 

in an intangible way as far as how I see the team working. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Do you have a plan to develop a publication 

policy for Saskatchewan government documents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. members, it’s not 

under consideration by our department at this time. I’m advised 

that that sometimes is roles of legislative libraries and/or other 

departments on occasion, but we certainly don’t have that kind 

of plan under consideration at this point in time. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Having a publication policy for Saskatchewan 

government documents is an issue that’s been important to 

librarians for some time. They would like to see the documents 

printed with the basic information, like the year in which the 

document was printed, the person that was responsible for it, 

and the identification of the department that’s printed it. 

You are not in charge of all the libraries, I realize, but we’re 

talking about libraries here, and I want to put that issue on the 

Table to alert the government that there’s a concern about that. 

And with the amalgamation of government departments that’s 

been going on, there’s a concern about keeping up the 

government libraries in each department, close to people’s work 

places, and I’m asking if you have any idea about what’s 

happening with the other government libraries. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the library and resource centres, 

so far as I’m aware of, across the departments - and obviously I 

can’t speak with great authority - but my best advice is that the 

libraries and resource centres that’s in departments are all alive 

and well. And I think, in fact, the hon. member herself would 

make the observation that if you have 15, 16 ministries as 

opposed to 36 you can have just that much better library and 

resource centres within each department because you’re not 

spread so thin. 

 

Obviously, you can do for 16 what you probably can’t do for 

36, a point I think you yourself made last night in this House, 

relative to what one can do for Regina and Saskatoon, maybe 

one necessarily can’t do for some of the smaller centres. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well it sounds like a good idea, and I certainly 

hope that the libraries will remain alive and well. The fact that 

you’ve cut the funding for the Legislative Library, and you’ve 

already referred to that as being one library through which the 

government documents can be processed. And that library’s 

been cut. 

 

(1100) 

 

The Saskatchewan library’s been disestablished. I really wonder 

how much your commitment to keeping the libraries alive and 

well is based on reality and isn’t just something that you’re 

saying to me here because you think it’s going to stop me from 

questioning you. 

 

I have one more question related to the regional libraries, and 

that is: I want to know what your plans are for the resource 

centres that the regional libraries are supposed to have operating 

in the smaller centres like North Battleford, Moose Jaw and 

Prince Albert? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I’d have 

to refer the hon. member to individual boards in the various 

regions for what plans they may have. It’s up to the regional 

boards. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I would like to just take a minute to go through 

the Act here because my understanding is that the regional 

library resource centres . . . the major libraries in those centres 

were to be resources for the regions. Is that not true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well if the government plan is to make those 

resource libraries resources for the regions, what are you doing 

to strengthen those centres financially? 

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1630 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well we’ve been working closely 

with them, I’m advised. Things like helping out in terms of 

collaboration, some training initiatives. If you’re going to ask 

me if there’s been some specific money, the answer is no. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well specific money is very much what they 

need. The new library in North Battleford has had a 50 per cent 

increase in circulation since it opened, and it’s a very nice 

resource centre, but it’s not going to be able to manage without 

the funding. And without the funding, the concept of having 

libraries as information centres is not going to exist. 

 

You’ve said that you want to have . . . exit it into the 21st 

century and the information age. But nothing that you’ve said in 

answer to my questions about libraries gives any reassurance 

that you understand the complexity of libraries, public library 

systems, the need for people to have access to free information 

across this province on many subjects, not just connected with 

education, Mr. Minister. 

 

And that’s a topic that I haven’t yet touched on, but one that I 

do want to mention briefly, is the fact that when you 

amalgamate the library into the Department of Education, and 

you make it function as a resource for the community colleges, 

the universities, the technical schools, the literacy programs, the 

distance education programs, you also have a lot of people in 

this province who’ve always used the public library for the kind 

of information that people need in their day-to-day lives and in 

their personal lives. And that is not frivolous information. 

 

In Saskatoon Public Library one of the areas of collection that’s 

used the most are the books on health and medicine. That’s an 

area where people use the public library for information that can 

be particularly important to them in leading their lives and 

going about the business . . . I’ve already mentioned business, 

for example, with the resource centres that the library has - 

information for business, information on child care is another 

big area. And people have to have access to a public library 

system that provides them with those resources. It needs an 

autonomous public library system that provides them with 

resources on a variety of topics in different points of view. 

 

And when you suck everything into a Department of Education, 

focused on the needs of K to 12 and the formal institutions, 

you’re in danger of losing a very important aspect of public 

library systems where they have access to information on a 

variety of topics. 

 

The cut-backs in libraries continue to be a very great concern to 

many people across the province, and particularly in the rural 

areas, where with the failure of the municipal libraries to get the 

kind of public government provincial support so that they can 

be resource centres to the other libraries, with the failure to 

provide funding for the resource centres in cities like North 

Battleford, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, you’re cutting back on 

the services to people in the rural areas because you’re 

destroying the one library network system that existed. You’ve 

disestablished it; you’ve sucked it into the Department of 

Education. I can’t get a clear picture about where you’re  

going with it. And I find it very distressing. 

 

Now one of the final things I just want to briefly mention 

what’s happening at the University of Regina, because I know 

that’s been an important development for you. You’ve 

mentioned it very often, the fact that the librarian there is able 

to get $200 million worth of books on microfilm, and now 

another grant from the university development fund for the new 

technology to automate the library there. And that’s important 

development, of course. 

 

But books on microfilm are useful only if you have the 

technology to read them. You have to have microfilm readers 

and printers. It’s not a technology that lends itself to easy 

disbursement to a number of people. It’s a technology very 

dependent on . . . it’s an information source very dependent on 

technology, and when you talk about the new information age, 

that’s one of the things that we really have to take into account, 

the fact that new information is only available to people who 

have access to the machines to read it and to access it. 

 

The Saskatoon Public Library has expressed its great concern 

about the fact that the province can be divided between people 

who are “information rich,” and people who are going to 

become more and more “information poor.” And I’m very 

worried about that as you suck the library into the Department 

of Education, and as you promote the new technology without a 

realization that you must make this information available to 

everyone, that you should respect the work that’s been done 

over the years in Saskatchewan - long, hard years of work to set 

up that public library system. You are destroying it. I started out 

early by talking about what happens when libraries are 

destroyed, what happens to people when they lose those 

accesses to information that’s available to everyone. The public 

library system is a relatively recent development. It doesn’t 

deserve to be treated as badly as you’ve been treating it. 

 

The education system doesn’t deserve to be treated as badly as 

you’ve been treating it. And I really want to express my grave 

concern about what’s been happening - my fear that you’re not 

going to consult with the people in the country and the rural 

areas about the development of libraries, that you’re just going 

to tell them what you’re doing without consideration for their 

needs. And I want to express my very grave concern about the 

kinds of answers you’ve been giving me here today and last 

night, in terms of the future of libraries in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I thank the hon. member for her 

glowing comments and observations about the good things that 

are happening at the University of Regina. It’s the fruit of the 

$1.6 million effort to get the microfilm there. And of course the 

more recent announcement was the whole business of not only 

the increase in the acquisitions but making those acquisitions 

available to people across Saskatchewan. In the recent 

announcement that we’ve got the computer and the proper 

equipment, you can do this catalogue accessing from anywhere 

in Saskatchewan. I think that’s a great step forward, and I join 

you in offering my congratulations to the University of Regina 

for their innovation and  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1631 

 

creativity as it comes to their library system. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I don’t intend to 

take a long time in this Assembly. I want to add my voice to the 

comments made by the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

I’ve watched, Mr. Minister, with growing annoyance over the 

last day and a half as the member from Saskatoon Centre has 

brought to your attention legitimate concerns. You, members of 

your caucus and, I regret to say, on occasion, members of your 

officials have sat and, I think, taken the comments of the 

member from Saskatoon Centre with something less than the 

gravity with which they deserve. 

 

I believe, Mr. Minister, that when you have the kind of cuts in 

your budget which you have, the matter ought to be treated 

seriously. And members of government caucus ought not to be 

making light of this matter. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to just briefly review to you what has 

happened to libraries under the stewardship of this government. 

I want to, Mr. Minister, just for a moment, compare your first 

budget and your latest budget. I happen to have that first budget 

with me, Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1983. 

 

Mr. Minister, from that budget to this budget, the amount you 

have spent on the provincial library has decreased. It’s now 73 

per cent of what it was in 1983. You’re spending 27 per cent 

less in absolute dollars now than you were five years ago . . . six 

years ago. 

 

During that period of time, Mr. Minister, the inflation has gone 

up by a little under 35 per cent. And just in case, Mr. Minister, I 

get from you this tiresome song and dance about how badly the 

world is treating you and your Minister of Finance, let me 

remind you that your budget has . . . your spending has gone up 

by 32 per cent during those five years, but your spending on 

libraries has gone down 27 per cent. Now that adds a great deal 

of credibility to the comments made by the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. It’s evident, looking at these estimates, that 

you people don’t care about libraries, and you don’t appreciate 

libraries for what they are. They’re the cutting edge of 

education, of adult education, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, your grants to libraries hasn’t fared much better. 

In your first budget you allocated $4.7 million. In your budget 

five years later, in ’87-88, you allocate $4.8 million. The 

increase is actually a little over 1 per cent. As I say, that’s 

during a period of time when your total government spending 

has gone up by 31 per cent, the rate of inflation has gone up by 

35 per cent, and the funding to libraries has been virtually 

frozen. 

 

Mr. Minister, I get more letters complaining about the funding 

to education than I do about any other single subject. Mr. 

Minister, I could keep you here for the next week reading the 

letters which I have got from teachers and from schools and 

principals and trustees complaining about the cuts in education. 

I have got more . . . I get more correspondence complaining 

about your department than I do about any other - bar none. 

That includes, Mr. Minister, highways . . . that includes such  

sore points as highways and social services. Your department, 

Mr. Minister, leads the pack in terms of public complaints. 

 

Mr. Minister, yes, you have had some new initiatives. You sure 

have, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, your . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the member from Regina Victoria wants 

to talk about . . . the member from Regina Wascana wants to 

talk about day care. We’ll have an opportunity to talk about day 

care when the right department comes. And I’ll be interested to 

see what the member from Regina Wascana has to say about 

day care. 

 

Getting back to the estimates from the Department of Education 

. . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! Order. I would ask members 

to allow the member from Regina Centre to make his 

comments. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, the 

libraries are beginning to show the effects of the neglect . . . of 

your government’s neglect. I note the comments by the Regina 

and Saskatoon libraries about what’s going to happen to the 

services they provide. 

 

Mr. Minister, if the cuts in the funding to libraries generally has 

been catastrophic, the English language is almost inadequate to 

describe what has happened to Regina and Saskatoon during the 

period of time you’re in office. It really has been serious. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to refer your attention to a letter written by 

the chairman of the Regina Public Library, Ron Yeo, to 

yourself, with copies to other members of the Assembly. Given 

the fact that there were copies to the other members of the 

Assembly, it was hardly a private letter. 

 

I won’t read the letter it total. It’s dated June 26. He makes what 

I think is an incontrovertible argument. He states that the board, 

on April 25, 1985, wrote to the government concerning library 

funding. The reply was from the then minister of Finance, the 

member from Kindersley. The member from Kindersley stated 

that the government was awaiting the report of the Local 

Government Finance Commission and would be acting on that 

report. 

 

The Local Government Finance Commission report, when 

received, pointed out what was obvious to anyone who has any 

interest in the subject, and that is that there was a serious 

imbalance in funding between the regional and the municipal 

libraries. The report was . . . and here I’m reading directly from 

the letter. The report was unequivocal in saying that funding 

proportions between municipal and regional libraries were 

seriously out of balance, and immediate action was needed to 

achieve equity. 

 

What has happened, what has happened of course is that your 

government has galloped in the opposite direction. Your 

government has aggravated that inequity. The cuts in funding to 

the Regina and Saskatoon libraries has been  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1632 

 

reduced by . . . is 30 per cent less than what it was. They were 

frozen out, for whatever reason, they were frozen out of the 

$500,000 special grant to buy books. 

 

Mr. Minister, the headline in the June 30 edition of The 

Leader-Post says it all, “Province stiffs city libraries.” That’s 

exactly what your government has done. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would be interested in your comments. I would 

be interested in what you think you are doing to libraries in 

general in this province, and what you think you’re doing to the 

municipal libraries. If there is any excuse for this behaviour 

apart from the fact that you don’t hold any seats in Regina, and 

you don’t . . . and apart from the fact that you hold very few 

seats in Saskatoon and Regina and have no hope of picking up 

any additional seats, if there is any other explanation for your 

behaviour, I would be delighted in hearing it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I thank the hon. member for the 

sermon. I also would point out that he once again exhibits a trait 

not uncommon to the NDP party, and that’s selective amnesia. 

 

And you can talk all you like about budget numbers and pick 

certain budget numbers to make some limited case and fail to 

ignore, and fail to ignore, what has happened in the K to 12 

system as it relates to libraries and resource centres; and fail to 

mention what has happened with the universities; and fail to 

mention the half-million dollar special fund; and fail to mention 

the fact that there has been a 29 per cent increase in grants since 

1981 - a 29 per cent increase. And the focus has been - and this 

is where the NDP have the real difficulty, Mr. Chairman - the 

focus has been on strengthening the libraries across this 

province, not some central government agency, if you like. 

 

That’s the difference between the NDP party and the 

Progressive Conservative Party. We are interested in fairness. 

You guys who pay this lip-service to fairness. And I want to 

talk specifically, because he mentioned the examples of Regina 

and Saskatoon. 

 

What would he have said, Mr. Chairman, if we hadn’t - if we 

hadn’t put a special fund in place to top up northern library 

book budgets and rural book budgets in rural Saskatchewan, 

given this information, given the fact, as I pointed out last night, 

that one-third of the population in this province had a $1.9 

million book budget, and two-thirds of the people had access to 

a book budget of 1.3 million. Is that fair? 

 

The hon. members like to talk so much about fairness. The NDP 

think they have the stranglehold on fairness. They are the ones 

that - well the NDP are the ones that talk about giving to those 

in need, and I happen to subscribe to that view, too. But when 

you give to those who have the most need, the people in 

northern Saskatchewan and the people in rural Saskatchewan, 

what do they say? Oh, you’re picking on Regina and Saskatoon. 

Well what is the story on Saskatoon and Regina libraries this 

year? Well I am advised that in 1986 Regina’s budget was 7.6 

million, and in ’87, is it down? There’s this horrendous cut the 

hon. member talks about. Well if he is right, is their budget 

somehow gone down? What are the facts, Mr. Chairman? 

 

Well their budget has gone from 7.6 to 7.75 million. And in 

Saskatoon it’s gone from 5.3 to 5.8 million. Now how does he 

square that? Nothing but lip-service, nothing but distortions, 

nothing but fear mongering. And he speaks against the very 

things I thought his party stood for - fairness and providing for 

those who have the greatest needs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You don’t know what fairness is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member from Prince Albert 

talks about not knowing what fairness is. Well you stand in this 

House and tell the people of Saskatchewan that we ought not to 

have given a $3,000 book grant to the northern libraries, that we 

ought not to have given $1,500 to the other branches across this 

province, because Regina and Saskatoon - and I want to 

acknowledge the great work that they’ve done in spreading their 

resources across this province, and this system - when they 

already have several millions of dollars and access in resources 

at their command that other provinces don’t have. 

 

So the issue becomes one not of somehow picking on Regina 

and Saskatoon as the hon. member has talked about, but it 

becomes a question of fairness and giving more to those who 

have greater needs and of strengthening our regional libraries 

system, a province-wide system of accessibility. 

 

That’s what we’re talking about here, is accessibility across this 

entire province. Look beyond Regina and Saskatoon, I say to 

you. Look beyond this narrow NDP notion of everything must 

happen in government, everything must happen in Regina and 

Saskatoon. I say to you, look beyond that - look beyond that, or 

your party will stay where it is for ever. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I quite intentionally did 

not discuss K to 12 education, or kindergarten, or the University 

of Regina, or the University of Saskatoon. That has been done 

very ably by the member from Saskatoon University and the 

member from Prince Albert. 

 

The point . . . the topic under discussion at the moment is 

libraries. And I say that your government has no idea what 

libraries are all about. And the funding which you have given to 

libraries shows that. 

 

Mr. Minister, you accuse me of picking figures here and there. 

I’m not picking specific figures; I am picking the total funding 

which you’ve given to libraries, and I’ve used the figures rather 

fairly; I think that’s evidenced by the fact that you never 

referred to any figures in your comments. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Minister, funding for the provincial library is 

down 27 per cent. Grants to libraries has been static; it’s up 1 

per cent. That’s during a period of time, Mr. Minister,  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1633 

 

when your total budget is up by 31 per cent. 

 

Now that, Mr. Minister, suggests to me, and I think suggests to 

a goodly number of the public in Saskatchewan, that you people 

don’t know what libraries are all about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well what your observations tell me 

is you haven’t looked at the issue, which you admit you 

haven’t. Because the reality is this, and I say it again and I said 

it before, and you referred to the fact that I didn’t mention 

numbers. I mentioned specific numbers, and I’ll mention them 

again: grants have increased 29 per cent since 1981, and the 

focus has been on strengthening libraries across this province, 

not some central government body. 

 

Now I know that’s an alien notion for the NDP, and I’ll give 

you another fact, hon. member, because I know the critic for 

this division is aware of these numbers, having worked in the 

library system, having worked in the library system. If you look 

at the western provinces in terms of grants per person, per 

person served in ’87-88, how does Saskatchewan stack up 

amongst the western provinces? 

 

Well here’s the record, Mr. Chairman, and I put this for the hon. 

member’s information, because I am getting sick and tired of 

fear mongering and distortion, and there’s no other words for it, 

Mr. Chairman. This is the reality. 

 

Saskatchewan, grants per person served, ’87-88, $5.79 - it’s a 

funding level; Manitoba, NDP Manitoba, espousing the same 

kind of commitment to libraries and to education in general as 

their party did when they were in power here in Saskatchewan; 

what’s the number? Is it more than $5.79, Mr. Chairman? Is it 6 

or is it 7 or is it 8 dollars? No, $3.35, $3.35! Alberta - $5.16; 

British Columbia - $2.38. 

 

And I’ll tell you why those numbers are so stark and so 

contrasting and why the Saskatchewan library system and all its 

trustees and all its staffs and faculties can hold their head high, 

is because Saskatchewan has one of the best systems across 

Canada, Mr. Chairman, bar none. 

 

And he can pick and snipe away at it, and somehow suggest that 

all the people that have worked in that system for years and 

years and years to create the strong kind of system that we have, 

that they are decimating it and ruining it and sniping and gutting 

it and all the rest of it. It’s hollow rhetoric, Mr. Chairman. It’s 

hollow rhetoric coming from an NDP, because in Manitoba 

they spent $3.35 and in Saskatchewan we spent nearly double 

that amount, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Those are the facts. He cannot dispute them, and they would 

have been raised by the hon. member, I’m sure, for Saskatoon, 

but the fact is, why put something so glowing as that on the 

table because it’s an embarrassment for NDP across this 

country, Mr. Chairman. And that’s a fact; that is a fact, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

And he doesn’t want to talk about our library initiatives in the K 

to 12 system. You know why, because when the NDP were in 

government, Mr. Chairman, there was never put in place a 

special fund for our schools to draw on to  

update those libraries. 

 

And when they were in government, Mr. Chairman . . . They 

don’t want to talk about universities either. You know why? 

Because they starved the universities of funding. They 

absolutely starved them. And I’ll tell you what. He can bring his 

blue books forward, and he go back as far as he wants. I wish 

he would, because what he would find out, Mr. Chairman, is 

when the NDP were in government, that the funding curve for 

the universities - it’s as clear as day and night - whenever there 

was an election coming, it went like this: whoop! The funding 

took a bit of a bleep that year, up. Then it would be starved 

again for three years. Whoops, another election coming, ’78 - 

up it went. And the hon. member form Saskatoon Riversdale 

nods his head and says, that’s exactly what we were doing. 

Starve them three years out of four, and then give them a little 

lip-service. 

 

And that’s been a trademark of the NDP for years and years in 

this province, Mr. Chairman, and that’s why they sit in 

opposition. That’s why we sit here. And that’s why we, along 

with the rest of the people in this province, can hold our heads 

high when it comes to the issue of education and libraries, no 

matter at what level. And I’m proud to say so on behalf of the 

people of this province, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I’d ask you to 

table the document you just read from, because I don’t think it’s 

accurate. I think those figures are inaccurate. Table it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I would ask members to rise 

when they’re making comments. When they’re making 

comments from their seat, they don’t go into the record. So I’d 

ask members on both sides of the House, if they have anything 

to say, they’ll have all kinds of opportunity to enter into the 

debate. And I would ask members to make their comments from 

their feet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I will table the document I read from. 

I have several copies of this document. The one I was reading 

from . . . I had scribbled some of my own notes on and I would 

prefer to keep them. But the statistics I related as it relates to the 

$5.79, the 3.35, etc., I will send across to the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you read some figures with 

respect to the grants, the total grants to Saskatchewan libraries. 

It’s the figure which is now subvote 39. I don’t have that right, 

subvote 38. You read off some figures. It’s that that I want. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would admit that the funding in Saskatchewan 

to libraries is generous by comparison to other provinces, and 

that is because the NDP and CCF have been in office since the 

war. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — The only reason, the only reason, Mr.  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1634 

 

Minister, that we spent more on libraries is because you people 

haven’t been in office since the ’30s. And that’s the truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — We have a good library system because the 

Douglas government spent generously on it. Mr. Minister, the 

funding . . . the level of increase since you people have been in 

office has been negative. There’s been a negative increase since 

you people have been in office. You’re spending less now than 

you were when you came in. That has not happened in this 

province since the ’30s. Mr. Minister - not coincidentally the 

last time you were in office. 

 

Mr. Minister, I say that . . . I will admit the funding in 

Saskatchewan is generous. That’s because you haven’t been in 

office very much. That isn’t something you people initiated. 

That was something that was in place when you came into 

office, and the cuts in funding which have taken place since 

you’ve been in office have not entirely destroyed the system. 

But that’s the best I can say for your administration, is that you 

haven’t entirely destroyed the system. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Minister, the figures I want are the figures you read. I want 

a copy of that document. I don’t want it read again; I want a 

copy of the document you read from - your briefing note with 

respect to the grants to the libraries in Saskatchewan - because 

the estimates give a very different story than what you just read. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member has suggested . . . 

He has now admitted, in fact, that yes, under our Premier and 

the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, libraries 

and the library system has continued to move forward. In fact 

the record will show, Mr. Chairman, and which I almost 

couldn’t believe myself, but the hon. member has admitted that 

we are generous. And I thank him for that acknowledgement. 

 

When he was faced with the facts, Mr. Chairman, he had to 

retreat to the truth. He had to retreat to the truth, and that’s a 

rare happening over there. But he went on further to say the 

reason that it’s so generous is because of the base, in his words, 

and the history of the NDP party and the legacy it left our 

government. Well I want to refresh his memory again with 

some more facts, Mr. Chairman. 

 

This will be quiz time for the hon. member from Regina. When 

your party was in government, did you have in place a special 

fund for schools to buy library books and video tapes and 

videos - that kind of thing? Did the NDP . . . This is quiz time 

for the hon. member. When the NDP, in this great legacy that 

they somehow left us, was there this special fund that our 

school boards and our teachers and our children could have 

access to, to buy books, to update resource centres and libraries, 

to get video materials, those kinds of things? In this great NDP 

legacy, was there that fund, Mr. Chairman? The answer is no. 

 

There was no legacy like that. There was a legacy of starvation 

in the system. There was a legacy of school  

libraries run down, a legacy of equipment and libraries run 

down at the university level. That was the legacy they left us. 

 

Second question, Mr. Chairman, then. When the NDP, in this 

great legacy that they left us in the library system, did they 

leave in place a fund that our universities could draw on to 

update their libraries, and to computerize the accessibilities and 

the card-cataloguing systems, and to put in place microfiche 

and some of the new technology in terms of library materials? 

Did they put in place a fund, or did they leave us a fund like 

that for the university to draw on, Mr. Chairman? Once again 

the answer is no. 

 

Every time you examine the question of the NDP funding in 

education, in libraries, in resource centres, and in new 

technology, you come up empty-handed, Mr. Chairman - 

empty-handed every time. 

 

And I myself am not going to stand here and take credit for all 

the fine things that have been happening, because - I’ve referred 

on numerous occasions to why these great things are happening 

- because we’ve got a Provincial Librarian that’s got a vision; 

we’ve got people like Ernie Ingles over at the University of 

Regina that’s got a vision; we’ve got people like the people at 

the University of Saskatchewan who’ve got a vision, outlining 

the future in their Issues and Options paper. 

 

And we’ve got strong library trustees across this province; and 

we’ve got a good library board advising myself and my 

colleagues; we’ve got a sound system; we’ve got a fine system. 

We’ve got a system that’s increasingly accessible; we’ve got a 

system that, increasingly, is meeting the needs of the northern 

part of this province, Mr. Chairman, and I am proud of it, and I 

am happy to hear what the hon. member has to say, because 

he’s right. Given the difficult times, the funding has been 

generous. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Given the overall level of funding, the 

funding for libraries has gone down, and that is the 

incontrovertible fact, Mr. Minister. Don’t give me this tripe 

about all the bad luck, and all the hard luck you’ve suffered 

from, and all the people who have been unfair to you, and the 

prices of all the commodities have gone down. 

 

The fact is that during the five, six years you people have been 

in office your funding has remained at the same level in 

constant dollars. Inflation has gone up by 35 per cent; your 

funding has gone up by 31 per cent, Mr. Minister. Your 

spending has remained about even in constant dollars. But the 

spending on libraries has gone down in absolute terms. In 

absolute dollars, your funding on the provincial library is 27 per 

cent less; your funding on regional libraries in the same. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to read to you a comment from the final 

report of the Local Government Finance Commission, 

September 27. Members of the commission were Ray Clayton, 

chairman; John Wright, commissioner; Lol O’Shaunghnessy, 

commissioner; Herve Langlois, commissioner; Nick Volk, 

commissioners; Bob Linner, commissioner. Their comments, 

contained on page 275 . . . The comment was as follows: 

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1635 

 

Mr. Minister, if I could have your attention, if you could quit 

chatting for a moment, and if I could have your attention . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Has he put down the comic book yet? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Yes, if you could set the magazine down 

that you were reading a second ago, Mr. Minister. Put that 

aside. Listen to this, and I’d ask you for your comments on this 

conclusion drawn by the local finance commission which spent 

some two years studying these issues. The commission also 

reached a number of conclusions and made the following 

recommendations regarding the finance of libraries: 

 

That relative to regional libraries, Regina and Saskatoon’s 

municipal libraries receive insufficient provincial funding 

and that, as in interim measure, provincial grants to these 

municipal libraries should be increased by approximately 

$3 per capita. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, for your comments on that 

recommendation from the board which you established. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I said before in this House, 

one could always use more money. But the rationale for why 

we targeted our additional funds, first to the North, and then 

secondly to the regional system as opposed to Regina and 

Saskatoon, was a question of fairness and providing to those 

who had the greatest need. 

 

And certainly one can argue that we could always use more 

everywhere. But the reality was the North had the least 

resources, and rural Saskatchewan, second, had the least 

resources. And I’ve read the numbers into this record before 

about the resources available to Regina and Saskatoon. Not that 

they’ve been . . . not shared those resources with the rest of the 

province, because they have, and we must underline that 

because they have a great tradition of serving the rest of 

Saskatchewan, if you like. 

 

And I absolutely do not - I want to underline to you again - that 

this is somehow, in this funding initiative, somehow not trying 

to penalize Regina and Saskatoon. It’s a matter of helping the 

rest of the province play catch-up to some degree. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you’ve patently failed to deal 

with the question, and that is to comment on this report. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think it’s obvious to all concerned, the reason 

why you have not only not redressed the imbalance in the 

funding to Regina and Saskatoon, but indeed you’ve grossly 

aggravated it, is because you don’t hold many seats in Regina 

and Saskatoon - you’re likely to hold four fewer after the next 

election - and that’s why they haven’t got any additional 

money, Mr. Minister. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask a couple of 

questions also regarding libraries. Our concern is the direction 

in which libraries have taken over the last three or four years. 

 

I speak from personal experience of having sat on a library 

board for several years, Mr. Minister. And I know that when we 

were sitting in our library board meetings, in our regional 

meetings and our consultations with other regions, that we 

found that we were having to cut staff in some cases, or cut 

programs, or to cut hours, because slowly, year by year by year, 

with costs going up but no pro rata costs coming towards the 

library boards, we found that even this year that the board was 

considering that they would have to shut down for some time 

during summer - shut down the libraries in the rural areas or 

shut down . . . and in some cases the small towns. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, with view of your record of not increasing 

funds at the rate of the cost of living increase, I want to ask you: 

is it your intention to slowly starve library boards so that they 

will eventually have to implement user fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member made reference to 

his time and experience on the regional board, and I believe that 

was the Lapiti board - Wapiti board rather. Well what is the 

funding history of the Wapiti board, Mr. Chairman? What is the 

. . . and I think you sat on that board through some of these 

years. 

 

In 1981 the budget there was 1.15 million. Now if the hon. 

member’s arguments are correct, and that somehow it’s been 

. . . not had the funding increases and resources made available 

to it, could he explain to the legislature how then their budget 

this year, or their proposal, given all this hardship that somehow 

the NDP think that has been thrust upon them, could he explain 

to this Assembly then how is that the budget in 1981 under the 

NDP was 1.15 million and today it’s 1.7 million. Could he 

explain that half a million dollar discrepancy for the House, Mr. 

Chairman? 

 

And maybe he wouldn’t want to, because the history is, if my 

memory serves me right, in 1978 when the NDP were in 

government, what did they do? They went to the RM’s in the 

area, they off voted their problem in to the RM’s in the area and 

said, double up the ante, boys. That’s what their history was. 

 

And I don’t know whether the hon. member was sitting on the 

board at that time or not. Maybe, perhaps, he’d like to explain 

to us their actions in the NDP days and explain to this House 

how, when the NDP were in government, the budget is nearly 

half of what it is today. Could he explain that for us please? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, my question dealt very 

specifically with funding to prevent the eventual possibility of 

having to implement user fees. When I sat on that board, we 

had board members that came up and said, look, we’re so stuck 

for funds because of the increasing demands on a library; we’re 

going into the proverbial information age; we should be setting 

up some  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1636 

 

computer system; we may have to implement user fees. I want a 

commitment from the Department of Education that we will 

never, never, ever have to set up user fees in Saskatchewan 

libraries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Now the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, 

did a good job of smoke and mirrors in getting away from 

trying to explain, because he couldn’t explain it and not make 

this government look good. He couldn’t explain the generous 

funding and not pat us on the back. 

 

Well let’s read it into the record again. In the board that he sat 

on, Mr. Chairman, the funding went from 1.15 million in terms 

of their budget. In 1981 to this year, I’m advised, 1.7 million - a 

generous increase. 

 

And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, it’s a tribute to the people 

of that area that they want to make those commitments to this 

resource in their area. And as it relates to user fees, if the hon. 

member was in the House last night, I’ll say it again now: (a) 

the Act prohibits it; and (b) we have no intention of putting user 

fees in place in this province. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — For the record, Mr. Chairman, the increase 

in budgets came largely from increases of assessments given 

directly from property taxation in the municipalities. 

 

I want to ask one more question regarding libraries. I’ll come 

back to this in a moment here. I want to ask another question 

regarding the direction of libraries. The question regards the 

future direction with respect to computers and computer 

implementation at the provincial level. The people . . . there’s 

an increasing demand, an increasing need, people wanting to 

have access to data systems and a complete data base with 

respect to . . . so that they could use it in any particular district 

and have easy access in libraries. It’s very difficult for each 

library region to go on with their own computer system without 

having a centralized computer system that they could go to. 

 

I would like the minister to comment on what type of initiatives 

they’re taking to set up a provincial on-line computer system so 

that regional libraries, or libraries in the regions, could have 

access to. And will they have access to the University of Regina 

library computer system? 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, Mr. Chairman, has 

attempted to make the point that we ought to undertake this 

initiative, essentially, because the boards, of their own volition, 

and on their own initiative, aren’t likely to undertake it. And 

just for the record, and for his information, I’m advised that 

Wheatland has automated on their own, and I congratulate that 

board for that initiative. Chinook is, in fact, in the process of 

automating. I may stand to be corrected, but I believe there are 

other boards that are contemplating similar moves. 

 

I know the NDP would typically like to have everything  

dictated from Regina and from government, but I think we can 

see here another excellent example of regional boards, with 

autonomy, carrying the ball and doing quite well, thank you. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, I went out to the lounge for a cup of coffee, and while 

there I heard you exploding with pride about what you were 

doing for northern libraries. Mr. Minister, I want to read back to 

you the briefing note which you gave me: 

 

The grants to regional libraries were cut 10 per cent in 

1987 (so the document says, it’s a quote). Grants to 

Regina and Saskatoon libraries, cut 30 per cent. Northern 

grants unchanged. 

 

Mr. Minister, how do you pretend to have done such wild and 

wonderful things for northern libraries when you’ve frozen their 

grants? About all one can say is that you haven’t devastated 

their system quite as badly as you have ours. 

 

The document contained one other interesting statistic which I 

didn’t have: 

 

In 1986 (and listen to this) provincial grants represented 

58 per cent of regional library revenue and less than 8 per 

cent of city library revenue. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Legislative Assembly has become somewhat 

numb to your approach. There is so much information which is 

inaccurate. I’m striving to make an accurate statement without 

contravening the rules. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have given this Assembly so much 

information which is patently inaccurate. It is inconsistent with 

the facts, and often inconsistent with what you said 10 minutes 

ago, that the members of this Assembly have become somewhat 

numb to your approach. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, when you give us your briefing note, we 

wish you would at least stick to the facts in your briefing note. 

The fact is that northern grants are unchanged. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you’ll be kind enough to give me the 

briefing note which I asked with respect to the library grants in 

total, which you haven’t given us, that might prove equally 

interesting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’m glad the hon. member has 

read the briefing note and, in fact, wants to explore what’s 

happening even more fully in our northern library services - and 

in fact the correct phraseology here would be our northern 

library services improvement. 

 

He read correctly, Mr. Speaker, from the briefing note. That 

much he can do. What he failed to acknowledge is that yes, the 

funding is unchanged for the libraries that are there, the 

individual libraries. What he failed to acknowledge is that we 

have more libraries. We have two new libraries opened. Okay. 

Yes, the funding is at the same, but we’ve expanded the number 

of libraries which  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1637 

 

is, I think, something that makes northern people very happy. 

 

So I’ll just detail for the Assembly what in fact we’re doing in 

terms of improving northern library services. Work has begun 

in the development of a federation of the north involving 

school, public, and community college resources. Book budgets 

are increased at $3,000 for each library for books. Two staff 

positions, strictly for the North, established since our 

government came into being. 

 

And matching grants. Now this is one that will interest the 

Assembly, Mr. Chairman, and will certainly interest the NDP 

member. Matching grants have been increased to $15,000 per 

library. And what was the number there, the similar number in 

1982 under the NDP, Mr. Chairman? Was it 15 or 14 or 

13,000? 

 

Well he said inflation was 30 per cent over those years, Mr. 

Chairman - 35 per cent. Well I ask you then, was the NDP 

commitment to the northern libraries just reduced by the 

amount of inflation? So that would say, if we were giving 

15,000, were they giving $10,000? The answer is no. 

 

Well what is the answer? What was the NDP commitment in 

1982, Mr. Chairman? - $2,000. Today, $15,000. The NDP 

years, lip-service to the North, and rightly so. The heir to the 

throne, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, sitting, head 

down, in embarrassment about the NDP record in northern 

Saskatchewan - $2,000. A $2,000 grant in 1982, and today the 

same number is . . . Mr. Chairman, I think I’ve hit a nerve. I 

think I’ve hit a nerve. 

 

Two new libraries open, Montreal Lake and Beauval, and 

greater emphasis on staff training and development. Now that’s 

what I call performance in northern Saskatchewan. And I’m 

happy to see it, Mr. Chairman, and I congratulate all the people 

involved. And I’m sorry the hon. member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has to leave at the mention of all this fine activity, 

Mr. Chairman. We’re proud of it. Our record stands, and I 

would encourage the hon. member to read further from the 

briefing notes. We’ve got more good news coming. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, I had asked the question 

earlier about computerization, and the minister answered 

indicating that there were some computerization starting. I 

believe that the computerization that had been started in these 

regions deals with book processing and payroll. 

 

My question was, a computerized database system that would 

be available for regions to tap into for purposes of . . . for 

reference purposes largely. Could you comment on that? Is 

there any initiative on the part of your department on a database 

system provincially based? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In so far as the issue of a data base 

and making existing data bases available, my understanding is 

that Toronto has a data base. We are hooked into that. Given 

that many regions aren’t automated and computerized, etc., etc., 

but might want access to the data base, if you like, we have a 

microfilm service to help get that database information out to 

the  

regions. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I want to turn now to a portion of estimates 

from dealing with K to 12 education, Mr. Minister. I want to 

thank your staff who has been here diligently day after day from 

the provincial library. I expect that we will be spending the rest 

of this day’s session on K to 12 matters. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I thank the hon. member for their 

questions relative to the provincial library, the Saskatchewan 

Library, and the library system in general, and if we need the 

officials forward again . . . And at the time the initial 

introductions were made and we started the estimates I don’t 

think Karen Adams, our Provincial Librarian, was formally 

introduced, who is sitting to my left. And I would want that to 

be on the record, and I thank her for her advice and guidance to 

the question period. And she will be happy to make herself 

available for further questioning, if such is the case. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I also would like to add my thanks to Karen 

Adams, the Provincial Librarian, for being here for so many 

times waiting for the libraries to come up. I appreciate her 

involvement in the discussion, and I certainly am looking 

forward to seeing that the Saskatchewan Library is strengthened 

so that we can enter the information age in the way in which we 

ought to be doing it. So thank you to Karen Adams. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I would simply add my 

comments to those of my colleagues who have thanked the 

officials for coming. I just wish, Mr. Minister, you’d give those 

very competent officials some resources to work with. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, when we’re dealing with K 

to 12 education, the school boards in the province, we all know 

have been hit with a triple whammy by this government. 

 

First of all, they got the 1 per cent cut in the operating grant. 

Secondly, there was a cut to the promised five-year EDF 

(educational development fund) plan. The promise was broken, 

turned around, and turned into a ten-year plan. And then more 

recently, of course, the gasoline tax that was added, which adds 

to every budget . . . to the school board’s budget. 

 

I want to ask the minister whether he consulted with any school 

boards prior to their cut on their EDF fund - the breaking of the 

promise - whether they consulted on it? And I know that there 

was considerable consultation prior to bringing the EDF in, and 

that was a result of it. I wonder if the same type of consultation 

went on as they were going to bring in the cuts? And I want to 

know what the rationale was for the plan, extending the plan, 

whether there was any other rationale for extending the EDF 

plan, other than just cost cutting? 

 

I want to bring to the minister’s attention what some of these 

cuts have done to school boards. Here is a letter that I have 

from Rockglen School, from a principal of Rockglen School, as 

one of many examples. He said in his  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1638 

 

letter: 

 

We will lose 2 teachers from our school. One position is 

from Division 1 and the other position is from division III 

and IV. The overall staff reduction is from 17 teachers to 

15.5. 

 

Then he talks about, a little later in his letter, he also indicates 

another problem. And this one is about: 

 

Presently (he says) the grade one class is split into two 

rooms. This class will (now have to) be combined next 

year with around 30 students. Their ability range in this 

room is extreme - we have students who are gifted, to 

average, to learning disabled . . . I sincerely doubt that we 

will be able to meet their individual differences . . . 

 

Now that was an example from Rockglen School, the principal 

of Rockglen School, as an example of some of the difficulties 

that are faced with, not just at the school board level but at the 

school level, and of course will have an impact on their 

students. 

 

From Moosomin, a portion of a letter written to our caucus 

from the McNaughton High School staff: 

 

We are very concerned about how the cuts in education(al) 

funding will adversely affect student opportunities in our 

school. 

 

. . . our staff will be decreased by an equivalent of 4/7 of a 

teacher. 

 

And later on in the letter they say: 

 

Saskatchewan Studies has been dropped from grades 10, 

11 and 12. 

 

So we’ve had program drops as well as increases in 

pupil/teacher ratio. Some subjects have been combined in this 

school. 

 

Another letter from Moosomin, from a division of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation in Moosomin: 

 

. . . we believe the cutbacks in education funding will 

make it virtually impossible to maintain the existing level 

of programs in our jurisdiction. 

 

From Centennial school in Regina: 

 

Reducing teaching staff will result in increased class sizes, 

more split grades, and ultimately will result in an inability 

to maintain the quality of education in Saskatchewan. 

 

The list is endless, Mr. Chairman. I could bring piles and piles 

of letters. I’ve simply selected a couple for the record so that I 

could bring to the minister’s attention the graveness of the 

concerns that are in the Saskatchewan public. 

 

Now what has happened as a result of those cuts is that the 

percentage of educational expenditure that is borne by school 

boards and borne by property taxes has  

changed considerably. The record shows from ’75 to ’86 that 

the percentage of school grants - grants as a percentage of 

school board expenditure - has gone from a rounded figure of 

56 per cent to a rounded figure of 44 per cent in ’86. From ’75, 

56 per cent. And it was in the 50’s, in the 50 per cent range, 

from ’75 to ’81. That is, the provincial government covered 

over 50 per cent of school grant expenditure until 1981. Since 

1981 it’s been lower than 50 per cent, and in 1986 it went to a 

new low of 44 per cent. What has happened is that the local 

taxes now have to pick up 342 million of the total grants . . . 

total grant of the expenditure, operating expenditure, and the 

province now picks up 330 million, which is a drop of 3.3 

million. 

 

(1200) 

 

Now it is our view, it is the view of the members on this side, 

that that is going in the wrong direction. It is the view of the 

members of this side that the provincial funding to education 

should be increasing, not decreasing, as a proportion of the total 

expenditure. I want to ask the minister how far does he expect 

to go with this obvious tax shift? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — A number of points there. The first 

one I think I would address is the question of the education 

development fund, that excellence fund that was established by 

our government under our Premier. And the hon. member asked 

if there was consultation relative to that issue. 

 

What I can say to him, there was consultation to a degree that 

the budget process allows for. I had met with some of the 

executive members, certainly the president, on a number of 

occasions before the budget. Because as you know, there was a 

white paper, an economic statement made by our Minister of 

Finance that laid out some broad guide-lines that cabinet was 

going to use in its budget preparation - things like the zero and 

zero salary guide-lines, about what school boards and 

municipalities might expect for grants. 

 

The reason we put that out there was to initiate that kind of 

dialogue and consultation. And once the president, for example, 

of the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and 

his officers had seen that, I visited with them and they said, 

well, we see what you’re saying. I think for the most part . . . In 

fact, I visited with him yesterday, I think they’ve intimated to 

me that they can live with this pause, if you like . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . 

 

And the hon. member for North East says they’re not 

impressed, and I think he probably hasn’t talked to the president 

of the SSTA. I would doubt that the member has once talked to 

the president of the SSTA since the budget came down. I would 

doubt it, Mr. Chairman, but he chirps from his seat and that’s 

his case. He can do as he wishes. Maybe he’d like to get into 

the debate. 

 

Anyways, before I was . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. All members get the opportunity to 

take part in this debate. I would ask members . . . Order. I 

would ask members to allow the  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1639 

 

minister to give his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as a result of that economic 

statement, the dialogue that one would expect would be 

forthcoming and the meetings were there. As I recall the 

discussions in my office, in fact, what the direction was from 

them, as they said this: as you go about your budget process, 

and given what we see in the economic statement, the strategy 

we would recommend to you is, above all, preserve the base 

grant or the operating grant. Above all, preserve that as best 

your can. And if you have to find some slack, or use something 

as a shock absorber, use the education development fund. And, 

of course, that’s what we did. 

 

But to back up even one step further in history, the year the 

education development fund came on stream, or the second year 

it was on on stream, and a very proactive year in so far as 

consultation was concerned, many school boards and trustees 

were expressing the concern that with this fund, as generous as 

it was and as fine as it was, they needed more planning time and 

more lead time on some of it. They didn’t want to have to rush 

into the projects. 

 

And as a result of those discussions, and in fact as a result of 

their suggestions, the fund was essentially moved from a 

five-year one to a six-year one then, Mr. Chairman. Certainly 

stretching it to 10 changes some planning, I am certain. But the 

important thing is, is that the dollars, the total commitment to 

the fund, is still there, and school boards acknowledge that and 

they feel comfortable with that. 

 

I mean, I suppose, one can debate whether it should have been 

stretched from six to eight, or six to seven, or six to nine, 

instead of six to 10. But the bottom line is the commitment is 

still there to excellence. 

 

To pick up the second point the hon. member raises about that 

somehow during the NDP years the amount of money that local 

school boards had to raise, exclusive of the provincial grants to 

education, that that share was somehow better, the provincial 

share was somehow larger than it is today. 

 

Once again, the hon. member is being very selective in his 

analysis, very selective. Because if one compares the funding, 

exclusive of what the school boards raised on their own, that 

they received from the province, what do we find? We find 

numbers like this, Mr. Chairman, and these numbers are . . . I 

will read into the record this year, and I’m sure my predecessor, 

my hon. colleague from Swift Current, read them into the 

record when she was minister, because they’re the same 

numbers we use from year to year to year. 

 

If we look at grants, the provincial share is percentage of actual 

or final budget expenditures with the education development 

fund into these numbers, the grants as a per cent of total actual 

expenditures. Now if we buy the NDP logic, Mr. Speaker, what 

we should find as we review these numbers is that the 

provincial share was higher in the NDP years than it is in the 

Progressive Conservative years. Well what does the record say? 

Well let’s pick a couple, three, four years, and I can read all of 

them in the 

 record if they so wish - 1972, 1973, the NDP were in power, 

the per cent of provincial share at that time was 48.8 and 50.9. 

The last year of the years they were in government, ’81, it was 

53.9; ’82 it was 52.6, okay? But what do we find this year, 

1987, if this is somehow he is making the argument that we’re 

off-loading onto the . . . off-loading our responsibilities onto the 

local school boards, onto the local taxpayer, what is the same 

number? Well it’s 52.4 per cent. 

 

Now by my arithmetic, Mr. Chairman, in 1972 and ’73 and 

even ’82, 45 and 48 and 50 per cent was the share of the 

provincial government in the NDP years, and today it’s 52.4. Is 

that not higher than 45 or 48 or 50? And granted, there was 

some years where it was higher in the mid ’70s, but certainly 

the record and the legacy that we were left was not such the 

case. And one of the reasons, Mr. Chairman, that the numbers 

are that way is because when the NDP were in power there was 

no excellence fund, this education development fund, that my 

colleague established. There wasn’t that kind of attention to the 

special needs of our school boards. 

 

I think one could . . . Another index that one can use that rebuts 

the arguments of the hon. member is that if you are . . . if we 

were being stingy with the provincial dollars to school boards, 

then one would expect that they would be running deficits, or 

certainly not surpluses in their budgets. 

 

Well what is the record there? What is the record? In 1981, at 

the end of this torrid funding initiative, apparently, by the NDP, 

the school boards across the province had accumulated 

surpluses of 30 millions of dollars, Mr. Chairman. Now if his 

logic is true and we’ve been stingy with our funding, then you 

would expect that the surpluses that have accumulated in the 

school boards across this province would have gone down from 

30 million, or maybe even the deficit situation. 

 

Well is there, in the accumulated surpluses of the school boards 

of this province, across this province, this very day, Mr. 

Chairman, is there more or less than 30 millions of dollars? To 

use his logic, he would suggest that we’ve been stingy with our 

funding, the surplus probably shouldn’t even exist, or if it is, it 

should be lower. Well what’s the record, Mr. Chairman? Well 

the record is, the surplus in 1981 was 30 million, and this very 

day it’s 57 million - almost double. Now could the hon. member 

square that for us in his logic? 

 

Or let’s use another index. If we have somehow been stingy 

with our funding and forced the taxpayers, the municipalities, to 

cough up more, and the land tax, etc., etc., was the increases 

forced upon the local burgess through the land tax greater in the 

NDP years or greater in the PC years, Mr. Chairman? 

 

The number again, once again, would suggest the increases 

were the greatest during the NDP years. The local landowner, 

property owner, the tax increases were enormous, Mr. 

Chairman. They’ve been very low since the Progressive 

Conservative Party came into power. 

 

Now I make all these arguments to buttress the fact that we 

consider education a priority; we’re not off-loading  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1640 

 

our responsibilities. But I don’t for one minute want to leave the 

impression that somehow education couldn’t use more money, 

because it always can. What I’m talking about here is the record 

that’s clear in terms of this government’s commitment. A 60 per 

cent increase in funding to the K to 12 system in the last five 

years, Mr. Chairman - a 60 per cent increase. And by the hon. 

member from Regina Centre’s own admission, the inflation rate 

during that same period was 35 per cent - so K to 12 funding 

went up 60 per cent in that same period, much higher than the 

rate of inflation. That is patently, absolutely true. Do you want 

me to table those numbers for you? I’ve hit a nerve, Mr. 

Chairman. I’ve hit a nerve again. 

 

I’ve put this in the record before . . . And I’ll give you one other 

fact, Mr. Chairman. I’ll give you one other fact. Not only has 

funding increased by 60 per cent, but the number of children in 

the system went down from 204,000 to slightly less than 

200,000 - more money, and even less children. And I’m proud 

of our record here, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if everything that the 

minister said was true I guess that the surplus should continue 

to be increasing. The fact is that I’ve had board members tell 

me, and I know my own school board, my own employing 

board, had to go into a deficit situation this year and they had to 

dig into their surpluses . . . and that’s why I’m asking the 

question about what the direction is that we’re taking. 

 

I want to shift now, Mr. Chairman . . . to ask a question 

regarding the cost of busing to rural school units. Now the 

figures that I’ve received from the Saskatchewan trustees 

association indicate that there are 359,000 kilometres of road 

that buses travel annually during school days. And if you 

average it out over 190 days per year, a total of 68 million 

kilometres, and then we go further. If we assume that you burn 

up a litre every 2.5 kilometres, it comes out to about 27 million 

litres of gasoline that they use. If you add the seven per cent gas 

tax, this comes out to very close to $2 million in additional cost 

to the Saskatchewan educational system to be borne by school 

boards. 

 

My question is, Mr. Minister, in view of this transfer of taxation 

from the provincial level to the school board level, will you be 

giving a rebate to school boards as well as the same type as 

promised to individuals? 

 

You know that if it isn’t this, it will result in one of two, one of 

three things: either additional deficits on the part of school 

boards, or program and staff cuts, or an increase in property 

taxes. So the question is: will you be setting up a rebate 

program for school boards, rural school boards? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, in the opening of 

his last statement, talked about the deficits of particular school 

boards. Well I’m advised that we only know of one school 

division that’s in a deficit financial position, one school 

division, and it has a $26,000 deficit. And so, as I say, I think to 

put that in perspective, the reality is across this province, the 

surplus situation has gone from 30 to 57. And that’s only a 

measure, one  

measure of the health of our school funding. 

 

The other question that the hon. member raised, Mr. Chairman, 

is: was our government aware of the hardship that the 7 per cent 

a litre gas tax could impose on rural school divisions who have 

to run buses, and the answer is yes. And in fact we were so 

aware of it that we made sure that it was looked after come 

budget day. We were aware of that, that that might be a 

potential tax increase there. We recognized the hardship 

generally in rural Saskatchewan and the hardships on those 

taxpayers. And so here is what we did, Mr. Chairman, to make 

sure that that wouldn’t be a surprise to them and in fact would 

be dealt with and would be dealt with and not have to get into 

rebates and all the other kind of thing. 

 

The annualized cost to school divisions, that is to say the cost of 

the 7 cent a litre tax to school divisions for an entire year, our 

numbers would suggest - and there is some variance with the 

hon. members numbers, but it’s not that great. I suspect we 

probably had access to better numbers than the hon. member, 

just because of the nature of the ministry, but the yearly cost is 

1.6 million. This year of course, Mr. Chairman, given the date 

of the gas tax, the cost to school boards, because it is only 

applicable for a part of a year, the cost is 665,000. 

 

So what I’m saying here, Mr. Chairman, is the 7 cent a litre tax 

this year meant an additional cost to operate the buses across 

this province of 665,000. And the hon. member is saying, are 

you going to put a rebate in place to handle that? And I say, 

well, we had some sense, because I happened to sit at the 

cabinet table, of what some of the tax decisions might be. And 

so we allowed for this before it got to the point that the hon. 

member might have suggested it would have got to. So what we 

did, Mr. Chairman, to offset this increase, is we increased the 

rural transportation per pupil rate by $3 or 2.7 per cent, now up 

to $114. And we also increased the rural transportation 

kilometre rate by $4 or 3.2 per cent. 

 

Well by increasing these . . . the recognition of these costs, for 

rural transportation . . . Mr. Chairman, what this means is that 

the school boards across this province, the increased recognition 

of the costs, is at $900,000. That’s what this increase in those 

two areas means in the formula, Mr. Chairman. So a $665,000 

increase, on the one hand, is offset very well by a $900,000 

increase in the formula. 

 

So I think one could argue, quite frankly, that the school boards 

will come out ahead. One could argue that they come out in this 

instance nearly $300,000 ahead. 

 

So the hon. member’s asking me: will school boards suffer any 

economic hardship because of the gas tax? The answer is no. 

It’s been looked after in the transportation grants, in the 

kilometre rate, and the per pupil rate, because we didn’t want to 

impose any hardships on these local school boards, these rural 

school boards, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, one of the difficulties that was 

caused here was that the . . . many school boards had already set 

up their budgets prior to hearing about the 7 cent gas tax 

increase. And maybe you had set up these  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1641 

 

increases; I would assume that they would have other increases 

just due to cost of operating, in addition, and the 7 cents seemed 

to sort of hit them over and above. And as a result, they’re 

having to find money after having set their budgets. 

 

Another question relates to your department’s intentions about 

helping out with tax collections. As you know, there used to be 

a property tax rebate system in this province that the previous 

NDP government had, and your government cancelled it. And 

we get repeated, we get repeated requests about a return for the 

property tax rebate. One of the . . . Of course, we know that it 

helps every home owner. 

 

But the other concern is on the part of people like school boards 

and like municipal councils. In a letter addressed to me from a 

school board, they asked whether - and this was prior to the 

October election - they said they are concerned with the 

dramatic increase of tax arrears that occurred in ’85 and at the 

rate tax collections were proceeding in ’86. It certainly appears 

that the elimination of property tax rebates has removed any 

incentive to prompt payment of taxes. 

 

I want to know whether his department is giving any 

consideration to reimplementation of the property improvement 

grant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, no. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the teachers’ 

superannuation fund. You will know the history as well as 

anybody, Mr. Minister, that there used to be one teachers’ 

superannuation fund, known as the formula fund. 

 

This was . . . In ’78, there was another plan instituted. It was a 

funded plan. The first plan was not a funded plan. And the 

reason for instituting the second plan was because of the threat 

to the teachers’ superannuation fund, the threat of increasing the 

liabilities. The government at the time negotiated with the 

teachers and set up two plans. 

 

And at the same time, they also set up a program that teacher 

contributions put into the plan, and also the interest raised on 

the part of the teacher contributions would go into the plan. 

Legally, 7 per cent was the amount that the government was to 

put in. The government, from ’78, I believe, until year previous, 

was putting in additional moneys that were earned by that 

teachers’ plan. 

 

Your government instituted a different policy last year. It 

started pulling the money over and above 7 per cent and putting 

into general revenue of the province. I want to know, Mr. 

Minister, is that practice something that you’re going to 

continue this year? I want to know, Mr. Minister, what the rate 

of return was for the entire plan this year, and how much of this 

was turned into the general funds for the province? How much 

of this was credited to the teachers’ superannuation fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Sorry for the delay hon. member. 

What I am advised is that it continued to meet the  

minimum requirements as expected of us, and to answer your 

question specifically as to the rate for year ’86-87, not yet 

known. The year end was just the end of June, but I can tell you 

that for ’85-86 it earned 16.82 per cent. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — In ’85-86 the fund earns 16.82 per cent; 7 

per cent of that money was turned into the teachers’ 

superannuation fund; the remaining was put into the general 

revenues for the province. In ’86-87 then, the rates may be 

down slightly, but we would expect them to be in the vicinity of 

. . . perhaps 14 per cent may be a fair estimate. And so half of 

that again would only be going into the teachers’ 

superannuation fund. 

 

Mr. Minister, the concern of the teachers, of course, Mr. 

Minister, is that the spirit of what was started in ’78 has been 

broken. We have heard many lectures, of course, about fiscal 

responsibility on the part of the province, and the difficulties 

that everybody has had to contend with as a result of the 

mismanagement of the government, of getting $3.4 billion into 

debt. 

 

Now the teachers are very conscious of this particular move as 

well, because they also want to have a fully funded pension 

plan, not only for the people on the new funded plan, but the 

people also on the formula plan, so that they can eventually all 

get in on the formula plan. 

 

It is the opinion of the members, and it is our view here, Mr. 

Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that we should be aiming in that 

direction - that that fund should become totally funded, and that 

the negotiations can properly take place so that the teachers can 

have the choice of the plans that they want. And unfortunately, 

removing the total of the money earned by that fund will simply 

slow this process down and put the teachers’ fund . . . keep the 

teachers’ fund at risk longer than it should. 

 

(1230) 

 

Is it your intention, Mr. Minister, to bring this to your Minister 

of Finance with the view of extracting that total portion from 

him and putting it into the teachers’ superannuation fund where 

it rightly belongs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Two points for the hon. member, just 

to correct one of his statement there, in so far as the disposition 

of the 16.82 per cent. I think your suggestion was that 

everything over 7 per cent was put into general revenues, but 

that was not the case. That would have been our minimum but 

there was more than 7 per cent left in, if you like. 

 

As relates to the unfunded liability, and the old plan, and what 

are we going to do about it, I think as the hon. member well 

knows, this is only one instance of a pension plan in Canada 

with this situation. And I suspect because of it that was why the 

thinking on creating the new plan in the first place, to exactly 

get around the problem that had been created. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some 

further questions on this subject of the minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you mentioned just now that in 1985-1986 the 

fund earned 16.82 per cent, and then you mentioned  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1642 

 

that something in excess of 7 per cent was left in the fund, but 

you didn’t mention how much was left in the fund, and how 

much was taken out. Can you inform the House how much was 

left in the fund on the interest earnings, in total dollars, and how 

much was taken off and put into the general revenues of the 

province to pay for the deficit, at the expense of the teachers’ 

pension fund, in total dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We allowed the fund to earn 18.2 

million more than the required 7 per cent. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — You must not have heard my second 

question. The second question was: how much was taken out of 

the fund from the earnings and put into the general revenues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think to answer the hon. member, 

the question here is not so much about how much we took back. 

The issue is: here was our minimum requirement, and we met 

that, and then some - to the tune of $18.2 million - and I don’t 

know what more I can say about the issue. I think you’re 

coming at it from one end, and we’re coming at it from the 

other end. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m coming at it 

from the same end as you are. I know what the minimum 

requirements are, and so do the teachers and the trustees of 

Saskatchewan, and the government, who make a contribution to 

the fund. That’s not at question here. 

 

At question here is: how much in ’85-86 did the fund earn in 

interest? You say . . . You didn’t answer that. You only gave us 

the percentage, which is fine. You say that $18.2 million was 

left in the fund out of the earnings. My question was - I thought, 

quite clear - how much was taken out of the earnings in total 

dollars and put into the general revenues? Not a very difficult 

question to answer, I’m sure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’m advised that the earnings 

track, if we look at the last . . . ’83-84, ’84-85, ’85-86, has not 

been all that much different. In ’83-84 the fund had . . . the 

number that I gave you earlier for ’85-86 at 18.262 million; the 

same number in ’83-84 was 16.9 million; the next year it was 

16.75 million; and in ’85-86 was 18.262 million. The 

contribution over and above the 7 per cent were clearly meeting 

more than our minimum expectation. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, since you don’t want to 

answer the question, let me ask it of you in a different way. 

How much did the fund earn in 1985-1986? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t think the numbers are any 

surprise to the hon. member, and in fact he probably has in his 

office the annual report, ’85-86, Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Superannuation Commission . . . page 42, teachers’ 

superannuation fund, investment incomes reads, 83,655,354 - 

$83,655,354 is the investment income of the teachers’ 

superannuation fund. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, what you have told 

us here is that in ’85-86 the fund earned $75.4 million. You 

now have also said that you retained in that year - well that’s 

what you said, if I misunderstood, I’ll give you an opportunity 

to correct me - but you just said  

that the earnings were $75.4 million, and you also said that you 

retained $18.2 million. 

 

Now I’m not going to - until I get a clarification - accuse you of 

anything out of giving you some fair opportunity to correct 

what you have just said, but will you please clarify what you 

had meant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What I said is in the annual report, 

’85-86, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Superannuation 

Commission, the investment income was $83,655,354, and I’ll 

get a copy of that page for you. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. So you’re saying, Mr. Minister, 

then the funds earned 83 million - I’ll round it off - and you 

retained only 18 million, is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, it is the seven per cent plus the 

18.2 million in change. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — You retained 70 per cent of what? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Seven per cent. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Seven per cent of what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The fund earned at 7 per cent and we 

let it grow by the additional 18.2 million. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — What is the amount of the 7 per cent in 

dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I just would point out to the hon. 

member that clearly, as it relates to the operation of this fund, 

the government is meeting its statutory obligation as bargained, 

as you know, and then some. And the then sum last year was 

$18.2 millions and change. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you’re not being helpful at 

all by avoiding the question. And I wish . . . I think, as the 

minister in charge, you have an obligation to the people who 

make contributions to this plan to give them the information 

that they ought to have. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s in the report. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, it may be in the report. I want you 

to put it on the record of this House what the situation is. Can 

you tell me . . . Mr. Minister, I’ll come back to my original 

question, and then if you don’t answer it, we’ll want an 

explanation of why you refuse to answer. The question simply 

is: how much of the earnings . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As 

soon as the minister is listening, I will continue, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question is this: how much of the earnings of 

the Saskatchewan teachers’ superannuation fund was taken out 

of the fund and put into the general revenues of the province in 

1985-1986? I know what was announced. 

 

It was announced by the former minister . . . by the Minister of 

Finance last year that he was going to take out $30 million. And 

in questioning in this House during estimates and during the 

question period in that last session, he admitted to the $30 

million. And so did the  

  



 

August 7, 1987 

 

1643 

 

Minister of Education. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, what, in fact, was that figure? Did the 

government take $30 million out of the teachers’ 

superannuation fund earnings? And your officials are there; 

they’ll know. Or did the government take out more or less, and 

if so, by how much? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My officials have calculated for you, 

the 7 per cent - and this is an approximation, but not that rough 

an approximation - the 7 per cent equals approximately 25 

millions of dollars. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Thank you. I’m surprised 

that that figure just wasn’t right there and that there had to be a 

calculation. 

 

Mr. Minister, the 7 per cent is what you left in the fund from the 

earnings - that’s $25 million. What is the 7 per cent out of? 

What’s the total that the 7 per cent is out of? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Turn to page 44 of the same report. At 

the year end, the minimum balance of the fund was determined 

to be 428 million . . . Oh, for this is . . . Sorry, then, 1985 is 

$371.012 million. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that wasn’t the question. 

The question was this: you retained 7 per cent of the earnings, 

interest earnings, of the fund. You said to this House . . . A little 

over 7 per cent. You said to this House that amounted to $25 

million. I want to know what was the total interest earnings of 

the fund that you calculate this 16.82 per cent to be. The interest 

earnings was at the rate of 16.82 per cent. What amount of 

dollars is that 16.82 per cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think the hon. member had . . . 

there’s some confusion, I sense, in his questioning. Let’s start 

this thing over again. 

 

What is the government obliged to do here: (a) match the 

teacher contributions; secondly, meet the pension payroll; and 

thirdly, allow it to earn 7 per cent. Okay? That’s our obligation. 

That is bargained, and that obligation the government clearly 

meets. 

 

But we’ve gone beyond that for the concerns that were raised, 

in part, by the member from Prince Albert, relative to this 

whole issue of what’s happened with previous pensions and 

pensions across this country and unfunded liability, etc., etc. So 

because we recognize that, and in good faith, not as though it 

was bargained or not as though it’s part of our statutory 

obligation, but because of that we go farther than our 

obligation. We go farther than merely matching the teachers’ 

contribution, farther than merely meeting the pension payroll, 

and farther than just merely allowing it to grow by the 7 per 

cent. 

 

Last year, as we had in years previous, as I mentioned earlier, 

allowed it to grow by an additional $18.2 million. I don’t know 

if I can . . . or that was ’85-86 rather. I don’t know if I can be 

any more clear than that. So in terms of commitments and 

obligations and bargains and, in fact, even going farther, just 

out of good faith and as a part of  

internal government policy, if you like, that’s what we are 

doing. So if you’re asking, is the commitment being met? the 

answer is yes, and then some, because we, too, recognize the 

dangers out there, the white water, if you like, of pensions past. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you may talk about the 

so-called legal commitments, but there are also moral 

commitments. From everything that you have said here today, 

you show . . . you have shown that what the Minister of Finance 

said last year in his last budget was wrong. Now you can correct 

me if you wish, but the Minister of Finance said in the last 

session, in his last budget, that he was going to take out $30 

million out of the earnings of the teachers’ superannuation fund, 

which has a huge liability now, and indeed, from the figures 

you have given us, the Minister of Finance, with your 

agreement, has taken out something near to $40 million. 

 

Now that’s stealing from the teachers’ pension fund, Mr. 

Minister, whether you like it or not. Whether it’s legally 

possible for you to do that, is irrelevant. The fact of the matter 

is that this pension fund, which has an unfunded liability, 

earned more than the 7 per cent, and you, instead of considering 

the interests of the people who contribute to the fund, and in the 

interest of the unfunded liability, agreed to let your Minister of 

Finance take out of that fund something like $40 million . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Now the member back . . . speaking 

from his seat thinks that that’s okay. 

 

I want to say to the minister, Mr. Chairman, that’s not okay. 

That’s not okay . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It was never 

done, I will tell the member opposite who is interrupting, Mr. 

Chairman. That has never been done until 1985, 1986 under this 

government, and it’s wrong. You’re stealing from the funds. 

And the only people who agree to that is you, Mr. Minister. The 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, on behalf of the teachers it 

represents, has objected to it strenuously, has met with the 

Minister of Education and the Minister of Finance and has 

stated very expressly, last year, that it had no satisfactory 

answers. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Minister, how can you justify . . . how can 

justify taking out of the earnings of the teachers’ 

superannuation fund $39 million or $40 million of earnings to 

pay for the deficit which you have created when that fund 

already has got a massive unfunded liability? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move we rise, report progress, and 

ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:54 p.m. 

 


