













































October 6, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 6, 1987 

 

 

3127 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Ratification of Free Trade Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Acting Premier, and I’ll be interested to know who stands, and 

it is this, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Minister of Trade 

answered a number of questions with respect to the free trade 

deal with the United States, and I refer the Acting Premier to 

this morning’s edition of the Globe and Mail, which has a front 

page headline: 

 

Premiers will get briefing today, but they have little say on 

the deal. 

 

And the article quotes a Canadian trade official as saying that 

the provinces will have little voice in ratification of the trade 

deal. 

 

And my question is this: does the Government of Saskatchewan 

have any sort of a veto over those aspects of the proposed 

agreement which would impact negatively on Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. 

member is quite right — at this very moment, as I understand it, 

the Premier along with other ministers are being fully briefed 

on the trade deal that was initialled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in so far as the consultation and the Premier’s 

involvement in this process, all along the Prime Minister has 

kept all premiers fully involved and apprised of what the deal 

looked like and what options were being explored. 

 

All along the way I think the consultation has been very full 

and, albeit at the end of the day, I suppose, the Prime Minister 

is the quarterback of the team, I think the team have been fully 

involved all along, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry 

I didn’t make my question clear. It did not deal with 

consultation, it dealt with the ratification procedure. And my 

question again is: does the province of Saskatchewan have any 

form of a veto over those aspects of the proposed trade 

agreement which might impact negatively on Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, what the province of 

Saskatchewan is interested in, and was from the outset, was a 

good deal. I think the early indications are at least that 

Saskatchewan has got a good deal; indeed, Canada has got a 

good deal, Mr. Speaker. I suspect our Premier, if that proves to 

be true, will be ratifying this deal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the minister for his answer indicating that there will be a 

ratification by the Premier on behalf of the Saskatchewan 

government. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this. Is there any formal 

ratification process by which a certain number of provinces 

must agree to the deal? Is there any structure built in? This has 

been talked about for a number of months. Can you tell us what 

the arrangements are? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any, 

and quite frankly I’d be a little worried if we were starting to 

rewrite the process at this point in time. I think the process, and 

how we would approach these trade negotiations, was 

established some long time ago, Mr. Speaker, at first ministers’ 

meetings. It has been adhered to. There has been consultation 

and our Premier this very day is in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I 

understand from the Minister of Trade, yesterday, that his 

officials were receiving full briefings from their federal 

counterparts yesterday, and accordingly I want to direct some 

questions on clarification of the terms of the agreement which 

were set out in the American version of it in yesterday’s Globe 

and Mail. 

 

I refer the minister to the American summary which talked 

about free trade in services, and it referred to disciplines on 

public monopolies. And we raised that yesterday, Mr. Minister. 

Could you tell us what impact this agreement will have on the 

operation of such public monopolies in Saskatchewan at 

SaskTel and the Saskatchewan Liquor Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I would take notice of 

that question until our ministers and the Premier are back and 

we have a full understanding. 

 

Effects of Trade Agreement on Tourism 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. I direct a 

question to the Minister of Tourism. The agreement provides, 

and he will perhaps recall there’s a special reference in it to 

services, and special reference is made to architects and 

tourism, and my question deals with tourism: can you tell me 

what the agreement means with respect to “same nation 

treatment in services” as it relates to tourism? Could you 

enlighten the House on that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it only seems reasonable 

and logical to me that before any one suggests any implications 

. . . or interpretations of the agreement, that it would only be 

right that the premiers are being briefed on it, that we wait till 

the Premier returns to explain in full detail the implications to 

this House and to all of us. So in that regard my answer to you 

at this point in  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3128 

 

time . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. The minister is 

attempting to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My answer, and thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker, for getting order in the House so I can complete 

my answer to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

And as I indicated to him, no, today I cannot expand upon that. 

But I think you realize, sir, that it’s only reasonable to hear 

what the debriefing is, to hear what the Premier brings back 

from Ottawa, and at that point in time we’d be more than 

pleased to share that information with you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Continental Energy Agreement 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 

Acting Premier, whoever it may be, and I have a question that 

deals with the continental energy agreement which is proposed 

in this treaty. Under the treaty, Mr. Minister, the United States 

will have unlimited access to Canadian oil, gas, coal, 

hydroelectric power, and all other forms of Canadian energy. 

You called that, or the Minister of Trade yesterday called that, 

“access to the American market”, but in reality it is a 

guaranteed access for Canadian energy . . . to Canadian energy 

for the Americans. Will you not admit, Mr. Minister, that even 

without this agreement, the Americans are such large importers 

of energy that Canada will always be able to sell our energy to 

the American market? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We might as well try a female, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — In response to the hon. member’s 

question, Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade said yesterday is key for 

Saskatchewan, and that is access to those markets without 

artificial barriers being put up for the producers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I think back a few years ago — and I use potash 

and uranium as an example, when there was a lot of taxpayers’ 

dollars invested into it — and I would have to ask the hon. 

member: who did they think they were going to sell the product 

to? Potash for example — all of it to Canada? I mean, how 

much do we use? Very little, Mr. Speaker. Of course we 

weren’t. We were going to sell it south of the border. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the trade agreements in principle, removing 

barriers, artificial barriers, and giving us a say in the disputes 

that arise, is key for the future of this province in selling our 

products. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary question, to the minister, 

Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, the Americans  

are going to have access now to our energy — unlimited access, 

when they want it. When the don’t want it they won’t take it 

because this agreement does nothing about the countervailing 

tariffs and what the Americans can do with them. So in fact we 

got nothing in return for guaranteeing the Americans our energy 

at Canadian prices for all time. They will decide when they take 

it, and we can do nothing about it. 

 

How can you possibly support that kind of a give-away of a 

valuable natural Canadian economic advantage for Canada and 

Saskatchewan while getting nothing in return? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, what this will allow — this 

trade agreement in principle will be for Americans in need of 

resources such as uranium, another product that has a lot of tax 

dollars invested into it. It’s for sure, Mr. Speaker, that when the 

uranium mines were brought up by the NDP government back 

in the ’70s, that there was not enough . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I will clarify it for the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

An Hon. Member: — 600 million. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — About $600 million invested into it of the 

taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Canada was not 

using all that nuclear power for that uranium, so it had to go 

south of the border. 

 

In terms of the access that the Americans are going to have, 

what I will say to the member, they will have to negotiate for 

the resources that they want whether it be our oil, our heavy oil, 

our uranium, Mr. Speaker, or our gas, and that will have to be at 

a fair price and a return not only to the producers but the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Effect of Free Trade on Energy Rebates 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the minister, and at 

some point in time, Mr. Speaker, I would like her to tell us one 

single uranium mine that was ever bought up in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, in these negotiations 

the result is that under the proposed free trade treaty which 

we’re talking about, the Government of Saskatchewan will no 

longer have the option to offer Saskatchewan farmers and small 

businesses rebates or other breaks in the price of energy 

because we have to offer our oil and gas to the Americans for 

the same price. Will you confirm, Madam Minister, that that 

will be the result of this treaty? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, as the agreement applies to 

the energy sector, under the constitution, section 92(a), Mr. 

Speaker, we will retain the right to manage, develop and 

conserve our resources. And that,  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3129 

 

Mr. Speaker, includes setting the primary rate of production on 

those resources that require that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me good business sense if you 

have a product, a resource that you can sell, Mr. Speaker, for a 

fair return, that creates jobs, opportunities for small 

communities, large communities in this province, resources for 

the future, for the institutions like education and the health 

institutions in this province, then that makes good economic 

sense to me. I don’t understand why it doesn’t make good 

economic sense to the member from Regina North East, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dispute-Settlement Mechanism 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Energy and Mines, and my 

question, Madam Minister, deals with the dispute-settling 

mechanism that is contained in the free treaty agreement that 

was just signed. Both the Prime Minister and the Premier of 

Saskatchewan said that that was the bottom line, a fundamental 

thing that they wanted in the agreement. 

 

Madam Minister, do you realize that the tribunal that is 

proposed will not have the power to rule whether an American 

anti-dumping action or an American countervailing action 

against some Canadian product is unfair, but only if that action 

is in line with, or properly applied with, American law? 

 

Now Madam Minister, since the current American laws are the 

problem that is confronting us, and not the application on it, 

why did the Prime Minister and the Premier of Saskatchewan 

cave in on this fundamental change that they said they were 

going to demand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 

Saskatoon South is missing one very key point in all this, and 

that is: nor will it rule on Canadian law that has been duly put 

into place by the legislators of this country, and perhaps even 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the anti-dumping, the countervail duties, that is a 

legislation process put in by the legislators in the United States. 

I do not believe for a moment, for a moment, Mr. Speaker, that 

anyone at that negotiating table had the right to bargain away or 

remove legislation that has been put into place by elected 

people in this country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I understand the agreement, we will, in fact, 

when it comes to the regulatory laws of Canada or the United 

States as it pertains to the energy sector, we will have an 

opportunity for greater consultation before those regulations in 

fact come into play. I also understand, Mr. Speaker, that there 

will be a phasing-in period of, say, five to seven years. And 

after that seven years, if we are not satisfied, then that will be 

expressed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that the 

minister has admitted that they did not get an exemption to the 

American laws and that the American laws are still applying to 

the Saskatchewan potash industry and will continue to apply. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to ask you again: is it not true that the 

tribunal that has been set up can only deal with the American 

laws as it applies to its . . . fairness . . . it can’t deal with the 

American laws and getting exemptions for the Saskatchewan 

industry? Would you please indicate to me now: what does this 

do right now to the potash, the anti-dumping tariffs that have 

been put in effect right now on Saskatchewan industries? How 

does that affect it right now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I can inform the member 

that as it pertains to the uranium, which I’m sure he’s been 

concerned about, that they have in fact agreed, Mr. Speaker, to 

remove the restrictions that have been put into place. And today 

that’s good news for our uranium industry in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, on the potash, this 

agreement comes into place January 1, 1989. It does not deal 

specifically today with the present anti-dumping duties, but, Mr. 

Speaker, after 1989 then in fact if that were to occur, it would 

go before the commission that will be put into place. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is a big improvement over what we have been 

facing this year with our potash industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the 

minister. Madam Minister, you are admitting that this is a 

powerless tribunal — powerless tribunal that can only look at 

the laws in the United States and that will not deal with the 

problems that are before us right now. If the Department of 

Commerce makes the anti-dumping laws permanent, then the 

tribunal can have a look at that. Madam Minister, how can you 

say that you have not caved in to one of the fundamental 

conditions that you asked for under this agreement when you 

accept a tribunal which has a referee, and all the rules are 

established by the Americans and not by the Canadians. How 

can you say that that is fair and that will protect Canadian 

interests? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — What he just said is not right, Mr. 

Speaker. That commission will be made up of two from 

Canada’s appointments and two from the Americans, and the 

fifth position to be decided upon within that group or the two 

countries. He is wrong, Mr. Speaker, wrong, wrong, wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, you have agreed, or you have 

admitted in this House, that negotiations are going  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3130 

 

on and those negotiations will carry on for at least five to seven 

years. 

 

I ask you, Madam Minister, how does that deal with the current 

problems that we are facing with the anti-tariff or 

anti-countervailing duties that have been imposed by the United 

States? Are you telling this House today that we are going to 

have to wait another five to seven years before you come to 

grips with a problem that is affecting a very important industry 

in Saskatchewan today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, let me say this to the 

member opposite. If there had’ve been a trade agreement 

between Canada and the United States in their term of 

government, we would not be in the fix we are in today with 

our anti-dumping on potash, Mr. Speaker. We would have that 

dispute mechanism to go forward with. Mr. Speaker, that will 

be in place beginning January 1 of 1989. That is a whole lot 

better than anything that ever happened in the ’70s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 

same minister with respect to the trade arrangements with the 

United States. If I heard the minister correctly in one of her 

previous answers, I believe she indicated that the agreement 

that has been initialled deals specifically with an exemption for 

Saskatchewan uranium in terms of U.S. trade harassment 

practices against that uranium. Could the minister confirm that I 

heard her correctly on that point, and if I heard her correctly, 

could she, in fact, table specific documentation to support that 

point? 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, would the minister indicate why 

potash was not specifically exempted if uranium was. Why 

uranium and not potash too? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, yes, the member did hear 

me correctly. I have been informed. I do not have the 

documents, but I have been informed that there was an 

agreement to remove the further processing requirements that, 

in fact, put a restriction on the uranium producers in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the difference, the energy sector within this trade 

agreement has some restrictions on its own, and potash does not 

come under the energy sector. I would also remind the member 

what I just told this House in terms of legislation. Whether it’s 

Canadian legislation or U.S. legislation, the negotiators at the 

table did not have the right to remove legislation that’s been put 

in by duly elected people of either country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister could 

indicate to us specifically when the appropriate action is going 

to be taken to remove those U.S. actions with respect to 

uranium. When, specifically, will we see that particular spectre 

removed from our uranium industry in Saskatchewan? 

 

And secondly, on the potash part of the question, in the  

negotiating process did you try to get the U.S. action against 

Saskatchewan potash removed as a part of the negotiations, or 

was uranium the only thing that was discussed? Did you at least 

try to get that break for Saskatchewan potash as a part of the 

negotiations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan put forth to 

the federal government our position on trade, free trade, as 

much as the members opposite don’t like to hear the term, and it 

was related to access without barriers, and that includes all 

commodities. In terms of the specific date on the uranium, I do 

not have those details yet and, when those details are know, I’m 

sure that they will be forwarded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Effects of Trade Agreement on Saskatchewan Agriculture 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

next Acting Premier who may wish to stand up, and it deals 

with . . . The free trade treaty, as you will know, removes a 

number of restrictions on American investment. Does that 

aspect of the treaty also include American investment in farm 

land? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I would take notice of that question, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, you will also know that the 

Nielsen task force report of the past led us to believe that the — 

new question, Mr. Speaker — the Canadian Wheat Board may 

be done away with. Now some American groups are saying that 

the Wheat Board may also have it in their grasp. Mr. Minister, 

is there a possibility that the two-price system for wheat, as we 

know it, giving Canadian farmers about $200 million extra in 

their pocket, is there a possibility the two-price system for 

wheat will be eliminated by this free trade agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, along the way before 

these . . . before and during these trade negotiations and now, 

once we have some sense of the trade deal that’s been struck, 

there was much talk made of those who opposed it that 

somehow we would go into this deal and the Canadian Wheat 

Board and other fundamental agriculture institutions would 

somehow be destroyed, Mr. Speaker. They were inaccurate 

then, and they are inaccurate now. The Canadian Wheat Board 

is alive and well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would say to you and to the people of this province and 

to the farmers of this province that either this is a deliberate 

attempt to be inaccurate or a deliberate attempt to scare people 

across this province and to scare the farmers. Because the 

reality is in this deal, Mr. Speaker, the reality is in this deal, it’s 

a good deal for farmers. It’s a good deal for hog farmers, and 

it’s a good deal for hog processors. It’s a good deal for beef 

farmers . . . 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3131 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, it amazes me that the minister 

doesn’t know what he’s agreeing to in Ottawa. My question was 

about two-price wheat and extra income for Saskatchewan 

farmers. Where, in the language of this agreement, Mr. 

Minister, does it say that the two-price system for wheat will be 

protected? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is, when it 

comes to the whole question of wheat, this has been a constant 

straw man that the opposition have thrown up relative to this 

trade arrangement. Because where wheat becomes important, 

Mr. Speaker, where wheat becomes important is not so much 

. . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Would 

you please allow the minister to answer the question on the 

topic. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Why I raised 

the point, Mr. Speaker, that the . . . trying to create fear and 

uncertainty relative to what this means to the Wheat Board or 

any other institution has been the straw man all along, and I’ll 

tell you why, Mr. Speaker. Because the issue of trade and 

grains, particularly wheat, between the U.S. and Canada, the 

U.S. and Saskatchewan — not that there isn’t some, and not 

that what there might be isn’t important — but the reality is, 

trading wheat for Saskatchewan farmers is an issue not with the 

U.S. so much, but it’s an issue with China and with Russia and 

with the Asia-Pacific countries, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 

that next important step, the multilateral trade negotiations, are 

all important for us in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Natural Gas Deregulation (Phase 2) 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — In February of this year, Mr. Speaker, I 

had announced a program to deregulate Saskatchewan’s natural 

gas markets . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to ask leave of the 

Assembly to introduce some guests before they leave your 

gallery. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much for the indulgence of hon. 

members on both sides of the House, and to you, Mr. Speaker. I 

wish to introduce today 19 students and four teachers and 

chaperons that are with them. They’re native life-skills students 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. The teach and chaperons 

that are attending today are Barry McKay, Dan Danforth, 

RoseAnne Keller, and Gilbert Longclaws. 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting with this group at just 

after 3 o’clock this afternoon for drinks and a short visit. Please, 

all hon. members, join me in welcoming this group to our 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Natural Gas Deregulation (Phase 2) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — As I had stated, Mr. Speaker, in February 

of this year we had announced a program to move through 

deregulation on the gas industry within this province. Mr. 

Speaker, phase 1 that was announced in February eliminated 

government regulation of prices and introduced a new 

price-sensitive royalty system. As a result of that phase 1, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s gas costs dropped 

approximately $30 million. That in turn allowed SPC to reduce 

rates and provide some savings to natural gas users. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce the 

implementation of phase 2. Mr. Speaker, phase two will address 

three areas: direct sales, export policy, and security of supply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, direct sales in the province of Saskatchewan of 

natural gas will be allowed. It will give Saskatchewan users the 

choice of buying gas from SPC or directly from Saskatchewan 

natural gas producers. As well, SPC’s financial position, Mr. 

Speaker, will be protected by allowing it to be the sole 

transporter of gas destined for direct sales. 

 

The practicality of these direct sales rests with large-volume 

users because of volume buying and economies of scale, and we 

recognize this. However, Mr. Speaker, it must be noted that 

direct buyers of gas will be responsible for their own security of 

supply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the export policy, royalties will be based on 

transaction prices. Export prices will not be lower than prices 

paid by Saskatchewan consumers for similar types in terms of 

sales. Sales of gas outside the province will not be allowed 

where such sales would violate the sanctity of contract 

principles. 

 

Producer exploration commitments will be lifted. However, Mr. 

Speaker, the annual volume limits on gas available for export 

will be set by a formula, which means gas will not be exported 

if Saskatchewan gas requirements cannot be met. Mr. Speaker, 

exports will be permitted only to the extent that they do not 

jeopardize Saskatchewan’s security requirements. 

 

In order to ensure fairness in the market-place, all existing 

removal permits will be amended to comply with the new terms 

and the conditions of the export policy, effective October 1, 

1987. 

 

Mr. Speaker, security of supply protection for Saskatchewan 

consumers will be provided through two mechanisms. Number 

one, SPC is directed to have available, through contract or 

direct ownership, sufficient  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3132 

 

natural gas for at least 15 years of consumer requirements, and 

number two, Mr. Speaker, a formula calculation to determine 

the volumes for export. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that phase 2 initiatives will provide 

substantial benefits to Saskatchewan consumers, producers, and 

the Crown, and will assist the province in reaching its economic 

development and diversification goals. However, in moving 

from an over-regulated system to a deregulated system, we 

recognize there must be a transitional phase to accommodate 

SPC’s contract obligations. In this transition any one buying 

directly from the producers, Mr. Speaker, will be required to 

take a minimum of 35 per cent of their daily requirements from 

SPC. Mr. Speaker, this does not apply to any new customers or 

new projects. 

 

This is in essence, Mr. Speaker, phase 2 of natural gas 

deregulation. And what does it mean for those of us who are not 

within the industry or familiar with the technicalities of it? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me put it into this context. For the 

workers that work in the many industries and businesses and the 

plants around the province, those plants and businesses that 

they work in will be better able to compete with their out of 

province competitors. That in turn, Mr. Speaker, secures jobs 

for Saskatchewan people. 

 

And for our businesses, Mr. Speaker, their competitive position 

will be improved. New investment will be easier to attract 

because of lower input costs and the long-term availability of 

gas for feedstock purposes, thereby promoting and enhancing 

the economic diversification. Mr. Speaker, that means further 

job opportunities in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for people like you and I, residential, the day to 

day gas supply and delivery arrangements with SPC will not 

likely change, and we will continue to pay our gas bills. 

However, Mr. Speaker, during the long winter months we know 

we will have a secure and reasonably priced source of heat. For 

the future, Mr. Speaker, for our consumers, competitive 

contracting by our utility, SPC, will continue to assure fair price 

gas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the natural gas industry has become increasingly 

more important to the economy of Saskatchewan. In 1981 we 

drilled 16 wells. And we compare that to an estimated 380 in 

1987. And that was before the effects of deregulation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The jobs, Mr. Speaker, have increased from 40 — 40 in 1982 to 

over 200 this year. 

 

Crown royalties from natural gas, Mr. Speaker, have increased 

from $1 million in 1982 to an estimated 23 million in 1987. 

And the investment, Mr. Speaker — 1 million in 1982, and over 

$63 million in 1986. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our known reserves have increased from 1.2 

trillion cubic feet in ’82 to an estimated 2.5 trillion cubic feet 

today. As a result, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan gas rates to 

residential customers have been the second lowest in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that has been the last five years of natural gas  

policy in Saskatchewan. Phase 2 deals with the next five years, 

and we expect further significant benefits for the province — an 

additional 1,100 gas wells will be drilled, 600 new person-years 

of employment will be created, and revenues to the provincial 

treasury, Mr. Speaker, will increase by $18 million. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, an additional $200 million will be invested 

in this province by the gas industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these new policy initiatives will ensure that the 

progress we have made over the past five years is continued in 

the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, the recently announced principles 

for a Canada-U.S. free trade agreement regarding secure access 

for Canadian energy producers to the U.S. market is timely 

indeed. It should only improve the prospects and the 

opportunities in this province for further job opportunities and 

revenues that will eventually occur to this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before we proceed to the opposition critic, I 

would just like to bring this to the attention of ministers that 

ministerial statements are meant to be brief and factual. That 

particular one took almost eight minutes. 

 

I’m only bringing this to the attention of the ministers now, that 

it doesn’t establish a trend. I realize ministers do want to give as 

clear as possible an explanation of their statement, and therefore 

the explanation could become quite lengthy. So I’m just 

bringing this to your attention. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a 

few comments in the ministerial statement that has been made. 

 

Madam Minister, I’m not certain what relevance your statement 

has with the agreement that was signed just a few days ago 

between Canada and the United States where you’ve set up a 

continental energy policy. The statements that you have made 

today may simply be of no significance whatsoever, because I 

am certain that if the agreement goes through that the free trade 

agreement will override what you have indicated today. As I 

understand the free trade agreement, you have no authority now 

to say to the United States people, we will not give you access 

to our energy on unlimited amounts. That is my understanding 

of the reading, and therefore what you have indicated today 

certainly you can’t put it ahead 5, 10 or 15 years because you 

will have no control over that any longer. If I am wrong on that, 

Madam Minister, I will accept further explanation. 

 

But, Madam Minister, what has been wrong with the way in 

which we have been transporting our natural energy and 

exporting our natural gas in the past? It seems to me that SPC 

has done a relatively good job in being the sole provider, or the 

exporter, of natural gas. And now it seems to me that you’re 

putting an additional burden on SPC by putting in deregulation. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3133 

 

And I say to the Madam Minister that I also pay my natural gas 

bills. You say there has been a reduction in the price of natural 

gas. I have not experienced that on my bill that I have paid. All 

that I have experienced in the last five years, Madam Minister, 

is a substantial increase of the natural gas that I have. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, you haven’t. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Oh yes, I have. The Madam Minister says I 

have not experienced that. I wish that she would . . . I’d rather 

pay my bills . . . I would say to the minister that I would rather 

pay my bills of five years ago than the bills that I am presently 

paying for natural gas. And I still live in the same house, and I 

have improved the energy factor of my house, and still I’m 

paying more for natural gas. 

 

So I say to the Madam Minister that that is simply not correct. 

 

Madam Minister, I also . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order! I’d ask all 

members to please allow the member to proceed without too 

many interruptions. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I am willing to predict that 

under the announcement that you have made today, that for the 

residents of Saskatchewan, the residential users, the price is 

going to increase. But I’ll also predict, Madam Minister, that 

the price for the large-volume users, the large corporations, and 

the large users of natural gas, that their price is going to go 

down. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I don’t see this as an advantage to the 

ordinary resident of Saskatchewan, but I certainly see it as an 

advantage to the large-volume user who will now be able to go 

to the natural producer and buy the natural gas directly whereas 

we will still have to buy ours from SaskPower. And it doesn’t 

make sense for an individual resident to buy directly from a 

natural producer. 

 

Madam Minister, what you again haven’t told the people of 

Saskatchewan, what you are announcing today is deregulation, 

yes. It may be irrelevant under the continental energy policy, 

but what you are announcing today is a good deal for the large 

producers who will be able to buy directly from a natural 

producer, natural gas producer. And that is what I see in this 

announcement. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I think you could have — and you 

would have without deregulation — have increased a number of 

workers and a number of wells that are going to be drilled. If 

that is not true, Madam Minister, surely you’re not telling us 

that all the wells, the increase in wells were only done since 

February since you’ve announced the first phase of your 

deregulation. Obviously not. That has happened over the last 

five years. So deregulation has nothing to do with the increase 

of the drilling of wells. 

 

What you are saying to us today, Madam Minister, is a break 

for the large users; again, increased costs for the ordinary 

citizen of Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re going to see today. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 

 

CORRECTION IN HANSARD MADE BY MEMBER 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, before going to orders of the 

day, I have a correction that I’d like to make in Hansard. It goes 

back to what was national honours day in this legislature on 

September 30. 

 

And on page 2976 of Hansard I introduced one of the honoured 

dignitaries that day, Mr. Allen Sapp. And the information, Mr. 

Speaker, that was given to me was that Mr. Sapp was a Member 

of the Order of Canada, and apparently the protocol office had 

been given that information they passed on to me. And it has 

come to our attention, since the introduction, that Mr. Sapp is 

not a Member of the Order of Canada. He, in fact, is at an upper 

level as an Officer of the Order of Canada. And I referred to 

Mr. Sapp twice during the introduction, starting on line 3 of my 

intervention that day, and on the final line, and I’d like Hansard 

to show that Mr. Sapp, in fact, is an Officer of the Order of 

Canada and not a Member. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Job Creation and Employment Opportunities for 

Saskatchewan People 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks 

I propose to move: 

 

That this Assembly regrets that Saskatchewan is the only 

province in Canada to have lost jobs over the past twelve 

months, and regrets the alarming out-migration of 

Saskatchewan workers, including many young 

Saskatchewan workers, to other provinces, and urges the 

Government of Saskatchewan to take immediate steps to 

provide jobs and job opportunities for Saskatchewan 

people, including the establishment of an effective winter 

works program. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend some time this afternoon just 

talking about the figures which establish the facts stated in that 

motion, and not only establishes the facts but in their own way 

paint a picture of a great deal of difficulty and tragedy for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The government opposite has talked about diversification and 

job creation as the things which they put highest on their 

agenda. And they have been the two major disappointments in 

the government’s six-year record, despite promising an all out 

effort and pulling out all the plugs, and the many phrases they 

used. In spite of all of the things they said they were going to do 

about job creation, this government has failed to provide any 

substantial job increases for Saskatchewan residents, and I want 

to take them one by one. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3134 

 

Job creation — in the past five years the performance has been 

disappointing. It’s been just over 6,000 — about 6,400 jobs a 

year have been created under the PC government. During the 

period from 1971 to 1981 the figure was well over 9,000 a year. 

And you can pick any five-year period and it would be better 

than any five years under the Tories. We had a promise in 1982 

that there was going to be a major thrust to create jobs, we 

should bring the children home, there would be jobs for them. 

That was a key promise, and it has not been lived up to. I want 

to repeat those figures again. During the 1971 to ’81 period, or I 

could take ’82 as well, the job creation was 9,100 jobs a year. 

Since that time, ’82-86, it’s been 6,400 jobs a year. 

 

And as you might expect, Mr. Speaker, this has meant that the 

number of people without jobs, the unemployed, has gone up 

and up and up. It’s gone up, Mr. Speaker, from 21,000 in 1981 

to 38,000 last year in 1986 — almost double. This from a 

government which promised us a real thrust in job creation. So 

as you might imagine, Mr. Speaker, the unemployment rate has 

gone up — gone up from 4.1 per cent in 1981 to 7.7 per cent — 

almost doubt — in 1986. 

 

The jobless rate climbed very, very slowly during the decade of 

the 1970s. It went up from 3.5 per cent in ’71 to 3.9 per cent in 

’76 to 4.1 per cent in ’81. Over 10 years it went up .6 per cent. 

In the five years since that period — in the five years that the 

PCs have been in office — it’s gone up not .6 per cent, but 3.6 

per cent. In no NDP year was unemployment over 5 per cent, 

and in no PC year has it been under 6 per cent. The NDPs worst 

was under 5, the PCs best was over 6. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the story with respect to youth employment 

is tragically much worse. Youth employment has consistently 

been higher than the employment for other people — when we 

speak of youth, we speak of the people from ages 15 or 16 to 24 

— and it’s up to around 12 per cent. And the number of jobs 

provided for young people has gone down each year. 

 

I won’t review all of the record of the 1970s, but let’s take the 

PC years themselves. In 1981, just before they came to office, 

there were 110,000 young people had jobs. By 1982 it was 

down to 107; then it went down to 103, and this year, 1986, it’s 

101. From 110,000 it’s dropped to 101,000 — 9,000 fewer jobs 

for young people. And this from a government which said, 

bring the young people home, we will provide jobs for them. 

That’s a sad, sad record. 

 

Now perhaps the most alarming is that the employment trend in 

Saskatchewan is much, much worse than other provinces — 

much, much worse. This year, when I checked the figures for 

August of this year, the number of people who were working 

was 2,000 fewer than last August — a drop of 2,000 jobs in a 

year. Now that, Mr. Speaker, indicates that we in Saskatchewan 

are losing jobs, and we are the only province in Canada that is 

— the only province in Canada. Manitoba had 4,000 more jobs; 

Alberta has 12,000 more jobs; Saskatchewan 2,000 fewer jobs. 

And of course, as you might expect, Mr. Speaker, our 

unemployment rate has gone up faster in Saskatchewan than 

any other province in the last 12  

months. 

 

These are statistics which you and I here in this House argue 

with. But they’re much more than statistics, they’re the story of 

people’s lives — people, particularly young people, who are 

looking for jobs, who can’t find jobs, and who are therefore 

considering leaving this province, and in many cases are 

leaving this province. We have seen a massive out-migration of 

Saskatchewan people. This business about migration is what the 

statisticians talk about, but you take the number of people who 

move into a province, you take the number of people who’ve 

moved out a province, and you take the difference, and the net 

out-migration in Saskatchewan in 1985 was 6,000; in ’86, 

8,400, and percentage-wise, Mr. Speaker, that’s the poorest 

record in Canada. 

 

As a percentage of our population or our work-force, any way 

you slice it, more people on a net basis are moving out of 

Saskatchewan than any other province. And they’re moving 

into B.C. to a small extent, Manitoba to a small extent, Ontario 

to a very large extent. And I have to emphasize that these are 

the young people who are moving out. That’s the real problem. 

I look at the numbers, and the number between 20 and 24, there 

are 3,300 people moved out of that age bracket — 3,300 people. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is more than all of the people who 

moved out and who are over 40 — from 40 to 80 it was 2,600, 

from 20 to 24 it was 3,300. 

 

There is overwhelmingly an out-migration, a moving out of 

young people. They’re all set out in five-year blocks, and the 

biggest block is the 20 to 24, and the next one is the 25 to 29, 

and the next one is the 30 to 34, and the next one is five-years 

and under, or four-years and under. We can see what’s 

happening. People between the ages of 20 and 35 are moving 

out en masse; sometimes they have children, and they’re taking 

their children with them. Those are the people who are leaving 

our province, and we will pay in the future for that future drain, 

that brain drain which is happening to us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you might expect there are serious drops 

in unemployment in many sectors. Manufacturing is one, and 

we’ve heard this government talk about diversifying and 

opening manufacturing plants. Well in 1981, 21,500 people 

were working in manufacturing and processing, and by 1985 

that number, after five years of their efforts at building and 

diversifying, had dropped by 3,000. That is a record of failure. 

 

Surely in this day and age we ought at least to be able to hold 

the manufacturing and processing jobs we have; but the answer 

is no, we have not. We have seen a huge drop in jobs in 

manufacturing and processing. And as I’ve said, these are not 

only numbers, but they represent a toll of human grief when 

people lose jobs and have to uproot their families, and move out 

of the province. Most people don’t want to do that, particularly 

if they’re settled here with a family. But that’s happening to 

them. 

 

And it’s not good enough for people to say, oh well, the wheat 

economy is down. And that’s our trouble, there’s many, many 

troubles. That’s one of them. Gross financial mismanagement is 

another. Who is going to stay in this province and face the 

inevitable increase in taxes  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3135 

 

because of the financial mismanagement of this government 

over five years? If you’ve got a choice, you move out because 

the prospects in the next several years are not bright. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, an increasing number of the 

people who are unemployed are falling into the long-term 

unemployment category. More and more people are out of work 

for one year or more, sometimes two or three years, and some 

of the young people have never had a real job. And I know, as a 

parent of teenagers and people in their 20s, I don’t like to see 

young people not have a job. I like to see them get used to the 

idea of having a regular job and going there. I don’t like to have 

them working a little bit here and a little there. Sure, if that’s all 

they can do, fine. But I’d like to see them have the discipline of 

having a regular job. 

 

I suppose I represent the views of parents of the older 

generation, but I think a lot of parents can understand how I 

feel. And it wasn't this way with my older children. They got 

jobs and they stuck with them, and they finished their education 

and away they went. The younger ones are having more 

difficulty getting that regular employment, and I’m sure that 

many, many families in Saskatchewan can repeat that story. 

 

And members opposite should know that the number of people 

on unemployment insurance in their constituencies are going up 

and up. The member for Turtleford, he’s got 100 more people in 

his riding who are getting unemployment insurance than there 

were a year ago. The member for Melville, he’s got 90 more. 

 

Yes, there are many, many more people who are having to seek 

that type of protection when they don’t want to. It’s easy 

enough to say that people don’t want to work. All I can say is, 

Mr. Speaker, when there were jobs, they worked. When there 

were jobs, they worked. And if there were jobs again, they’d 

work. 

 

Two thousand fewer people working this August, not because 

they don’t want to work, but because there are no jobs for them 

to go to. They haven’t got lazy since last year. Two thousand 

people haven’t got lazy since last August; 2,000 people who 

worked last August aren’t working this August because there 

are no jobs. 

 

Now that’s a failure, not of these people; they haven’t failed. 

Their government has failed them, with the worst job creation 

record in Canada. We need some more action on the part of the 

government. We need action to create jobs, and particularly 

now we need a winter works program. 

 

That is the proposition I am putting to the government opposite 

— that whatever may have been their failures in the past, they 

turn to the job of creating some employment, particularly for 

young people, and now with a winter works program. 

 

And with this in mind, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member for Regina Rosemont: 

 

That this Assembly regrets that Saskatchewan is the only 

province in Canada to have lost jobs over  

the last 12 months, regrets the alarming out-migration of 

Saskatchewan workers, including many young 

Saskatchewan workers to other provinces, and urges the 

Government of Saskatchewan to take immediate steps to 

provide jobs and job opportunities for Saskatchewan 

people, including the establishment of an effective winter 

works program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

particularly pleased to rise today to take part in this debate and 

to second the motion put forward by my friend and colleague, 

the member for Regina Elphinstone, to deal with . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The hon. member. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — The hon. member from Regina Elphinstone . . . 

in order to deal with this question, one of the most important 

political question which faces us as politicians, regardless of 

what political stripe we may stand for, in terms of the question 

of job creation for people in Saskatchewan, in terms for the 

long-term growth and development of a viable life for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won’t take the time of the Assembly to go 

through all the facts and figures, all the facts and figures which 

prove that this government and this government’s job creation 

strategy — or I should say lack of a job creation strategy — has 

left us in this kind of predicament where Saskatchewan has the 

worst job creation record in the country. Because I don’t think it 

will serve any good to go and to hold up time and time again 

that in fact the government has failed, and has failed quite 

miserably, in providing that kind of job creation strategy for the 

people of this province. 

 

My colleague from Regina Elphinstone has pointed out, has 

pointed out the trends and statistics which prove beyond any 

kind of reasonable doubt that job creation has just not been a 

major consideration and a major priority with this government. 

And I suspect, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to put forward the 

notion that the blind endorsation of the free trade agreement 

that we see from the members opposite are going to result in an 

even further loss of jobs for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And I am sure as the weeks unfold, I’m sure as the weeks 

unfold and as sector by sector the results of what is really in that 

free trade agreement comes in, whether people are working in 

the poultry industry or whether they’re working in the red meat 

industry or working in the grain handling industry or working in 

the petrochemical industry, or working in manufacture or the 

service sector of this province, that one by one, each of these 

sectors will see the results of that free trade agreement in terms 

of jobs. 

 

And I suspect, Mr. Speaker, I suspect that if this  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3136 

 

government is foolish enough, and if the federal government is 

even more foolish enough to endorse that free trade agreement, 

you will see, not as this government says, not as this 

government proclaims, prosperity and jobs; you will see the 

erosion and the even further erosion of jobs in this province — 

an erosion that we have yet to witness since the 1930s. That was 

the last time we will have witnessed that kind of an erosion in 

jobs and opportunities for young people. 

 

We have seen, Mr. Speaker, we have seen five years of a lack of 

action in job creation, which is leading to a lost generation of 

Saskatchewan youth. It’s a lost generation for those young 

people in Saskatchewan who decide to stay and tough it out 

under the Tory years. It’s a lost generation because they have 

seen job opportunities which once were there, disappear before 

their very eyes. It’s a lost generation in terms of hopes and in 

terms of dreams for young people in this province. It’s five lost 

years. And the young people in this province are asking 

themselves, how much more must we endure? 

 

There are those people who’ve said, well, I’m going to stay and 

tough it out under these Tory years, because maybe things will 

get better. And things will get better, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Things will get better when this government opposite is 

changed, when it’s replaced by a government which says it’s 

the government’s duty to lead the way in job creation. Unlike 

this government which does not believe that the government 

should intervene in the market-place to create jobs for young 

people or for all working people, the members on this side of 

the House stand four-square for that. 

 

We believe it’s the government’s job to create job opportunities 

and jobs for all people in this province, regardless of their 

political ideology, regardless of where they stand on the 

political scale. We say that government members were elected 

to do a job when it comes to jobs, and they have failed in that 

job. And the statistics speak volumes. The statistics speak for 

themselves. 

 

As the member for Regina Elphinstone has pointed out that the 

job creation record of this present government is nothing to be 

boastful about, is nothing to be dealt with in any kind of proud 

moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to jobs it’s as if the Premier had 

said, whoa, had said whoa in that proverbial mud hole. And not 

only had he said whoa in the mud hole, when it come to jobs for 

young people, he sunk out of sight, bubbles rising to the top, 

disappearing along with the hopes and aspirations of jobs for 

young people. The minister said whoa in that mud hole and the 

young people are suffering. When it came to jobs he forgot to 

say, give her snoose, or if he did he spit it away in the spittoon 

along with the jobs for young people in this province. 

 

And the facts speak for themselves. Unemployment in 1981 in 

this province was 21,000; unemployment, 1986 — 38,000. 

Very stark facts and statistics. And as the member from 

Elphinstone said, those statistics, however, don’t tell the whole 

story. They don’t tell the kind of misery that the young people 

of this province who have decided to stay here and tough it out 

are facing. 

But there are other statistics which do tell the story. We went 

through an estimate process last night, estimates in the 

Department of (public) Health, and we’ve seen a rising tide, and 

I’ll quote the Premier: “We’ve seen a rising tide of drug and 

alcohol abuse among young people in this province.” And in 

order to react to that rising tide the government was forced to 

initiate the Whitespruce home. 

 

There’s a correlation between the rising tide of drug and alcohol 

abuse and the rising tide of unemployment. There is a definite 

and a provable and tangible correlation between those two 

phenomena that are occurring. As everybody knows, Mr. 

Speaker, when there is no opportunities, when the future 

appears bleak, when there doesn’t appear any way out, when 

you appear trapped in a situation, a great many people in this 

society turn to alcohol, to abuse alcohol. And that’s what’s 

happening, that’s what’s happening with young people in our 

province who see their doors being shut, the doors of 

opportunity being shut when it comes to jobs and job creation. 

 

And as those doors are shutting, do we hear any response to that 

on the job front from the members opposite? Do we hear the 

enunciation of any job strategy and job creation strategy from 

the government opposite? And the answer to that is no. The 

answer to that is no, despite the former rhetoric of this 

government, Mr. Speaker, about pulling out all the stops,, about 

making job creation the top priority. No longer do we hear of 

job creation as being a priority for this government. And I 

wonder why. And I have to ask myself, why is that? Is it 

because they’ve lost all political credibility when it comes to 

jobs and job creation? Is it they’ve said, this is not our issue, we 

can’t make political capital on this, so we’re not going to talk 

about jobs and job creation? I think so. 

 

So here we hare, Mr. Speaker, here we are faced with a 

situation with winter fast approaching us — winter fast 

approaching, skies turning dark, air getting cold, and no 

announcement of a winter works creation project. No winter 

works creation project announced by the government opposite. 

We have record unemployment, we having rising 

unemployment among young people and we have no winter 

works job creation program by the government opposite. 

 

Now I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, why that’s so. Is it because 

they don’t care about jobs? Is that the reason? Are they bereft of 

ideas? After all, for five and a half years they have been unable 

to come up with any kind of coherent job creation strategy. 

Maybe they’ve run out of ideas. Maybe they don’t have any 

initiative. Maybe their imagination is deadened and dulled from 

the fact that they’ve spent five and a half years trying to 

struggle with an outworn ideology which has been unable to 

produce when it comes to jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the members on this side of the House 

have ideas when it comes to job creation, we have ideas when it 

comes to winter works programs. We have ideas that will begin 

to put Saskatchewan workers, whether young or old, back on 

the road to full employment. Because, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a 

full  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3137 

 

employment strategy for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I guess I should be surprised, but I’m not, that we have 

such a motion ahead of us on the floor today. I’d like to say that 

I’d like to speak in this context not only as a member of the 

legislature but as a concerned parent. 

 

In the spring of 1982 the voters of the province of 

Saskatchewan elected a Progressive Conservative government. 

And since 1982 Saskatchewan has maintained one of the lowest 

unemployment rates in all of Canada. And I’m proud of that 

fact. And I’m proud of the record of our Progressive 

Conservative government in job creation, economic 

diversification, building Saskatchewan, and bringing home 

Saskatchewan young people. 

 

For 10 long years prior to 1982, and those were the NDP years, 

all of us remember the fact that thousands of Saskatchewan 

young people had to migrate to other provinces like Alberta and 

British Columbia to find jobs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Even in the good times. 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — And yes, as one of my colleagues said, in the 

good times. Saskatchewan, during the NDP years, became the 

subject of a joke around the rest of Canada with the line that I 

will quote: will the last person out of Saskatchewan turn out the 

lights? 

 

Outward migration of Saskatchewan young people during the 

NDP regime was not a job, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was a very 

sad commentary on our province. The parents of thousands of 

those young folks punished the NDP in 1982 by throwing them 

out of office. 

 

Today before this Assembly, the NDP opposition has decided to 

waste over $30,000 of public money by introducing a motion 

that is steeped in socialist rhetoric, cloaked in sanctimonious 

language, and dressed in self-serving words. 

 

The motion before the Assembly tries to ignore the past. It does 

not want Saskatchewan people to be reminded of who was 

responsible for a whole generation of Saskatchewan people to 

migrate to other parts of Canada. The NDP does not want the 

people to be reminded that Saskatchewan suffered a net decline 

in population during their term of office. No, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the NDP does not want to hear about the years of 

stagnation during the time they were at the helm. I am indeed 

amazed that they would even introduce a motion at this 

particular time that would draw attention to their record of 

failure in improving employment opportunities for the young 

during the years prior to 1982. 

 

Yet we have a motion before us that I say is an example of their 

tactics of fear and destitution. Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1982, 

since the election of the Progressive Conservative government, 

the population of Saskatchewan has increased., And I am proud 

of the fact that it has been during the PC government that  

Saskatchewan’s population passed the one million mark. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Many of the people who moved to 

Saskatchewan from other parts of Canada since 1982 were 

people returning home. They were coming home because they 

had confidence in the economic policies of our Premier and this 

government. That confidence comes from the people because 

they have a government that has the courage and the leadership 

to create jobs, to build, and have pride in our province. 

 

(1515) 

 

Building Saskatchewan has meant such positive economic 

projects as the construction of Canada’s first heavy oil upgrader 

here in Regina. That project is employing many young workers 

who have come home to Saskatchewan. Building Saskatchewan 

has meant the construction of a new paper mill in Prince Albert, 

and that too has seen young people return home to 

Saskatchewan. Building Saskatchewan means projects to 

provide jobs and opportunities for people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, building Saskatchewan does not mean dwelling in 

negatives, in tearing down, in dealing in doom and gloom. It 

means promoting the greatness of this province and its people. 

We have sat is this Assembly all summer and going on to 100 

days, and all we have heard from the NDP opposition are 

negatives. They are against building Saskatchewan. They are 

against economic diversification. They willingly held up 

passage of the potash resources Act to protect thousands of jobs 

in that industry. 

 

They are against free trade with the United States, and they are 

against new job creations through helping companies expand. 

They attack Gainers and they attack Weyerhaeuser. They attack 

the Premier for going to Japan and the United States to promote 

trade. So how do they dare come here today and say they are 

concerned about employment, about the job creation, about 

bringing young people back to Saskatchewan. 

 

The Saskatchewan . . . I’d like to go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

just to indicate to you some of the other incentives we had here. 

The Saskatchewan home program has succeeded in generating 

the employment for many Saskatchewan workers. The home 

program is expected to stimulate approximately 850 million of 

new investment and create 19,000 new jobs, yet the NDP 

opposition criticizes. 

 

Saskatoon has become a major high-tech centre attracting new 

high tech in business, yet the opposition seeds . . . seeded 

doubts and attacked business people. This Assembly has sat for 

nearly 100 days and not once have we heard the NDP 

opposition offer a constructive or positive policy suggestion. 

 

Yes, we can talk about alarming out-migration, the alarming 

out-migration of the NDP years, the time when young men and 

women packed their bags and left Saskatchewan, not because 

they wanted to but because  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3138 

 

they had to. Small towns got smaller. A whole generation was 

missing, and you could see it in every town, village, and hamlet 

in Saskatchewan. That was the lasting legacy of the 10 years of 

the NDP. 

 

We can talk about job opportunities for young people because 

this Progressive Conservative government is proud of its record 

in creating employment opportunities for young people. We can 

talk about Saskatchewan Builds program and our commitment 

to build our province tourism industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many, many, many things that 

we could talk about. And before I take leave and let other 

members comment, I would just like to suggest to you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I’m more than proud to pass this 

amendment to the motion, and that I will read. It will be 

seconded by the member from Moosomin: 

 

That the motion under Rule 16 introduced by the Leader 

of the Opposition be amended by deleting all words after 

the words “That this Assembly” and substituting them 

with the words: 

 

recognizes that Saskatchewan, since 1982, has maintained 

on average one of the lowest unemployment rates in 

Canada, almost two percentage points below the national 

average and is pleased with the increase in 

Saskatchewan’s population to the 1 million mark, 

especially since many of the people moving into the 

province are young people who left prior to 1982, and 

commends the Government of Saskatchewan for its 

policies of economic diversification and job creation 

which have resulted in the creation of new employment for 

the young people. 

 

Mr. Deputy, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise in this Assembly 

today to join in this debate of the motion put forth by the 

present Leader of the Opposition. The motion urges the 

Government of Saskatchewan to take immediate steps to 

provide jobs and job opportunities for Saskatchewan people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I can’t support the original motion, but I 

rise in support of the amendment. Why do I support the 

amendment? Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to explain why I 

support the amendment. 

 

I am proud to inform the members opposite that this 

government has provided jobs and job opportunities and that 

this government will continue to build on our positive record. 

 

We will continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to build because we are 

aware of the great things this province has in store for it with 

continued initiatives presented to our youth. 

Through the most up-to-date education programs and 

institutions and programs available for those who wish to learn 

or upgrade their skills, these initiatives in education, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I raise in this debate for obvious reasons. The 

importance of education and skill development cannot be 

overstated, for the link between these and job opportunities, not 

to mention job security, goes hand in hand. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan as a province can only 

benefit from having a work-force and a business climate that is 

able to meet the demands of a rapidly changing world. Only a 

party that remains stuck in neutral, occasionally they slip into 

reverse, but more often than not, the NDP present themselves as 

the party that does not change with the times. And that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, may be why the connection between initiatives 

and education and jobs and job opportunities was never raised 

when the member put forth this motion. That party doesn’t 

seem to make the connection. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another link with jobs and job 

opportunities that went over the heads of the NDP is the 

important role that small business plays in this province — a 

role that is very significant. And, Mr. Speaker, I had the 

privilege the other day of being involved in the official opening 

of another small business, an expanded business in the 

community of Rocanville. The vast majority of new job 

creation is generated by small businesses in Saskatchewan and, 

Mr. Speaker, over 5,000 more businesses are operating in 

Saskatchewan than they were when this government first took 

place in 1982. 

 

And with the Business Opportunities Saskatchewan show held 

in Saskatoon that this government was involved in, 

Saskatchewan will feel the benefits of business and job 

opportunities for years to come. 

 

Those are the facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And let me share 

some other facts that may not be easy listening for members 

opposite, but I really wouldn’t want them to forget. I wouldn’t 

want them to forget that in June of 1981 when the NDP were on 

this side of the House, the population of this province according 

to SHSP (Saskatchewan hospital services plan) was 990,746 

and, according to that same source Saskatchewan’s population 

in June of this year was 1,045,440. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is that there are more people living in the 

province under this government than during the NDP’s last full 

year of governing this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look at some facts in the 

labour force. Statistics Canada reports that the total labour force 

in June 1981, under the former government of Saskatchewan, 

was approximately 457,000. But what is it today? The total 

labour force, based on participants 15 years of age and up, was 

742,000 in June of 1987 under the present Progressive 

Conservative government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s almost 300,000 more people in the 

total labour force in the province — almost twice the amount — 

almost 100 per cent more people in the labour force in this 

province under the Progressive Conservative government. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3139 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government recognizes that jobs come 

through diversification. Let me give you a few examples of how 

this has proven beneficial to Saskatchewan. The Prince Albert 

pulp and paper mill is a prime example of government 

ownership versus private ownership. Which would you rather 

see, a mill that was losing approximately $90,000 per day, a 

mill that was not able to keep employees working, a mill that 

was destined to pull its workers and their families down with it? 

Or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would you rather see the sale of this 

mill to private enterprise that brings the facility up to date, that 

creates jobs and encourages the introduction of a chemical plant 

to yet further enhance the opportunities for Saskatchewan and 

its people? 

 

Another example of how, through its policies, this Progressive 

Conservative government has encouraged a great deal of 

economic activity right here in Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker: the 

heavy oil upgrader. We chose to stay away from the tactics of 

the former administration, tactics such as whining and 

snivelling because no big multinational company wants to come 

into Saskatchewan and build an upgrader. The results of their 

style was evident — no upgrader. 

 

This government worked in co-operation with the co-op to have 

the upgrader project turned into a reality, and that reality, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, standing right on the east side of Regina today. 

It is an upgrader that’s created many jobs, and it is an important 

product, an important construction item in this province and for 

the oil patch industry of this province. 

 

I am sure you can see, Mr. Speaker, that the single solution 

proposed by the members opposite, that famous massive 

government intervention, to use the words of the member from 

Regina Rosemont, that solution is not the solution for 

Saskatchewan families and the future of this province. 

 

This province will experience continued growth and 

opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it does have a 

government that understands how to create growth. It does have 

a government that understands what opportunity means. It does 

have a government with the courage and the foresight to pursue 

all avenues of development, from free trade and diversification 

to renewed education institutions and excellence in research. It 

is your government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Progressive 

Conservative government, that is doing those things. And we 

will continue to do those things, Mr. Speaker, for 

Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be voting against the main motion, 

and am voting in favour of the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’d just like to make a couple of comments on some of 

the things that members opposite have said. One member told 

us that we run “open for business: in Saskatchewan and all the 

young people came home. And I agree that a lot of them did 

come home. But do you know what they did? They looked  

around and they went to Manitoba because they could see that 

there was nothing going on here. They came home in the spirit 

of optimism and left depressed with the economic conditions of 

this province created by that government. 

 

Something else I would like to mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the last speaker said, told us all the great jobs that were created. 

I have no argument with the jobs that are created, but that'’ not 

the issue. The issue here is the jobs that aren’t being created. 

And look at the numbers. The jobs that aren’t being created in 

this province are going up and up and up. The young people, as 

we have heard; are going: unemployment rates are increasing. 

 

(1530) 

 

I would just like to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 

constituency of Estevan, for example, numbers of persons 

collecting regular benefits has gone up — gone up. Kinistino — 

number of persons collecting regular benefits has increased, 350 

to 420. Rural people — Melville, increased from 300 to 390 — 

25 per cent. These are the jobs that are not being created, Mr. 

Deputy. Souris-Cannington, 330- up to 360; Turtleford, number 

of persons collecting regular unemployment benefits increased 

from April ’86 to April ’87, 550 up to 650. And in my own 

constituency of Humboldt, benefits increased 25 per cent from 

380 to 480 people collecting unemployment. In Athabasca, 580 

to 690. 

 

This is the issue that we’re discussing here; the jobs that are not 

being created; the people who are not working in this province; 

the people who, if they were working, would be able to 

contribute to the economy but are being stymied and stifled by 

the government opposite. 

 

I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why this isn’t happening. 

We’ve seen grants to villages, to towns, to rural municipalities 

reduced or cut. This money was used to provide jobs in the rural 

communities; it was used to provide capital work projects to 

employ local people. It’s gone. That’s one reason why this . . . 

numbers have gone up. 

 

We see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a program like the Opportunities 

’87 drastically cut. Young people this summer went out of 

school expecting to work because of a program that should have 

been initiated by a government to its fullest degree. And what 

did we see? More hopes based and dashed by the Tory 

government — the dream brokers, the dream spoilers. We see 

this money cut from Opportunities ’87 grant, fewer people 

employed, and that same money — where did it go — 

squandered to the pockets of Tory hacks; squandered by a Tory 

government incapable of managing this province. 

 

I can look at my own constituency where we have the Prairie 

Agricultural Machinery Institute, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a fine — 

and I’ll use the words of the member from Weyburn — state of 

the art facility. And what’s happening to PAMI? This 

government is reducing their funding this year, and they’re 

threatening to cut out the jobs of 25 people next year by totally 

eliminating the funding. And if that’s not true, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3140 

 

would ask the member for Weyburn to stand up and tell me 

they’re not going to cut PAMI out, and I’d ask the Premier the 

same thing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, where are the winter work projects? 

Where are they? These people sit over here across the floor 

telling us about how great things are, and I hope they keep 

telling us how great things are because I know the reality out in 

rural Saskatchewan, and the people out there are telling me 

things aren’t so great. So I would encourage the members 

opposite to live in their little dream world, live in their little 

dream world, because you’re totally out of touch with reality. 

 

We see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unprecedented tax increases with 

. . . end result, fewer services and fewer jobs. Fewer services 

and fewer jobs, because the government doesn’t care whether 

people work. They care about Weyerhaeuser. They care about 

Pocklington. I care about the people out there who are 

unemployed who want to work. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see the minister of unemployment 

harassing those who aren’t working. And what are they doing to 

let them work? Not creating jobs, and at the same time turning 

around and harassing them because they’re not working. What 

kind of attitude is that bestowed by a government who is 

supposedly looking after the people of this province? Putting 

people out of work instead of putting people to work. 

 

And just think, I mean, it’s simple economics. The more people 

that are working, the more taxes that are paid, thus reducing the 

general tax load. It’s a stimulation of the economy. Where’s the 

sense in keeping people out of work and taxing heavily those 

that are remaining? It dries up the economy. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, putting a great burden on those who remain. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just like to say something now 

about what I hear across the floor of this House. We hear, New 

Democrats are the ones who are spreading pessimistic attitudes, 

doom and gloom, fear monger — that’s what members opposite 

are accusing our side of the House of. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do 

not propagate fear, but I know fear when I’m looking it in the 

face. And the people of this province are telling me by the looks 

on their faces that they are afraid of what is happening. 

 

The farmers of this province are afraid of why their children 

aren’t getting jobs and what they’re going to do. You know, 

how is my daughter or son going to establish himself, have a 

family, and contribute to the society when the government is 

not creating an economic atmosphere in this province whereby 

he can do that? 

 

And what about those people not being counted? Those sons 

and daughters of farm families and rural families who are back 

on the farm or in the small business. They can’t find a job; 

they’ve given up; they’re helping out on the farm. They’re not 

even a statistic. 

 

What about the daughter who’s taken four years of nurses’ 

training, four years of training, Mr. Speaker, at an approximate 

cost of $16,000 a year times four, is $64,000 to educate that 

nurse — $64,000 of taxpayers’ money to  

educate that nurse and she cannot get a job. Now you may say, 

well maybe she can’t get a job, there’s other people working. 

But the reality, Mr. Speaker, is we have hospitals in this 

province whose beds are closed down because of lack of funds 

to keep them open. We have 11,000 people waiting to get into 

hospitals. And we pay $64,000 to educate a young person who 

wants to be a nurse to contribute to the society, and this 

government says no. And so what does she do? She’ll go to 

Alberta or British Columbia or somewhere else. 

 

So we’re manufacturing very good working people from this 

province, at taxpayers’ expense, and shipping them out of the 

province, forcing them out of the province, because this 

government will not loosen up funds for hospitals so that they 

can be employed to help the people who are in need of 

medicare care. And what’s happening? What’s happening? We 

have the cost of the education, we have tax dollars being spent, 

and we have a poor management . . . we have poor management 

by this government. The result is again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

drying up of Saskatchewan’s economy by this government. And 

let’s just talk about . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to join in today’s debate. I’d like to perhaps fill in some 

of the obvious gaps in the opposite members’ memories, and 

there’s some pretty large gaps in there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We hear the NDP talk about employment and unemployment. 

We hear them condemn the government, talking about new 

opportunities. They haven’t got any. We don’t hear them talk 

about new opportunities — not at all. 

 

They don’t talk about the oil upgrader in Regina. They don’t 

talk about all those people who are working on site right now. 

Why don’t you take a little tour? Get out of your ivory tower 

here and wander down to that site and take a look at what real 

people doing real jobs are like. Take a good look. Maybe you’ll 

learn something. 

 

They try to create an impression that there’s a mass exodus out 

of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s not true. Members 

opposite know it. The Leader of the Opposition quoted from 

figures, back and forth statistics. They point to us like drop in 

the work-force and they say, it’s a disaster. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind them of a few facts. Let’s 

compare records — their record to ours. They may not like to 

admit it, but from May of 1978 for example to May of ’81, 

7,000 more people left the province than came into it. And you 

can’t deny those numbers, Mr. Speaker. The NDP can’t deny 

those figures, Mr. Speaker. And according to their own rhetoric 

that we’ve just heard quite a bit of, that was during good 

economic times, Mr. Deputy Speaker — good economic times. 

 

Now let’s take a look at May, 1982, to May ’86 under a PC 

government in what we’ve heard members of the opposition 

call tough times, Tory times, and yes, Mr.  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3141 

 

Speaker, we have had some economic set-backs. Yes, we have. 

During that time 6,700 more people came into Saskatchewan 

than left, Mr. Speaker — came in. In their administration during 

good times, 7,000 left; under our administration during tough 

times, almost 7,000 came in. 

 

What does that say, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It says, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that people have more confidence in a Conservative 

government in Saskatchewan than they have in the NDP’s 

doom and gloom rhetoric that we’ve heard so much of today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Petersen: — They call for job creation programs. They 

call for job creation programs as if none exist. We heard the 

Leader of the Opposition talk about a winter works program, a 

winter works program. Well that was their answer to 

everything, I guess, if it’s his answer to everything today. But 

they don’t talk about the home program that we instituted. They 

liked it though. They liked is so well, they incorporated it as 

part of their platform during the last election. They called it 

7-7-7, when you had to be seven years old, or 70, or seven 

months, or I’m not sure what exactly it was. But the long and 

short of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that they agreed that 

creating employment in the housing sector was a good thing. 

But we didn’t hear the member opposite talk about that. 

 

The home program is one of the most successful job-creation 

programs in the history of Saskatchewan. And it’s not for a 

two-month period during one winter. It’s not designed for 

people who are over 35 years old and going bald, for example. 

It’s designed for everyone who wants to work — everyone who 

wants to work. Young people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

tradespeople, small business can benefit from it. 

 

Fourteen thousand new jobs, Mr. Speaker, have been created by 

that program, and over $600 million worth of economic activity 

have been generated. And the Leader of the Opposition 

neglected that. He kind of missed it. Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope 

he takes notice of it now. 

 

The NDP have a fixed vision of what job creation should be. 

They can’t allow small businesses to create jobs. They oppose 

programs like our home program. They oppose businesses. 

They don’t want to see the heavy oil upgrader going. They 

didn’t want to see the P.A. paper mill come into being. They 

don’t want to see the Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford. 

They’re against private enterprise. They’re against small 

business. They’re against people. 

 

We talk about, what are our children going to do? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, some of us went through technical training programs 

and became mechanics, as I did, and had to leave the province 

to find a job back in the ’70s. I couldn’t get a job in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many of your class-mates did the 

same? 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Most of my class-mates left. At the present 

time, some have come back again into  

Saskatchewan, and I’m proud to say that my children are 

looking forward to completing their education in Saskatchewan. 

 

But let’s talk about the people who didn’t want to, or maybe 

weren’t given the opportunity to work in trades areas or perhaps 

in some of the professions — go to university, become a nurse, 

become a doctor, become a lawyer. What about people like 

that? And we’ve got lots of them in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In my home town, the town of Rose Valley, a lot of the people 

there, a lot of the farmer have some part-time jobs; a lot of the 

people make full-time employment out of working the diamond 

drills up North, working the oil patch, Mr. Speaker, in the 

South. 

 

(1545) 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, we had companies calling my 

office asking me if I knew of any young farmer who wanted to 

go to work who wasn’t combining, because they desperately 

needed them because they’re moving into the province to drill 

in the North and to drill in the oil patch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Petersen: — And I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that that’s a direct result of many of our programs and many of 

our proposals that the NDP call no good. They don’t want to see 

people working in the oil patch. They don’t want to see people 

working in the diamond drills. They shut in the oil when they 

were in power, they chased investment out. 

 

Let’s take a look at the mentality of the NDP. Mind you, I 

might have to use a magnifying glass. It comes from Hansard, 

March 24, 1986, page 120. The former NDP member for 

Cumberland, who could hardly be deemed part of the party’s 

left wing, said the following, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Mr. Speaker, capitalism is a system which does not work 

for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The blanket statement that capitalism does not work. Well what 

did they think would work? DNS, the department of northern 

Saskatchewan, and they imposed it on Northerners. That was 

their idea of job creation. Create a bureaucratic nightmare — a 

bureaucratic nightmare. 

 

Take a look at the department when we took office. It was a 

department run amuck. It answered to no one. It just went wild. 

Millions and millions of dollars were wasted in that 

bureaucratic paper shuffle. Did it create meaningful 

employment? No. Did it create anything that produced a 

product that could be used? No. 

 

Now a lot of the members talk about private enterprise is a bad 

thing but, Mr. Speaker, when you compare the record of a 

monster like DNS that created a bureaucratic nightmare of 

paper shuffling, compared to the jobs, the real jobs that people 

in Saskatchewan have today, I think the record speaks for itself. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3142 

 

In the North, private enterprise has developed wild rice farming, 

we have food processing, gold exploration development, 

uranium mining. And with the coming into being of a free trade 

pact, uranium will once again be very, very important for the 

people of the North and for the constituents from Athabasca and 

Cumberland to obtain employment. 

 

The PC government in Saskatchewan has encouraged this type 

of activity; we’ve even helped it to expand and grow in 

Saskatchewan. We’re not stuck into one narrow train of thought 

that the government can create all the jobs by itself, hire all the 

people. We believe in building and working with private 

enterprise. The NDP don’t. They believe in the status quo — 

keep it as it is, let government do it all for you. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the past five years the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan have spoken twice and I think it’s 

time the members opposite started to listen. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be of course speaking in 

favour of the motion and against the amendment. 

 

I would like to start my talk out with a comment on some of the 

statements made by the member from Moosomin, and the 

member from Cut Knife-Lloyd, and also the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. And what I would like to show from those 

statements is to clearly show the empty rhetoric — the empty 

general rhetoric of the PC government. Also I would like to 

show, following that, what the actual facts are in the province of 

Saskatchewan, but also in the relation to the North, but also in 

relation to Indian and Métis people. 

 

First of all, what I hear the PC government members saying is 

this. In the initial stage the had the rhetoric of more jobs 

through open for business; recently free trade and 

diversification are the saviours. Now they also state that we are 

dealing in the past. 

 

But the other thing that they always mention in all of their talks 

in the past while is the question of fear. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to say yes to the Tories when they talk about fear. Of 

any government in the history of Saskatchewan, there has been 

none like the PCs that have created more fear in this province. 

 

When they talk about fear, it tells me one thing. At least there is 

a tiny speck of guilt behind that rhetoric, because they know it 

is true that they have created fear in this province. So from a 

subconscious basis, they always come out and talk about this 

fear. So fear is the essence of the PC government policy and the 

PC government strategy. 

 

When I look at the reply and the input of people, they say this is 

the most negative government that they have ever met. This is a 

government that has cut us back the most in the history of 

Saskatchewan. And as I travel around, that’s the essence of 

their statements. 

 

We come here to present a motion that looks at a specific  

thing in the future, the real importance of jobs. Because it is not 

done in the oil patch, because it is not done to a very great 

extent in all other areas, we have to look forward to the cold 

winter months now and do something about a simple fact that 

has arisen in the last five year s- the winter works programs 

have been steadily cut back. And the winter . . . Of course we 

come through a tough winter last year, and it will even be 

tougher this coming year. 

 

Our proposal is a positive proposal, Mr. Speaker. It is one that 

looks at trying to get jobs for people through the winter — the 

jobs that the PC government has been unable to put into place 

because of their lack of planning and their simple give-away 

strategies to big business. 

 

When I look at the reality, Mr. Speaker, I look at the facts from 

the period 1971, when the NDP came in power, to the period of 

course till 1981. And I look at the facts. In that period in time 

there was an increase in jobs — over 9,000 jobs per year. 

 

When I look at the PC strategy in 1981 to ’86, the record is 

6,400 jobs; in other words, approximately 3,000 less jobs per 

year is the record for the PC government — 3,000 less jobs in 

the period in each year between ’81 and ’86, than between the 

period of 1971 to 1981. Those are the records; the facts speak 

for themselves. 

 

When we look from 1981 to ’86, the last time the NDP was in 

power, the unemployment rate has doubled. And when you look 

at a more closer record of the past year, we look at the fact that 

the Manitoba record is one where there’s an increase of jobs of 

4,000 over there, Mr. Speaker. And when I look at Alberta, it’s 

an increase of 12,000. What do we get in Saskatchewan? A 

cut-back in number of jobs by 2,000. There’s 2,000 less jobs 

and fewer jobs in this province, when on either side of these 

two provinces we have increases. That is the fact of the 

Saskatchewan record. 

 

We also know that people are leaving this province. Our youth 

are leaving this province. Six thousand left in 1985; over 8,400 

left in 1986; 1987, up to August, Mr. Speaker, we have about 

6,000 have already gone. Our top people have been pushed out 

of this province. Our hard-working people are being squeezed 

out. Our youth are looking all over the place. All the people 

who have made a living here for many years are leaving our 

province. 

 

When I look into the question of the North, one of the members, 

an opposite, talked about the North, and I must say that he kept 

talking about the rhetoric of PCs and the small business 

strategy. But what is the reality and what are the facts, Mr. 

Speaker? In general, I do know that here’s a lot more small 

businesses that have gone down the drain in this province than 

at any time in the period in history. 

 

That also the fact remains in northern Saskatchewan if you look 

at specific agreements, the very specific agreements, Mr. 

Speaker, if you look at the Key Lake contract which the NDP 

government put together where you had to have a monitoring 

committee to be able to favour small business and to make sure 

that small business was getting the contracts from the mining 

development, that was the record of the NDP. There was  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3143 

 

more small business in northern Saskatchewan getting jobs 

through mining and forestry than what you will ever see with 

this PC government in the past five years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Not only was there more, Mr. Speaker, what 

you saw in the small business strategy was direct help and 

direct benefit to the businesses. The small business sector was 

provided with a 10 per cent clause. What that 10 per cent clause 

meant, Mr. Speaker, is that when they were bidding, the 

northern contractors, the northern small businesses were 

provided with a 10 per cent basis so that if they bid 9 per cent 

lower than the person, they would still be the ones that would 

be getting the jobs. And that was a specific directed strategy for 

small business by the NDP government during the period of the 

NDP administration. But when this government came in they 

took that away. They took it away. 

 

When you also look at the jobs, we know that the jobs for Key 

Lake went down since the NDP administration because they did 

away with the monitoring committee also. The hiring of 

Northerners was an extremely important aspect of the NDP 

policy, and the practice was there where we had 60 per cent of 

the people hired. 

 

When this government came in, now we look at the record. 

When I look at the record, the past two years, it even went 

down to 15 per cent. Yet this same government will talk about 

law and looking after the law, Mr. Speaker, and yet this same 

government won’t even follow their own laws that are existing 

in terms of the employment of the people in this province and 

especially in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So when I look at the empty rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, they do not 

look at the facts. They do not look at the facts because what I 

see in the brand-new agreements, these brand-new policies, all 

they say is encourage. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Time has expired. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m just sorry, Mr. 

Speaker, that I haven’t got half an hour to speak instead of two 

or three minutes. But it just bothered me today so much, Mr. 

Speaker, to hear the rhetoric coming from the other side of this 

House talking about this government not promoting jobs, and 

there have been less jobs in this province while we’ve been in 

government than when they were in government. That’s 

absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, and they know so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — They stand up here with their cheap scare 

tactics is what they’re doing. When I hear people stand up and 

talk about . . . that’s so mixed up — the member from 

Cumberland when he says 3,000 less jobs, then he says 2,000 

less jobs, then he said 1,000 less jobs, he doesn’t even believe 

what he’s saying himself. He knows these things aren’t true. It’s 

just plain scare tactics, Mr. Speaker. And we have to sit and 

listen to it here day after day. 

 

We’ve been sitting on this — it will soon be 90 days sitting  

here, and we have to listen to it in question period, we have to 

listen to it in estimates, and we have to listen to it in debates — 

trying to scare the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that is not true, and who is the judge? The people of 

Saskatchewan have been the judge because they know, Mr. 

Speaker, when we had an election last fall that their scare 

tactics were not right, and that’s why they re-elected the 

Progressive Conservatives for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We had to listen to the only — only elected farmer, who calls 

himself a farmer — the only elected one in the province of 

Saskatchewan, the member from Humboldt who stood up here 

and tried to tell us all these statistics. Well I think a Hansard 

should be taken back out to the constituents of Humboldt, and 

there’s no way that that gentleman could ever be re-elected to 

this here legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a part of the Progressive 

Conservative government when I look back over the last five 

years and see the jobs that’s been brought to the people of this 

province by this government. 

 

(1600) 

 

We hear the members opposite say there’s been thousands of 

businesses go under under this government. That’s absolutely 

false. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I am afraid time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 

Assembly, I move that we stand all the motions down to no. 21 

and move on to adjourned debates. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debates on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 34 — An Act to 

amend The Prescription Drug Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to start out 

by saying that I am 100 per cent opposed to this Bill. I think it’s 

an abomination, I think it’s wrong headed, I think it’s cruel, I 

think it’s opportunistic for these Progressive Conservative 

members opposite to introduce this kind of legislation to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What we see with this drug prescription Bill, Mr. Speaker, is 

the beginning of the end of medicare. We see a poisoning of the 

medicare system with this legislation; we see a drugging of the 

people of Saskatchewan into accepting the demise of their 

medicare system. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3144 

 

This Bill wrecks the Saskatchewan prescription drug program, 

and it wrecks it because it shifts the burden of paying for 

medical care in terms of prescription drugs onto the backs of 

individual Saskatchewan people, onto the backs of individual 

Saskatchewan households. And this is what Saskatchewan 

people find so unacceptable. 

 

For years they’ve come to expect that their provincial 

government recognizes its responsibility to provide medical 

services, to provide prescription drug services, and the plan that 

was introduced here in Saskatchewan was a model for drug 

prescription plans across Canada and indeed across the world. 

 

What we realize, Mr. Speaker, and what everyone in 

Saskatchewan realizes fundamentally, is that illness or disease 

is no respecter of persons — is no respecter of individuals. And 

it’s for that reason that the good people of Saskatchewan and 

the New Democratic government put into place a prescription 

drug plan that would protect Saskatchewan people from the 

unfortunate incidences of unforeseen illness or accident or 

disease. 

 

Crucial drugs should not be predicated on the ability to pay, not 

if we want to have a universally accessible health care system. 

And what this Bill does, this prescription drug Bill does, is it 

shifts the ability to receive the drug onto the individual’s ability 

to pay for it. And, Mr. Speaker, I have people in my Saskatoon 

Sutherland constituency who have already told me that they are 

doctoring themselves as a result of this Bill. They are doctoring 

themselves by either deciding that, well I don’t really need to 

fill this prescription, perhaps I can do without it even though the 

doctor has ordered me to, and told me that I needed this 

prescription, since I can’t afford the money up front., I’ll hold 

back and I won’t go to the drug store and buy it. That’s one 

scenario that I’ve had a number of people in my constituency 

tell me; a decision that they have taken upon themself because 

they don’t have the ability to pay. 

 

The other option, of course, which is very similar but slightly 

different, is simply to take the prescription and to cut it in half. 

Now they can do that. Some of them have told me that they’ve 

asked the druggists if he would only fill half the prescription. 

What is the cost, they ask? Sixty-four dollars they’re told. 

Could you fill half the prescription? I can’t afford quite that 

much money; I don’t have it up front, could you do only half of 

it for $32? Either that or they get the . . . if the druggist won’t 

do that, they get the prescription filled for $64 and then ration 

the drugs to themselves, again playing doctor. 

 

Well for individual people to assume that medical responsibility 

after they’ve had medical authority suggest to them that they 

need drugs for certain illnesses and disease is playing fast and 

loose with the health care system of Saskatchewan. It requires 

that people . . . and this Bill requires that people put the money 

up front for their prescription drugs, an impossibility for many 

people on fixed incomes, elderly, single parents, and the like. 

This Bill does nothing to help those kinds of people. 

 

In addition this, Mr. Speaker, another major problem with this 

Bill is that it eliminate from the formulary a whole class of 

prescription drugs — a whole class of  

prescription drugs that are no longer available under the 

formulary that was part of the old prescription drug plan. And 

that means that people have to pay more for those drugs 

because they aren't included in the government's plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the cost of 

this plan. I haven’t heard a whole lot about how much this is 

going to save the government. I think we can have estimates 

ranging up to $30 million a year perhaps. 

 

Be that as it may, what this Bill does is shift the cost of these 

drugs to the individual. As I’ve explained, it privatizes health 

care. It doesn’t reduce the cost of prescription drugs for 

Saskatchewan people by 1 cent or by $1. It simply shifts the 

burden for paying for those drugs onto the backs of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And it’s in this connection then, that I think we need to see this 

prescription drug plan, as set over against proposals by the 

federal government to change the generic . . . the prescription 

drug legislation for Canada and increase the waiting time for 

generic drugs to come on the market, because it’s this kind of 

measure by the federal PC cousins in Ottawa that is in collusion 

or in partnership with the provincial PC plan to raise drug costs 

to Saskatchewan people, both provincially and on the federal 

level. And we have both level of governments partners to this 

— PC partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to understand this issue and how this shift 

is taking place, we need to understand that it was back in 1969 

that the patent Act respecting pharmaceutical drugs was 

introduced by the federal Consumer Affairs minister. And what 

this patent legislation did in 1969 was to allow manufacturers of 

generic drugs to produce less expensive equivalents of 

brand-name drugs, so the pharmacists and the consuming public 

could make a choice between whether they wanted a 

brand-name drug or a generic drug. 

 

And anyone who goes to the supermarket nowadays knows that 

there certainly is to be a savings effected by buying a generic 

product as over against a name-brand product, and most of us in 

Saskatchewan realize that when it comes to prescription drugs. 

And when we look at something like aspirin, if we buy a 

brand-name aspirin, we pay proportionately more for it. Last 

time I did so, and bought the generic aspirin, I got the same 

amount for about half the price of the name brand. And I think 

most Saskatchewan people will recognize the savings effected 

by that sort of thing. 

 

Now my point is, Mr. Speaker, that it was not without cause 

that the federal government in 1969 introduced this legislation, 

because it effected a savings for individual Canadians in their 

drug purchases. But more importantly, when the provincial 

governments, Saskatchewan leading the way, introduced their 

prescription drug programs, it meant that when they went to buy 

drugs for their populace, they could have the choice of buying 

generic drugs or name-brand drugs. And what this meant then, 

is that provincial governments, such as the Government of 

Saskatchewan itself — just as a consumer had the choice to buy 

generic drugs or brand-name drugs — could buy generic drugs 

and therein effect a considerable savings  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3145 

 

given the scale in which the provincial plan was buying drugs. 

 

So in 1969 then, Canada went from having among the most 

expensive drugs in the world to having the cheapest, as a result 

of this simple change in patent legislation. Now what we have 

with federal government’s suggestion, the Mulroney 

government’s suggestion, that we end this system introduced in 

1979, is that the brand-name drug manufacturers would now 

have a 10-year monopoly on all marketing of newly patented 

drugs — a 10-year monopoly as opposed to the previous 

provisions. And this 10-year monopoly, it’s estimated, will cost 

Canadian patients $300 million a year in higher prescription 

drug costs. 

 

We’re told by a group of Saskatoon doctors within the last year 

— as they reviewed this legislation, this Mulroney legislation 

— we’re told by these Saskatoon doctors that they estimate the 

extra cost to Saskatchewan people being in the neighbourhood 

of $10 million a year if this patent drug legislation changes. 

Well that’s the doctors in Saskatoon. The Canadian Drug 

Manufacturing Association, a group of generic drug companies 

lobbying against changes to this patent legislation, say it will 

cost consumers and the drug plan in Saskatchewan an extra $26 

million by 1995. 

 

And so my point is, Mr. Speaker, that we have introduced here 

a Bill to change the Saskatchewan prescription drug program, 

and at the same time we have federal legislation introduced by 

the Mulroney government to change the patent drug legislation 

of Canada which grossly inflates the cost of drugs to this 

provincial government. So if they were really concerned, if the 

Minister of Health were really concerned about the cost of 

prescription drugs for Saskatchewan people, it would seem to 

me, at least, that he would address the situation of the patent 

drug legislation changes and tackle the federal government, the 

Mulroney government, on this issue, which is precisely what 

hasn’t happened to date. 

 

Indeed, we find exactly the opposite, that the present 

government, the present PC government of this province, 

supports the federal drug legislation, the patent legislation 

changes, even though the Bill could cost Saskatchewan 

consumers up to an extra $26 million a year. Now who’s going 

to be paying for that? Indirectly, the provincial government, but 

directly, the Saskatchewan taxpayer by additional taxes. 

 

Take the lower figure offered by the Saskatchewan physicians 

when they talk about $10 million. That’s still a considerable 

savings. And yet this government, this PC government of 

Saskatchewan, has not uttered one protest concerning this 

federal legislation. 

 

(1615) 

 

And the only result, the only spin-off of this restrictive patent 

legislation is higher costs for new prescription drugs. Now why 

wouldn’t this government tackle that issue? Why does it tackle 

individual Saskatchewan taxpayers and shift the burden of 

providing drugs onto their backs? 

What we have, Mr. Speaker, is a privatization of pain, a 

privatization of the health care system, a shifting of the burden 

and of the responsibility that we share collectively to each 

other, back onto the individual families and onto individual 

persons. 

 

And as I said earlier, disease or illness is no respecter of 

individuals. Any one of us could be struck by a debilitating 

sickness that requires prescription drugs. And the question is: 

what ability do we have to pay for that prescription drugs or to 

contend with these costs? In some instances the costs for new 

drugs, for experimental drugs, can be enormous. 

 

And the fundamental question then is: should the individual be 

subject to the whims of fortune and outrageous fate when it 

comes to sickness and illness and disease, or does not the 

provincial government, do not the people collectively, have a 

responsibility to spread the burden of health care and associated 

costs? 

 

And I think Saskatchewan people long ago — 25 years ago 

when they introduced medicare — said that we do have a 

collective responsibility to one another. We are our brother’s or 

our sister’s keeper in a fundamental sense. We do bear 

responsibility to protect and to cushion each other from the 

ravages of — not just physically, but fiscally — of illness and 

disease. But with the elimination of these generic drugs and not 

a murmur of dissent from this government to the federal 

government over these changes, we see an outstanding example 

of the hypocrisy and the failure of this government to protect 

the interests, the best interests of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Jack Kay, a member of the Canadian (Generic) Drug 

Manufacturers Association, lobbying against the federal drug 

legislation says that “Saskatchewan consumers will pay $26 

million more for drugs by 1995 as a result of this legislation.” 

And already now Saskatchewan taxpayers with this Bill 34 

before the House to change the prescription drug legislation, 

already now Saskatchewan taxpayers are being asked to pay 

more when the federal legislation hasn’t even been introduced. 

One wonders what we’re headed for. 

 

It’s no wonder then, Mr. Speaker, that a considerable coalition 

of people have risen up in opposition to this legislation. And I 

think some of the same organizations here in Saskatchewan are 

opposing this very Bill, the prescription drug legislation we 

have before us in this House right now. 

 

On the federal level we have the National Anti-Poverty 

Organization — it’s no wonder that they would protest this 

legislation. The National Pensioners and Senior Citizens 

Federation — little wonder that they would oppose it. The 

Canadian Council on Social Development, the Canadian Labour 

Congress, the National Action Committee on the Status of 

Women, and representatives from countless senior citizens 

organizations and health care organizations across the country. 

Why would this be? Why would senior citizens, for example, 

protest this legislation? Because it’s going to cost them dearly. 

And this same legislation in this House before us now, Bill 34, 

is going to cost senior citizens dearly and will be no respecter of 

persons or their abilities  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3146 

 

to pay. 

 

The former head of the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you send the Bill? 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Just a moment, Mr. Speaker, here. 

Nationally, it’s estimated that Canadians collectively will spend 

an extra $650 million by 1995 for prescription drugs. But what 

kind of sense does it make for us here in Saskatchewan to tackle 

one little corner of the prescription drug program and start 

chiselling away at individual consumers of drugs, then 

demanding that they pay up front by this legislation, and at the 

same time ignore a situation where, federally, Canadians 

collectively are going to be asked to pay an extra $650 million 

in the next decade annually for prescription drugs? 

 

Fundamentally, it seems to me, there’s something wrong with 

the approach of the Minister of Health on this issue. 

Fundamentally we have a failure to protect the interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

There’s no net benefit in this Bill for Canadians, says Mr. Kay, 

the head of the Canadian Generic Drug Manufacturers 

Association. There’s no net benefit in this Bill for Canadians. 

It’s a sell-out to pressure from the United States, said Mr. Kay, 

another sell-out, another give-away by this government to the 

Americans as part of the free trade negotiation, a direct result of 

the free trade negotiation that was initiated. 

 

And this is very current, Mr. Speaker, because it was at the 

“shamrock summit” that Mr. Reagan came to Mr. Mulroney and 

said, if you want a free trade agreement, you change your patent 

drug legislation regardless of what it costs Canadian taxpayers 

— $650 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m not sure if free trade 

negotiations regarding drugs applies to The Prescription Drugs 

Act before the House. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I guess I’m not 

making my . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I know hon. 

members . . . some hon. members don’t like these sorts of 

things brought to their attention, and certainly I’m not referring 

to the member from Saskatoon Sutherland because it isn’t him 

at this moment, but many other members. However, from time 

to time it’s my role to remind members that while some latitude 

is allowed in these speeches, they have to impose some rules. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker, in the sense that I 

don’t think I’ve made myself clear. My point earlier, I think I 

have made clear, is that the patent legislation increases the costs 

of drugs; that this government is increasing the cost of drugs 

here in Saskatchewan to individual people. It’s not tackling a 

corresponding increase in the cost of drugs federally, and I’ve 

simply mentioned the shamrock summit to detail the genesis of 

how this legislation was introduced. And that was the point that 

I wanted to make, that it was as a result of Mr. Reagan coming 

to Mr. Mulroney that we have that  

situation and that now we have a government that is unwilling 

to challenge that legislation. 

 

So I think the real issue then for us here in Saskatchewan is: 

how do we handle these changes that have been introduced? 

Now that we have a government that seems unwilling or 

incapable of addressing the larger changes, the fundamental 

structural changes in the prescription drug legislation federally, 

and simply keeps its mouth shut on the issue, what do we do 

now when we come to this particular Bill that deals with the 

provincial drug plan? 

 

Well I think in the fundamental sense there is very little that we 

can do because the government has made up its mind to shift 

the burden of health care onto individuals, and as a result 

individual Saskatchewan taxpayers will be paying more for 

their drugs. This betrays Saskatchewan people. It betrays the 

heritage that we have here in Saskatchewan which is a heritage 

of collective responsibility. This was a tradition of 

Saskatchewan pioneers — that we care about one another, that 

we show compassion, and this is precisely the failing in this 

particular drug Bill. 

 

It introduces into the Saskatchewan health care system the 

principle of user-pay. It doesn’t matter whether you’re sick or 

not, if you need drugs, you pay. And if you don’t have the 

money, you pay. And if you still don’t have the money, then 

heaven help you, but you will have to pay up front; you must 

have the funds to pay for that drug or you simply don’t get it. 

That’s a fundamental shift in Saskatchewan’s prescription drug 

plan — the drug plan that we had before the Minister of Health 

introduced this Bill — a fundamental shift. And it’s a shift that 

the people of Saskatchewan are not willing to accommodate 

because it gets so fundamental to our values system and to the 

tradition of this province. 

 

This government is simply, with this legislation, betraying its 

incompetence. Why in the world would it shift the burden of 

provision of paying for prescription drugs onto the individuals? 

Because it’s given away too much to the corporate sector. And 

that’s why individual senior citizens will have to begin 

doctoring themselves and deciding to cut back on their 

prescriptions and to maybe even try to wean themselves off the 

drugs altogether at their own discretion and not the discretion of 

their doctor. 

 

And this is no way to improve our health care system. It’s a 

way to erode our health care system, and to compromise it, and 

to endanger individual lives, and so that’s why I stand 

fundamentally opposed to this legislation. I can’t envision 

individual Saskatchewan people doctoring themselves. I think 

we have concerns, all of us, that perhaps as a society we have 

too much dependence at many junctures on prescription drugs, 

but that isn’t the issue here. 

 

The issue is the ability to pay, and this is my concern. My 

concern is that by its mismanagement and by its incompetence 

that this government is changing the health care system that we 

have come to know and enjoy and appreciate here in 

Saskatchewan. This drug prescription legislation undermines 

our medicare system.  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3147 

 

It’s the wrecking of medicare; it’s a poisoning of medicare; and 

it’s a prime example of PC policy — PC policy federally which 

foists increased costs for drugs onto individual taxpayers and 

PC policy provincially which foists the cost of drugs onto 

individual taxpayers. 

 

And there’s going to be a revolt over this legislation, and there 

already has been a revolt over this legislation because even 

though the populous and the people of Saskatchewan have 

quieted down on this question of the prescription drug 

legislation, I think they’ve made already a fundamental decision 

with respect to it. And that decision is to say, any government 

that would change our prescription drug program in this fashion 

simply does not have our confidence. It has to go. And I think 

it’s instructive for us then today that we don’t hear wails and 

gales of protest over this legislation from the public. 

 

And my suspicion, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of 

Saskatchewan have already written this government off, have 

digested this legislation personally in their own lives as they’ve 

gone — when was it? July 1? — before July 1 to the drug stores 

and bought drugs and store piles of drugs under the old plan. 

That’s instructive I think, Mr. Speaker. That tells us that they 

have smelled a rat, that they know what is in store for them, and 

they now are only waiting for the change in the government. 

 

They aren’t going to attempt to change this policy overnight. 

And I don’t think that this speech I’m giving now is going to 

change this policy at all. But fundamentally it will be changed. 

 

(1630) 

 

It will be changed when a New Democratic government comes 

into office and re-establishes a prescription drug program that is 

as good as Saskatchewan’s own people, a prescription drug 

program that does not shift the burden of payment onto 

individual Saskatchewan people, that respects our collective 

responsibility to each other, and that is testimony to the 

competence and the caring and the compassion of a government 

that really does put human priorities first, and not just its 

political friends and patronage and the like, a government that is 

willing to stand up for its people and to tackle the federal 

government if it’s out of line and compromising the best 

interests of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I stand fundamentally opposed to 

this legislation. I wouldn’t vote for this legislation if my life 

depended on it. And I thank you very much for your attention to 

my speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I understand the House 

Leader wants to move along very shortly, and I’ll only take a 

brief while today to lay out some comments for the members, 

and perhaps will speak another time on this very important Bill. 

 

Whenever we have important legislation such as this before the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we examine it 

thoroughly, that we debate the issue back and forwards, and that 

we check the commitment of the  

government to its programs. And one of its programs and one of 

its commitments was health care for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They said, and I heard them say many, many times in the 

expensive advertising, that health care was number one with 

them. Matter of fact, I went back and got an ad that the 

Conservative Party had run in the Star-Phoenix or Leader-Post 

— I think they ran it in both of them — back in April 26, 1983, 

one year after they had been in power. 

 

And in this particular ad, I think we can see that they clearly lay 

out what their commitment and policies were, and how strongly 

they adhere to those policies. And this ad was fairly 

self-congratulatory of the Conservative Party and the Premier. It 

starts out: . . . “because a promise is a promise.” This is the 

Premier of our province one year after being in power, saying in 

an ad, “a promise is a promise.” And in this ad they deal with a 

number of things. 

 

In order to get the background of their commitment to health 

care, you have to examine their whole program, but essentially I 

shall hone in on health care. But they say, gasoline tax 

removed. This is back in ’83. And they also say that the 

Government of Saskatchewan is proud to have played a major 

role enabling a Saskatchewan group to obtain an NHL hockey 

team. Well now that’s not a big thing in Saskatchewan, but 

apparently the Premier had obtained an NHL hockey team in 

April 1983. A promise is a promise, he said. 

 

They were saying that the Progressive Conservative 

government extended the Saskatchewan dental plan to include 

16-year-olds. They extended the Saskatchewan dental plan to 

include 16-year-olds. 

 

And they also said children’s clothing is exempt from 

provincial sales tax. Well to that I say, so what, Mr. Speaker? 

Children’s clothing was exempt from provincial sales tax in 

January of 1982; this government didn’t come into power until 

May of 1982. But here they are in their ad, taking credit for it. 

 

And in another sector, they say . . . Under the business sector, 

Mr. Speaker, very strong on business. Now the commitment of 

this party, who says a promise is a promise, displays broken 

commitment across the piece, Mr. Speaker. For business, they 

say. They’re assisting business — with trade development, aid 

to trade programs, and encouraging new investment. And they 

go on and they say they’re going to establish a Public Utilities 

Review Commission. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the sales tax has been put back on. We don’t 

have an NHL hockey team. The dental program to 16-year-olds 

has been virtually demolished — changed from a school-based 

program serving hundreds of communities, down to a different 

type of program which has limited services, serving 

significantly less communities in Saskatchewan. And the 

business development programs are gone — taken away by this 

government in the last budget. And we all know that the Public 

Utilities Review Commission is being sacrificed as well by this 

government. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3148 

 

Now I don’t know, in this ad where the Premier says, because a 

promise is a promise, means anything or not, or whether the 

Premier was telling an untruth in this ad. Now we realize that as 

we go through life there are certain untruths that are required. 

And I happened to come across an article, Mr. Speaker, dealing 

with this very issue. It says, and I quote: 

 

Lying, a necessity, psychologist says. Lying is integral to a 

typical day of spared feelings, boosted egos, and social 

graces. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. First of all, I question 

whether that vein of the speech should be permitted. Secondly, I 

fail to see how the hon. member will relate it to the prescription 

drug plan. And if he directly relates it to the drugs Act, he 

knows the rules of the House. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I shall not stray form the 

topic which is before us, which is Bill 34, dealing with 

prescription drug legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And I want to deal with this government’s commitment to 

health care which they said was number one, including a 

prescription drug plan, not to mention dental care and hospitals 

and all those kinds of things, but prescription drug which is 

number one, and health care overall — number one. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this psychologist says: 

 

Lying is integral to the typical day of spared feelings, 

boosted egos, and social grace. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would like to ask the hon. 

member how he relates that statement to the drug Act under 

consideration. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I made myself 

clear. I said that central to this whole government'’ program, 

which was advertised by the Premier in this ad in 1983 — a 

promise is a promise — was health care. And in health care one 

of the elements, one of the most important elements, was 

prescription drug service which Bill 34 seeks to amend. 

 

Now I’m examining the basis which causes this government to 

change its mind about health care and about prescription drug 

service. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would just like to make this comment. Many 

times in the past I have had to rise regarding unparliamentary 

remarks. I’m afraid that the member is speaking in a vein that 

will lead to just that. I don’t want to force the hon. member or 

ask him to withdraw and apologize to that type of statement, so 

I’m bringing it to his attention now. But I think from now on we 

have to be very careful, and I talked about this the other day in 

the House, that we have to be very careful about 

unparliamentary remarks because it doesn’t do the House any 

good. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite aware of the rule 

with regard to unparliamentary remarks, and I welcome your 

suggestion that I should adhere to the rules of the House. And I 

shall adhere to the rules of the House.  

I am quoting an article dated March 28, 1984, in the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix, and I read you the title, Mr. Speaker, and I read 

you one paragraph, and I’m reading you the concluding 

paragraph which tries to examine the basis on which I’m using 

to say that this government has changed its view. Now . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. If the hon. member from 

Saskatoon Westmount, through his quotes, is implying that the 

government was lying, that is clearly out of order. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I have said nothing of that 

nature. Now if someone wishes to accept that view, that has 

nothing to do with me. I have said nothing of that sort, and I 

deny having said that. I think an examination of the record will 

show that I did not say that. 

 

Now this article which I am quoting, quoting directly: 

 

We all lie to avoid unpleasant experiences, but I don’t see 

it as a problem unless it becomes a predominant pattern in 

your life. 

 

And I agree with that psychologist who said that. It’s not a 

serious problem unless it becomes a predominant pattern. And 

Mr. Speaker, I can only refer to the number of promises that 

have been broken by this government, which are alluded to by 

the Premier’s ad in 1983, health care being one of them. 

 

It’s necessary that we check the government’s sincerity on the 

issue of health care. Are they telling the truth? What is their 

adherence to the to the principles of health care? Well we had 

another example of it not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, on June 

30, and this shows in the Votes and Proceedings of the House 

where the Hon. Mr. Blakeney, the Leader of the Opposition, 

asked leave under rule 39 to move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly hereby commemorates the twenty-fifth 

anniversary of Medicare in Saskatchewan, and 

acknowledges the desire and . . . right of Saskatchewan 

people to have a high quality medicare system based on 

the principles of universality and accessibility. 

 

Unanimous consent having been requested, it was not 

granted. 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, it was not granted by the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan who sits opposite to me. 

 

What about the Minister of Health’s commitment to health care 

in Saskatchewan? Well we saw some of his commitment on 

July 1 when he put into effect a prescription drug plan. But July 

1 is another significant day in the history of Saskatchewan. July 

1 is the day that medicare came in, and the Minister of Health 

was good enough to run an ad in the Leader-Post, and I suspect 

this appeared in the Star-Phoenix as well. And the ad says: 

 

This week marks the 25th anniversary of the introduction 

of medicare in Saskatchewan, and we were pleased to 

proclaim July 2 as Medicare Day in our province. 

 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3149 

 

It says, “we were pleased to proclaim July 2 as Medicare Day in 

our province.” Now I fail to hear the Minister of Health on that, 

and the Minister of Health was a little slow getting his ad into 

the paper because July 2 was the day, Medicare Day, and he 

managed to get the ad into the paper on July 4, which shows to 

the people of Saskatchewan quite clearly that medicare week or 

Medicare Day in this province is an afterthought as far as the 

Minister of Health is concerned. 

 

Now in the introduction of the prescription drug plan, the 

Minister of Health sent a letter to all and sundry in 

Saskatchewan. I expect everyone here got them, and everybody 

out in TV land got them as well. I got one and it was entitled, 

“Dear Saskatchewan Resident.” And this particular letter was 

preceded before and after, and followed by volumes of 

advertising. And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, you saw it. The 

colourful brochure on the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan 

was sent to all people in the province, and a letter. I’m sure that 

some of the Conservative Party’s friends in . . . got fat and rich 

on this particular distribution of pamphlet all over 

Saskatchewan. There were ads — large ads in newspapers; 

there were ads on television, radio, very expensive plan to 

introduce to the people of . . . or advertising to introduce to the 

people of Saskatchewan a prescription drug plan. 

 

And what is one of the elements of this prescription drug plan, 

Mr. Speaker? Well, one of them is the rebate program, the 

rebate part of the program. And the prescription drug plan has 

an interesting rebate system; first of all it has $125 deductible, 

or $75 if you are a senior citizen, and then it has a 20 per cent 

deterrent fee. This government is back into deterrent fees. Its 

predecessor, the Liberal government of Saskatchewan was into 

deterrent fees a number of years ago and the consequence of 

that, in the health care field, deterrent fees in the health care 

field, was that that Liberal government went the way that this 

government is due to go in a short period of time. 

 

(1645) 

 

Now what do they think of the rebate program? Well back in 

1985 the minister of Finance, that was budget Bob, or pardon 

me, budget minister Bob . . . the member from Kindersley was 

speaking in the House and he said that all rebate programs: 

“dismissed as silly.” This is an article that appeared in the 

Star-Phoenix or the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well they have a rebate program in the drug plan, and the 

minister from Kindersley thinks that’s silly. And they have a 

rebate program for the gasoline tax, and I suppose the minister 

from Kindersley also thinks that’s silly, but the very thing that 

he says in 1985 is silly, he brings in — he and his government 

bring in in 1987 on a prescription drug plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier in . . . a number of times has 

been concerned about us dealing with the subject of the 

prescription drug plan, so much so that he’s taken to the 

headlines and one of them here is . . . I would quote his name, 

Mr. Speaker, but the rules prevent me. 

The Premier slams NDP’s drug plan rhetoric. 

 

And he questions whether people are having any problems with 

the province’s drug plan. And he suggests that the New 

Democratic Party is trying to score political points by 

continuously asking questions about the drug plan and this 

legislation, this drug legislation. 

 

Well the Premier can call it scoring political points if he wishes, 

but when he comes out in an election and says he’s going to 

make health care number one in Canada, it’s central to his 

program, and one year after he’s in power he starts to destroy 

the very basis on which he sought the confidence of the electors 

of Saskatchewan, I say to you that is rhetoric. And it has to be 

attacked by anybody and everybody in Saskatchewan who’s 

concerned about it. 

 

Here’s another one: 

 

The Premier questions the wisdom of free drugs. 

 

Well, if the Premier in this particular article, which is August 1, 

1987, in the Star-Phoenix, was out speaking at Leask, 

Saskatchewan, and he continuously referred to free drugs, free 

drugs, free drugs. I’ve heard him in this House repeat it. I’m 

against free drugs. There’s no wisdom in free drugs. He’s for 

free trade, but he’s not for free drugs. 

 

Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the patient does not 

write the prescription for the drug. The patient does not write 

the prescription for the drug, and it doesn’t do the Premier’s 

image much good to suggest the people are responsible for 

accepting free drugs when in fact the doctor write the 

prescription for free drugs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the 

good doctor from Weyburn wants to say a few words on this 

later, perhaps he can get into the debate and we’ll hear what he 

has to say about prescription drugs . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . But maybe he’s attending the Premier. 

 

I’ll tell you what, I’ll tell you what, Mr. Member from 

Weyburn. You’d better watch out because when I saw you up in 

Saskatoon the other day those people up at the university are 

just waiting for the chance to get at you, just waiting for the 

chance to get at you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that the House Leader wanted to carry on 

some other business at this point and I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 48 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3150 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 50 — An Act to 

amend The Hospital Standards Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 50 is a follow-up 

to Bill 48 and both Bills go hand in hand. Once again, we’d be 

prepared to move this Bill into third reading. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 49 — An Act to Amend The Change of Name Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 — An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 


