


















































June 29, 1987 Hansard Evening


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 29, 1987 
 

825 
 

 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the former minister 
of northern Saskatchewan wanted me to give him more of the 
same. So I think I’ll direct my reports on the North now in 
regards to this interim Bill, interim resolution. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the central issue for people this spring while we 
were waiting for the budget was the issue of jobs. The high 
unemployment situation, we don’t have to repeat – I think 
everybody knows what it is in the North. I might comment, Mr. 
Chairperson, that research in the ‘60s and ‘80s has shown very 
clearly that unemployment is indeed not only one of the most 
stressful aspects of a person’s life, but actually really not only 
tears apart his individual being but also his family and 
community. 
 
It is important to recognize that the research report states that 
for every 1 per cent rise in unemployment, there is a 4 per cent 
rise in suicide rates. I would like to mention a particular 
instance that has occurred in relation to that, Mr. Chairperson. 
In one community in northern Saskatchewan since the housing 
crisis fell on us in ’82 and since this government come in, and 
in particular to the people who had raised hopes on this 
particular budget of this spring, there was a suicide rate of 
approximately 1 per cent in a particular community. And that 1 
per cent, when you look at it in, let’s say, a situation like 
Regina, that would equal 2,000 people – 1 per cent of the city of 
Regina would be about 2,000 people – in the North, in one 
particular community between 1982 and ’82, there was 1 per 
cent of the people that committed suicide. 
 
While it hardly raises any eyebrows for any of the members 
from across, it was a devastating experience for the people at 
the community level and also for the families who had to 
endure the pain and the suffering of particularly the effects of 
unemployment. 
 
As I mentioned in relation to the jobs aspect, one of the key 
hopes that people had in this budget was hopefully to come out 
with something on jobs in relation to mining and forestry. As 
usual there was nothing in the budget in relation to the 
monitoring committee of Key Lake. The monitoring committee 
was to make sure that people from the North and Indian/Métis 
people were hired into the Key Lake mine. We were also to 
make sure that the environmental and also the safety and 
positive benefits to the business people in northern 
Saskatchewan were there. But again, the very device that was 
used in the Key Lake agreement to improve the hiring of 
Northerners and Indian and Métis people was knocked off by 
this government. It’s no longer there. It has disappeared. 
 
Again, Mr. Chairperson, it shows that this government simply 
not only punishes people from the North; it destroys their 
means of livelihood. 
 
A lot of people were wondering whether this budget 

which would, as provided through the mechanism of this 
interim resolution we are raising, there may be something on 
the development of the highways in the North. We know that 19 
people have died on the road. Highway 102 alone, north of La 
Ronge, between 1979 and ’85 – 19 people. And we thought that 
this interim mechanism would provide, you know, for some 
money so that we could start working on building the roads in 
the North that were accessible right down to the community 
level, and also bridges – for example, the bridge in Cumberland 
House; the roads up to Sandy Bay; the roads up to Wollaston. 
 
But what this province, what this PC government has done, is 
simply neglected the needs of people in northern Saskatchewan. 
They would just allow the people in the North to continually go 
on a road that is highly hazardous. And at a time also when we 
are pushing a lot more dangerous chemicals to be transported 
on those roads, they need improvement. 
 
In relation to this interim mechanism, a lot of the citizens from 
Wollaston were very hopeful that they would be treated in the 
same way that the citizens of southern Saskatchewan are 
treated. They wanted sewer and water. They wanted housing. 
They said three families are living in one house. This is 
occurring in many of the communities, but they . .  I will have 
to report to them, Mr. Chairperson, that indeed this is not the 
case. 
 
The other point that I wanted to mention in relation to the fact 
that a lot of people were interested in the tourism aspect. There 
will be . .  interesting to know that Tourism and Small Business 
has cut back $500,000. Also, too, the camp rates were increased 
without proper notice to the tourists that were visiting the 
North. A lot of them, of course, have raised their concerns 
already to the minister. 
 
When we followed up, a lot of people talked about the need also 
in the area of forestry. A lot of people were wondering whether 
this spring the Weyerhaeuser agreement would work hard to 
hire Indian/Métis people and Northerners at a higher extent than 
before. There was a clause in the Weyerhaeuser agreement that 
said it would encourage Indian/Métis people to be employed in 
the forestry industry. What we have found out, Mr. 
Chairperson, is this: as I talked to many of the contractors and 
workers in the North, they said, it is discouraging. It’s not 
encouraging. One particular case was such where a person 
actually went to Weyerhaeuser quite a few times, the person 
brought their skidders two times to the work site to get a job, 
and he was told to move his equipment out. Two times the 
person wanted to find a job and couldn’t find it. The contract 
stipulates that they would encourage people to be hired but hat 
simply wasn’t the case. 
 
In relation to the forestry industry, and this again pertains to this 
spring, there was a lot of forest fires this spring – one of the 
largest forest fires in our history. We looked at our budget in 
relation to forest fires, and what we find is that it has been cut 
back. A lot of people reflected back in regards to that forest fire, 
and they said that it was even tough to get a job on the way they 
are now handling the forest fire arrangements. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

826 
 

But the main thing that people wanted to relate to me in regards 
to the forest fire this spring was this: they said, it is sad to say 
that when we fight for jobs in the North – and we have been 
fighting hard for these jobs in the past five years – it is sad to 
say that in one fire alone, there were more jobs created in that 
one fire than in the past five years of the operation of this 
government. The person went on to say that it is surprising that 
lightning can create more jobs in northern Saskatchewan with 
one strike than the PC government in five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — When you look at the aspect of those people 
who are fighting for jobs in the forestry and mining areas, one 
also has to look at the traditional resource use area – and I’m 
glad that the minister in charge is waiting for what I am going 
to say in this regard. 
 
I recognize that while we still have subsidies this spring for 
booze, that there is still a cut-back in the subsidies to fish. 
Transportation . .  The fish transportation subsidy has been cut 
back by 50 to 60 per cent. The cut-back has attacked the 
fishermen. The fishermen, Mr. Speaker, are also worried . .  
That’s not a cut-back only on generally all the fish but it is cut 
back on the most productive fish. Pickerel and sturgeon will not 
get a fish transportation subsidy. 
 
When I look back at that fish transportation subsidy this spring, 
Mr. Chairperson, I talked with one of the fishermen and he told 
me that the department that spent a lot of time trying to catch 
him for using illegal nets. He said that they used planes, they 
used helicopters – probably spending about $10,000 a day to try 
and catch him on what he was using. He said that they even had 
video cameras after him – all over the place. 
 
(1915) 
 
Now they found him guilty of using one illegal net and of 
course, he said, I will gladly pay for that and he did. But that 
wasn’t enough. He got a letter from the deputy minister later on 
saying that since he had caught all of his fish with this 
supposedly illegal net, which was never proven in court, he said 
they would take away his transportation subsidy. Of course, a 
person came to see me later on. He said, nothing really is 
getting done here, and of course nothing was being done 
because everybody else got cut by that transportation subsidy – 
not only him, but everybody. 
 
In summary, I would say that in relation to the Indian/Métis 
people, I will quote a person that I met a little while ago in my 
travels. And he said, in the past, we had owned this land and all 
the resources that were there. In our goodness we shared these 
resources with everybody that has come up to the northern 
areas. After our land was taken, they said that they would give 
us jobs and that we would work our way from the bottom. 
 
He said, 40, 50 years later we are still working our way from 
the bottom. But not only are we working our way from the 
bottom; these people, this present government, now is trying to 
do away with the few jobs that we have 

left. First they took away our land, now they want to take away 
all our jobs. 
 
In relation to the North the people are saying, why doesn’t this 
government change? Why doesn’t it want to work with the real 
builders of northern Saskatchewan? They say, we are the 
builders; everything in the community is everything that is here. 
The government says they build, but they destroy most of the 
things that we have fought so hard for all these years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that this interim resolution assists 
one small mechanism in the large plan to continue to punish and 
keep down people from the North and people of Indian and 
Métis ancestry; that this interim measurement is not simply an 
ordinary measurement but is part and parcel of a plan which in 
Saskatchewan history we will look back and say that it was the 
error where there was a great rise in ageism and handicapism 
and sexism and racism. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I support this measure, basically, because we 
want to get on with the business of this House with a greatest 
reluctance and, hopefully, that the members from across start 
listening and not trying to keep the people quiet whether they’re 
from the North or whether they are Indian and Métis people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to address this interim 
supply Bill on behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon Centre. I 
want to make some general comments related to this Bill, 
particularly because time ran out and I didn’t have time to 
respond to the budget speech. I would like the constituents of 
Saskatoon Centre to understand clearly my concern about 
approving this Bill, although I feel that I will have to do it. 
 
This Bill is a Saskatchewan first. We’re being asked to approve 
expenditures for April, May, June, and July before we’ve had a 
chance to debate the estimates and debate the budget that’s 
being presented to this House. This is a precedent that’s never 
been set before, and I find it a very great concern. 
 
First of all there’s the question of the illegality of spending 
money by special warrants as has been done over the last few 
months, especially as many of these special warrants were all 
signed by Bob Andrew, as Acting Minister of Highways, and 
. .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order! Order. Order! Order. 
I’ve asked members not to refer to members by name, but by 
their seat or their position as a minister or a member of the 
House. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I was referring the former Finance minister who 
was fired from his job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — It’s important to me to explain to the 
constituents of Saskatoon Centre what this issue is about, 
because being new to the House I am learning a lot about the 
procedures of the legislature, and I’m having some 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

827 
 

very grave concerns about what I’m learning here. 
 
I was really concerned to discover, for example, that the public 
accounts have been very late in coming. Just today we received 
the public accounts for the province of Saskatchewan for 1985 
to 1986. And we’re already debating the estimates for ’87 to 
’88. There’s a huge gap in there of public accounts that have 
been spent, money that’s been spent that we still don’t know 
where it’s been spent or what it’s been spent on. And I’m being 
asked to support this interim supply Bill to spend more money 
when I still haven’t had a chance to discuss what the money’s 
being spent on. 
 
And I know for many of the small-business men in Saskatoon 
Centre constituency that this is very unbusiness-like behaviour 
on the part of the government. It’s totally unacceptable business 
practices and it really amazes me to think that we are being 
asked to buy basically a pig in a poke by supporting the funding 
of programs, and we don’t know what the money’s going to be 
spent on. 
 
I also want to tell the constituents of Saskatoon Centre my very 
grave concern about what I witnessed, particularly in the House 
today, when the Premier, in question period, was asked over 
and over again to explain to the people of Saskatchewan how he 
could approve a budget deficit of $500 million at one point and 
then a few months later say, whoops, it’s gone to 1.2 billion. He 
was asked over and over again by many people in the 
opposition to answer that very simple question, and that 
question was not answered. And I find I have a very grave 
concern about supporting an interim supply Bill to spend more 
money when I can’t even get a direct answer from the Premier 
of this province as to what the deficit actually is and where he 
gets these ideas from; that he’s saying one thing one month and 
something else another. 
 
And I find it even more concerning because the Premier has 
been, of all people, a booster of the information age, telling us 
over and over again that this is the information age. We are 
entering the new technology; we’re enter in the new age of 
information; this is a wonderful new change that we’ve got. 
And yet he has denied us the basic information that we need to 
make wise decisions here in the House. 
 
I find it very difficult to make reasonable decisions in 
approving this supply Bill, and I find it of very grave concern 
that we have to be told over and over again how important 
information is – and yet it’s withheld. 
 
And it’s that kind of doublespeak that I’m finding myself really 
opposing in this House, and I want people in Saskatoon Centre 
constituency particularly to know that I find it very hard when 
information is withheld — not only withheld; when what we 
say isn’t what we really mean. 
 
There’ve been two examples in the budget that I find of 
particularly concern. There’s been much made of the 63 per 
cent increase in health care costs and yet there’s been no 
acknowledgement that many programs have been put into the 
health care budget that were not in there before. We’re just told 
over and over again there’s been this large increase, but we 
don’t know what it’s been spent on. 

An Hon. Member: — They don’t either. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Maybe they don’t know. But I want to know. 
Before I start approving any more expenditures, I want to know 
what you’re proposing that we spend the money on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — You tell me that Saskatchewan government 
resource revenues have fallen by 50 per cent since 1985, 
declining from roughly one-third of the government revenues in 
1981 to only 13 per cent today – and that was in the budget 
speech. And yet, there was never any acknowledgement that the 
reason that the resource revenues have fallen is because this 
government is not collecting them. So there’s more being said 
than what’s actually being admitted. And I find in that kind of 
doublespeak, it’s very difficult to make wise decisions. 
 
I want to know, when I approve an interim supply Bill, how 
much of these funds under this Bill is intended for the large, 
expensive, partisan politics support staff which now exists in 
this government. We know that, at the very least, the 
government has doubled partisan political support staff at the 
ministerial level. 
 
I understand that cabinet minister have 99 political staff 
members and that the Premier has about 60, and that the total 
cost of this is about $10 million. That’s a tremendous amount of 
money. 
 
I want to know how much of this money that I’m being asked to 
approve in this interim supply Bill is being spent for 
extravagant political advertising. I can see by the estimates that 
the total cost of advertising by the government is phenomenal, 
and I say that this cost reflects its deceit. The advertising that 
they’ve been paying for reflects the deceit that the government 
has been perpetrating on the people of Saskatchewan, and I 
protest on behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon Centre. 
 
I was deeply offended by the ad that came out in the 
Star-Phoenix and other newspaper right after the gas tax was 
announced, with big headings saying, “Important savings for 
Saskatchewan drivers.” That gas tax is no saving for 
Saskatchewan drivers. This is deception. This is the kind of 
propaganda that is absolutely unacceptable to people in 
Saskatoon Centre constituency, and I protest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — You’re expending a large amount of resources 
on advertising your programs, and there’s a basic inconsistency, 
also, in the advertising priorities. Those departments providing 
essential services to a great many people, for example, Social 
Services and Health, are not receiving the advertising support 
and assistance that befits their importance to people in this 
province. Instead, the availability of such service tends to be 
sporadic and selective. 
 
I was just really interested to find out that, for example, in 
advertising, the Highways budget, the Highways department, 
has spent $1,080,402 on advertising; Parks, 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

828 
 

$1,016,533; and Social Services only $563,728. 
 
The budget for Social Services only represents .17 per cent of 
the total spending on advertising by this government, and the 
budget for Health on advertising only .09 per cent. And just to 
tell you how serious this is for people, particularly the people in 
Saskatoon Centre constituency – many of whom are on very 
low incomes—is that advertising dollars for the Saskatchewan 
assistance plan, the family income plan and the Saskatchewan 
income plan within Social Services does not exist or there’s an 
absence of it. 
 
We discovered when we went around Saskatchewan talking to 
people about social services that many, many people on low 
incomes didn’t even know about the family income plan that 
was available to them to bring their earnings up to a minimum 
amount. These are families that are working on minimum wage. 
 
(1930) 
 
I don’t know if any of the members opposite have any idea 
what it’s like to work on minimum wage and support a family, 
but on $4.50 an hour, a person is only making about $9,000 a 
year. I have in my constituency men who are supporting their 
wives and children on that amount, and they’re entitled to get 
some assistance from the government to bring their income up a 
bit. 
 
And yet we find when we look at 1986, that only 8,084 families 
were enrolled in the family income plan, and 38,480 were 
eligible. A lot of people don’t know about that family income 
plan. Probably one of the reason they don’t know about it is 
you’re sitting on it because you don’t want to pay for it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Gordon Dirks and Paul Schoenhals 
know about it. They‘ve got a little bigger plan though, with 
hundreds of thousands . .  
 
Ms. Smart: — One of my colleagues has pointed out that there 
are many people getting money from this government who are 
already getting quite a lot. People like Paul Schoenhals and 
Gordon Dirks have got contracts from the government for very 
good incomes. And yet in Saskatoon Centre, and in other 
constituencies in this province, there are many people living on 
very little. I’m not sure that this interim supply budget is going 
to give them anything. I’m very concerned about how much 
they will see. 
 
I want to speak about this because it reflects to me a fact that 
this government, I don’t think, values where the money that 
they are proposing to spend comes from. It comes from the 
people who are earning a little bit. It comes for all the people in 
Saskatchewan who give in to the tax plan, who pay their extra 
taxes so that the government can have money to spend. 
 
I believe, that in deciding how that money should be spent, that 
we should think about it carefully and respect the work that’s 
involved in providing that money to the government – the work 
that many, many working people do in Saskatchewan to pay 
their taxes and to have their money, that’s collected by the 
government, treated 

with the respect that it deserves. 
 
I want particularly to know how much of the funds that are 
being approved now for April, May, June, and July, without me 
seeing anything except a recommendation that I approve an 
interim supply Bill. I have no documentation as to what’s going 
to be spent; I have no details on it. How much of these funds is 
going to be used already to move us closer to the 
super-technical institute that’s being proposed by this 
government? It’s being set up now. I want to know how much 
of this supply money is going to work towards getting that set 
up. It hasn’t yet been debated in this House. We need legislation 
to set up that super institute, yet you’re moving very quickly to 
set it up without that debate in the House. 
 
It’s just one more example to me of the fact that the government 
does not seem to respect the legislative process one bit. You’ve 
been so late in calling the legislature that now you have us in 
here over the summer to give you money to spend on things that 
have already been spent, and on things that we don’t know 
anything about, before we can get around to debating the 
budget. I find it, really, the most incredible process to be going 
through. 
 
I want particularly to refer to that super institute because I was 
surprised to hear the member for Saskatoon Mayfair say that the 
Minister of Finance has delivered a fair and honest budget and 
that this government has the integrity and conviction to do what 
is right in planning for our province’s future. I wonder how he 
can say that in connection with something like the proposals in 
education, when he’s been involved in education and he knows, 
for example, that not only will the super institutes be set up, but 
the move to privatized education is going to cost the people in 
the province a lot of extra money. And I want to speak on 
behalf of the people, particularly the women in Saskatoon 
Centre constituency that I have talked to, who have enrolled in 
Compucollege in Saskatoon Centre. Compucollege is a 
franchise operating at a profit, and the cost of the course there is 
astronomical. 
 
You’re closing down course at Kelsey, for example, in office 
administration – a course that was mostly women, and taught by 
women – and now the fee at Kelsey is just over $500, and now 
that the fee has gone up. It was $471 for a whole year’s tuition. 
And people going to Compucollege, many of those women, 
have been paying $3,495 for a six-month diploma course in 
business administration. That is a terrific fee for people to be 
paying. Accounting and computer courses at Compucollege 
cost 4,700-and-some dollars for a six-month course when they 
could have had the same thing at Kelsey, but the program at 
Kelsey has been destroyed. 
 
The courses at Kelsey that have been destroyed have been 
courses that have been particularly important to women – dental 
assistants, nursing assistants, office management, cosmetology, 
barbering and hair-styling – to mention five out of six that were 
closed down and eliminated completely, not to mention the 
teachers that were thrown out of work. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

829 
 

I protest on behalf of the constituents in Saskatoon Centre, that 
they have this kind of decision being made in education to cut 
the programs and at the same time being forced to pay these 
high rates at the private colleges. 
 
And then I notice with interest that the government is now 
proposing that students will have to take out $6,000 in student 
loans before any portion of that loan is forgivable, and it’s only 
going to be forgivable if you finish the course that you’re 
taking. 
 
Now when you look at the courses in the private institutes and 
you look at the cost – 3,000, $5,000 for a six-month course – 
you see that somebody could take out a loan for $6,000, pay for 
that course, finish it in six months, get the money back, and the 
government has paid that money to the private college. The loan 
is forgivable to the student, but the college has got that money. 
 
I want to know just what the plans are for the government in 
spending money on education. I don’t see that this is a 
progressive step, one bit. I see it a step backwards. I see it 
hurting women particularly – particularly the women in 
Saskatoon Centre from age 50 to 65 who have had to stop 
working in their particular work place because their health is 
broken down or because they have been put out of work by new 
technology, and they are looking for retraining. Many of them 
are going to classes at Compucollege, taking their whole life 
savings and putting it into courses. Many of them are not 
accredited. When they finish the course, they can’t get work. 
 
The travel agency business in one good example: they can take 
the course and have nothing to show for it at the end, and I 
suggest that the money in privatizing education is going in the 
pockets of people who already have it and don’t need it. It 
should be in public sphere, and I want to know more about this 
before I start approving budget estimates and interim supply 
Bills. 
 
Something else I wanted to talk about is the senior citizens. The 
Premier says, “Senior citizens have more financial assistance 
(and I’m quoting from Hansard) than they have ever had in the 
history of Saskatchewan.” Now many of the senior citizens – 
and I represent a constituency with over 30 per cent senior 
citizens – have told me that, yes, they do have a better life now 
than they’ve had in the past, and they appreciate what they have 
in terms of the government’s support. But they are very 
frightened now, and I’m getting a lot of phone calls from senior 
citizens, saying they have had good assistance in the past and 
now they are losing it. 
 
They are very worried. The good assistance ha been built up 
over the years; it’s not something that just happened last year. 
It’s been worked up over the years in a very solid program of 
support for seniors, and now they are very fearful of what is 
happening with the loss of the drug plan and with the loss of 
health care services. 
 
Much has been made of the fact that the NDP government for 
some time decided not to go forward with the building of 
nursing homes. That’s because, and the constituents in 
Saskatoon Centre know very well, that that’s because home 
care was developed in 1979 – a very important phenomenon for 
the people who are senior citizens in 

this province. Home care cut down on the need for nursing 
homes. Home care gave people support in their own homes. 
There are many people in Saskatoon Centre living in their own 
homes who really appreciated that kind of support, so that they 
would not have to go into an institution. And it seems to me 
only logical and sensible that a government would, when they 
introduce a program like home care, cut back on nursing homes 
until they could see the need to go forward. It was very sensible 
planning, in my estimation, a lot more sensible than the 
conservative government now. 
 
In Saskatoon constituencies there was a very nice service going 
called Evergreen Neighbourly Services. Evergreen neighbourly 
Services cost the government $78,000 a year. It was just the 
ideal program for support from a Conservative government 
because Evergreen Neighbourly Services extended home care 
on a volunteer basis to over 300 people in their homes in 
Saskatoon. It provided crisis service; it provided friendly visits; 
it provided meals on wheels on weekends; it was a program 
with three and a half staff people employed and 75 volunteers 
organized. And this is the government that talks about valuing 
volunteer work, valuing the work of seniors. That’s all rhetoric. 
It doesn’t mean anything when you take away the $78,000 that 
were supporting a really good program of volunteer work in 
Saskatoon, support for home care. And you’ve taken it away. 
 
And you talk about how you’ve been putting in nursing homes. 
The people don’t want to go into nursing homes; they want the 
home care service. They want that volunteer service. They 
appreciated the seniors going out to talk to each other. It was a 
program where strong seniors were supporting frail seniors – 
and you took the money away And I don’t know, when I 
support this interim supply Bill, what kinds of money I am 
supporting for who. But I do know that the $78,000 for 
Evergreen Neighbourly Services has been cut, and I’m sure that 
lots of other good programs are being cut, too. 
 
There’s another point that I want to speak to when I speak about 
his interim supply Bill, because it directly affects so many 
people I’ve talked with when I’ve been able to get back into the 
constituency. And that is the accusation that the opposition is 
trying to scare people and intimidate them, and inciting them 
into going out there and protesting things that they thoroughly 
don’t understand. And those are the words of the Acting 
Minister of Health the other day when he was speaking about 
the demonstration. And I find those words really insulting to the 
people of Saskatoon. 
 
They understand very well what they’re protesting. They know 
very well what’s inciting them to go out and to stand in line and 
to come out and to show their displeasure. They understand it 
very well. It’s a put-down to say that they don’t understand it. 
They know that change is not necessarily progress, that much of 
what they’ve built up in Saskatchewan can easily be destroyed 
and is being destroyed. They are concerned for themselves, the 
senior citizens. They are concerned for older people who are not 
yet 65 and believe me, it breaks my heart when I see people — 
particularly women, because so many women live in poverty – 
telling me that they can’t wait until they turn 65 so that they can 
get the 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

830 
 

old age pension. 
 
And the people who are protesting the drug plan and the people 
who are protesting the possibility of being charged for 
physiotherapy and chiropractors care are protesting on behalf of 
older people who are not senior citizens yet, who haven’t got 
that kind of fixed income. Their fixed income is very low. And 
many of the older people in my constituency are protesting not 
just for themselves, but for the younger people. They’re 
protesting because the programs that they’ve put so much 
energy into building up in Saskatchewan are for the future, not 
just for the pats. They want them for the younger people and 
they’re very concerned about the destruction that’s going on 
right now. 
 
The people that I’ve been talking to have a deep understanding 
of what’s going on. They have a deep love for the province, and 
they have deep interest in political action, and very much want 
to see people telling this government just how unacceptable 
these so-called changes are. 
 
When we had the budget speech, that day when the protesters 
were here at the legislature, I had the opportunity to stand in the 
Legislative Library with a constituent from Saskatoon Centre, a 
man in his 80s, who had taken the bus to come down that 
morning. And he was resting in the library before he went out to 
join the demonstrators on the steps of the legislature, and he 
was telling me with tears in his eyes of his great fear that they 
were ruining the province, and that everything that he’d fought 
for when he went to fight in the Second World War was being 
lost. 
 
(1945) 
 
And he said, Anne, you’ve got to do something, you and your 
colleagues on your side of the House, to stop the government 
from its destructive ways. 
 
He was afraid, and I had not instilled that fear in him. Believe 
me, I have not got that power to incite people. People know 
perfectly well why they’re protesting in the streets. And I say to 
all of you, to the chairperson, that the thousands of people who 
marched on the legislature are only the tip of the iceberg of 
protest in this province. 
 
The Premier may think that they march because they are pawns 
in the hands of the opposition, but as I say, he deeply insults the 
people of this province by saying this. The people who marched 
and the many thousands more who cheered them on – and there 
was cheering all the way along the streets of Regina, and horns 
honking in support, and in protest against the government – 
these are people who come from a wide variety of backgrounds. 
 
I know from the people I’ve talked to in Saskatoon that they’re 
people who care about their neighbours and about what’s 
happening to this province. They’re people from the most 
vulnerable groups in our society and they are people who are 
their supporters and their friends, and I know from talking to 
people in Saskatoon Centre that there are many, many 
kind-hearted people in this province who are very deeply 
concerned. They are 

people who are proud of what they have built up over the years 
in Saskatchewan and they’re not afraid of building for a future 
as long as it’s a future which is fair and just to all. 
 
On their behalf, I really want to express my grave concerns 
about approving this interim supply Bill. I feel almost as if I’m 
betraying people when I do because I want to see the estimates. 
I want to see what the money’s being spent on. I want a chance 
for all of us as critics in this side of House to have a chance to 
have our questions answered, and hope that they will be 
answered, because the people of Saskatchewan deserve 
answers. They don’t deserve the kind of treatment they had 
today in question period. 
 
They’ve put their sweat and their blood into the money that 
you’re now spending. It’s very important to them to know that 
it’s being spent wisely. They believe in the future of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — They’ve been building the future of this 
province and we’re building it with them and we will in the 
future, and I will be very reluctantly approving this interim 
supply Bill because I know that it means that money has to go 
out for social assistance. But on behalf of the . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! I’d like the members on both 
sides of the House to give the . .  Order! I’d like members on 
both sides of the House to give the member from Saskatoon 
Centre . .  to make her comments. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Just a conclusion and a pledge to the people of 
this province, and particularly the constituents of Saskatoon 
Centre, that I will certainly do all I can to try to get some 
answers out of this government as to how their money is being 
spent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to address the Assembly 
for a few minutes – a few minutes probably would be about 20 
minutes to one-half an hour. I know the members opposite 
would like to hear a few intelligent words from me, especially 
the former minister of Health, and I will accommodate him. 
 
Mr. Chairman, today we’ve heard many people from this side 
of the Assembly give ample reason as to why this interim 
motion should be debated today. In question period today, Mr. 
Chairman, we had the worst performance that I have ever seen 
of a premier in this Assembly. When asked upon by the Leader 
of the Opposition to answer questions in regards to this budget 
and the deficit, he simply refused to answer. He was asked, Mr. 
Chairman, if he knew last fall when he spoke to the people of 
this province in the election if the deficit would be $1.2 billion 
dollars, while he was telling the people that it would be only 
$500 million. He refused to rise in his chair and answer to the 
people of this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think that that is ample evidence that the 
Premier simply did not tell the truth last October. He 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

831 
 

deceived the people of this province as to the actual financial 
situation of this province. And I therefore say that we cannot 
believe the figures that are presented to us in the estimates, and 
I certainly do not believe the figures that we have before us in 
the interim supply motion. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t know whether the deficit for this year 
was $1.2 billion. The SGEU says that the budget is fudged. 
Many other people say that the actual deficit may well be more 
than that. Others say that it is less than that. But I do know one 
thing, Mr. Chairman: that the figures of $577 million is a 
fictitious figure. You simply cannot believe that figure. This 
Minister of Finance and the former minister of Finance were so 
far out in their estimates that one would be very naïve to believe 
the figures that they have presented to us today. 
 
So I say, Mr. Chairman, there is a credibility gap in the present 
Minister of Finance and certainly the Premier. Mr. Chairman, a 
week before the budget was presented to this province, on June 
12, the Premier, the Premier of this province spoke to the 
Canadian Club in Saskatoon, and when one of the members 
there asked him about his budget and about the cut-backs – I 
believe by a farmer by the name of Mr. McFarlane; it said 
McFarlane’s remarks drew a round of applause from the 
audience, but Devine defended the government’s record. 
 
Now I want to go on a little bit further. The Premier said this: 
 

The province could borrow more money, Devine said, but the 
deficit for the coming year (and I want the people to note this 
was five days before the Minister of Finance presented the 
budget – the deficit for this year) will likely be $1 billion . .  
 

And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, how can the Premier of this 
province, five days before his Minister of Finance presents the 
budget in this House, tell the people of this province that the 
deficit would be $1 billion? Is he incompetent? Does he not 
know what the truth is? I don’t think he does; I don’t think he 
knows what the truth is. 
 
Mr. Chairman, as I said the other day in this House, Sir Walter 
Scott, I’m sure, had the Premier in mind when he wrote: 
 

Oh, what a tangled web we weave, 
When first we practice to deceive! 

 
This Premier, Mr. Chairman, started to deceive in 1982; he 
can’t get himself off the hook; he has to continue to deceive in 
order to cover up, and I’m saying that this budget is as 
untruthful as any statement that I have read that hasn’t 
contained any truth whatsoever. You simply cannot believe the 
figures that are there. 
 
That is why, Mr. Chairman, it is so ironic that we have to 
approve this interim supply motion. Because there are people 
out in Saskatchewan who need that money, and if we don’t 
approve it, those are the people that are going to suffer. It’s not 
the Premier that is going to suffer; it is not the Minister of 
Finance that is going to suffer. They’ll take care of themselves. 
As my colleague from Saskatoon Centre has indicated, 150 
hacks, political hacks – 60 of 

them in the Premier’s office, another 90 distributed around the 
other ministers -–they’ll take care of their own. We know what 
they’ve done to their other colleagues who were turfed out by 
the people — $100,000 to Schoenhals; $500,000 consulting 
fees to Embury and company; and it goes on and on and on, Mr. 
Chairman. They’ll take care of their own but the opposition has 
a duty to defend the ordinary person out there. And, Mr. 
Chairman, I tell you that this budget has the wrong priorities. 
This interim supply therefore has the wrong priorities and that’s 
why this interim supply motion must be debated now. 
 
Mr. Chairman, for months on end we asked the government to 
call the legislature. Their reasoning was, well, we haven’t got 
the budget ready. And yet I am told – and yet I am told, 
Minister of Health, by people in the government, that the 
budget was ready two months ahead of time, two months ahead 
of time, but they simply didn’t want to present it to the people 
when everybody was watching TV. So they choose a nice time 
during the summer; nobody seems to be listening, nobody 
seems to care – they’re on holidays. That’s when they present 
the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I simply want to say to this government that you 
can’t get away with that kind of haphazard playing with 
democracy. There are some traditions in this province that the 
people out there hold fairly sacred, and I say to you that you are 
going to, in due course, pay for that decision. You’re going to 
pay the ultimate and that is a defeat in the next election. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the members opposite, and to 
the Premier and to the Finance minister, that this budget simply 
has the wrong priorities. It has the wrong priorities. You created 
a deficit over $3.4 billion in five short years. You were left with 
a province that was envied by many right across Canada. We 
had the fastest growing economy, the lowest unemployment; we 
had a diversified economy; and we gave you a surplus to work 
with. What have you done in that short time? You have created 
the largest deficit that this province has ever seen. 
 
And not only that, Mr. Chairman. What they have done is, in 
this budget, they have the audacity to give all the breaks and all 
the benefits to the big oil companies, to their friends, through 
patronage. So what did they do in this budget? They turn 
around and tax the ordinary person to the tune of almost $300 
million — $300 million. 
 
And by the way, I want to say to the Minister of Parks that Roy 
Norris gives you his welcome. I heard Roy Norris on the open 
line show this morning, saying . .  And where is the Minister of 
Parks? Where is he? I want to thank him for an increase of $138 
per week — $138 per week increase – at Pike Lake for Roy 
Norris and his family. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He finally sees the light. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I think Roy Norris has finally seen the light. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

832 
 

One hundred and thirty-eight dollar increase for one family per 
week to stay in our parks – in our parks, Mr. Chairman. That’s 
why I say this budget has the wrong priorities; this interim 
supply motion has the wrong priorities. 
 
This interim supply motion and this budget, Mr. Chairman, 
does not come to grips; it does not address the problems that 
exist in this province. I want to tell the Minister of Health – I 
want to tell him there with all his arrogance, with all his 
arrogance, that the people in Saskatoon . .  We have almost 
10,000 people on the waiting list. And when you have people 
who need a hip operation have to wait for over one year – for 
over one year – to get into a hospital, don’t tell me that you are 
giving high priority to health. 
 
When I was the minister of Health, we had a total of 3,000 
people on the waiting list in Saskatoon; now we have close to 
10,000. And I want to say to the member from Eastview: I’ve 
known him for a long time; I know that his office has been 
flooded with complaints by people of Saskatoon who simply are 
not getting the service that they should be getting. 
 
In tough economic times, gentlemen, ladies and gentlemen, you 
do not fight the economic situation on the backs of the poor. 
You don’t fight it on the backs of our senior citizens. You don’t 
fight it on the disadvantaged. These are not the people that 
caused this deficit. These are not the people that should suffer 
now because of your mismanagement, because of decisions that 
you made to cut the royalty rates to the oil companies. Don’t 
fight it on the backs of the poor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I tell you, with all the reasons I 
have already given you, the member from Cumberland House, I 
think, gave us probably the best reason why we should not 
approve this budget or should not approve this interim supply – 
and that is what you have done to the aboriginal people of this 
province. That is what you’ve done to them, the people that 
founded this country, the people that you should try and protect 
the rights of, and not do what you people have done; not cut 
their core funding just because Jim Sinclair told the Premier 
exactly what he should hear. Don’t take it off out of those 
people. Now don’t cut the native court workers. Don’t cut the 
native court workers in time of economic restraint. What you 
are doing . .  
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Chairman, what I want to say is that in tough economic 
times, you do not place the burden on the poor, the 
disadvantaged, or the senior citizens. This is the time . .  In 
tough economic times, Mr. Chairman, that is when you’re going 
to get more family breakdowns; that is when we’re going to get 
more women battering; that is when we’re going to have more 
child abuse; that is the time when these people, these groups, 
these non-government groups, need the money. The voluntary 
groups need that money to work with these people. It’s not the 
time to cut their grants. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, this budget, in my opinion, does 
not address the problem out there in agriculture either. Very 
little . .  In fact, the budget cuts, I believe, 23 per cent of the 
Agriculture budget. Where does this budget – I ask the former 
minister of Agriculture – where does this budget come to grips 
with the debts that the farmers have right now? Where does it 
come to grips with the commodity prices, the low commodity 
prices that the farmers are getting right now? Where does it 
come to grips with the high input costs that farmers have? 
Nothing in here in this budget. No, but you’ve cut the 
Agriculture budget dramatically. 
 
It wasn’t the farmers that caused your problem; it was your 
decisions, your priorities, your mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to simply conclude by saying that this 
budget is a betrayal. It is a fudged budget. Mr. Chairman, I want 
to conclude by simply reading from a number of clippings that I 
have here as to what other people feel about this budget – why, 
for example, the budget should not be approved. 
 
Here’s one: “Cuts hurt crisis unit”; “Interval House faces 
$27,000 cut in budget”; “Childfind Saskatchewan out of 
money.” The budget doesn’t come to grips with any of these. 
“Disabled protest cut-backs.” Why fight it on the disabled? 
 
“Provincial cut-backs have seniors fired up”; “Human rights 
commission alarmed by 25 per cent cuts”; “Leaner justice 
system left chasing criminals” “Cuts stun John Howard 
Society”; “Voice of the Handicapped cries out”; “Handicapped 
official blasts government cuts”; “Deficit cutting affects 
children”; “Cut-backs hit women’s dream of a new life”; 
“Funding cut-backs shock library board”; “Funding cuts hit 
harder in rural area”; “Provincial cuts anger P.A. mayor.” 
Who’s the mayor of P.A.! P.A. mayor. Oh, that’s Dick Spencer, 
isn’t it? Oh yes, Dick Spencer. Sure, oh yes, I remember now. 
“P.A. must borrow for capital works.” 
 
I’d like to end up by saying, “Klein says, municipalities lucky 
cuts weren’t higher.” Thank you very much, thank you very 
much! You’re a very . .  Now I’ll tell you, there is a kind and 
sensitive individual. You’re just lucky I didn’t cut you off 
entirely. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think from what I have said, this budget does 
not address the problems that exist in rural Saskatchewan or in 
urban Saskatchewan. We all know there had to be restraints. 
What I’m saying is the government simply chose the wrong 
priorities. They are fighting their restraint on the poor, the 
disadvantaged, and the senior citizens, when they should be 
looking at other areas. And I suggested, for example, the 
multinational corporations, the oil companies – these are the 
people who did well from 1982 to 1985 when oil prices were 
the highest they ever were. These people did well. 
 
Mr. Chairman, as I said, I very reluctantly have to support the 
interim supply motion because the people out there need the 
money, but I do it very reluctantly. Thank you. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

833 
 

Mr. Koenker: — This interim supply Bill was an insult to 
Saskatchewan people. It’s an insult to Saskatchewan people. 
For the government to come now and want approval for its 
spending plans is an insult, laughable if it weren’t so insulting – 
a request to supply one quarter of the year’s funding to a 
johnny-come-late government. 
 
The question is: where was the government earlier this spring 
when it was spending the people’s money? Hiding from the 
people, hiding from public accountability, hiding from this 
legislature and the process that takes place here. 
 
When it comes to this interim supply Bill, we have a 
government and a Premier who believes that the legislature isn’t 
necessary, that we really don’t have to be here, that we really 
don’t have to follow due process, that the cabinet can do things 
sequestered in its own hiding. 
 
It’s a sort of government by living in a hole, a government by 
executive decree or dictatorship. It’s a government that has 
disregard for parliamentary principles and for the will of the 
public, that the people be represented, that the people’s money 
and expenditure of that money be scrutinized by the 
representatives. 
 
During the months that we’re asked to cover by this interim 
supply Bill, the months this spring, February, March, April, 
May, the first half of June, there was no legislature in session. If 
it had been in session, there wouldn’t be any need for us to 
address this problem tonight. 
 
This was the single latest budget in Saskatchewan history, and 
Saskatchewan people aren’t likely going to forget that for a 
long time. Saskatchewan people, this spring, lived with a 
government acting by executive decree, and they resented it. 
Across the province people came to New Democrats and were 
saying, what can we do? What can we do to get this government 
accountable for its actions, to stop the cuts, the wild and 
reckless cuts that are hurting us and our children, our senior 
citizens? How can we put an end to these cuts? The answer was 
public pressure, in part. The people of the province brought to 
bear pressure on the government which resulted in this 
legislature being recalled. 
 
But also it was the threat of legal action that intimidated them to 
get back in here and deal with the public’s business. When the 
legislature wasn’t in session, there was no recourse for technical 
institute instructors, for students, for senior citizens, for low 
income families and seniors, to deal with the cut-backs that they 
were experiencing –no place where they could put their case, no 
place where they could have people plead their case, no place 
where the government would be forced to justify their actions. 
 
This government loves to practice deception, and loves to hide 
from the public – decisions in closed cabinet sessions and not 
on the floor of this Legislative Assembly. And so the question 
is, where was their public accountability? Where was their 
public accessibility earlier this spring when public funds were 
being spent? It wasn’t on the floor of this legislature, that’s for 
sure. What 

was the government doing when it wasn’t here? Well, it was 
cutting; cutting health programs. 
 
I have a constituent who sent a letter to the Premier’s office just 
within the last week and a half, who talks about the cut-backs to 
the chiropractic services. She explains the fact that she had been 
seeing a medical doctor regarding headache problems this 
spring, hadn’t been able to achieve any satisfaction, and finally 
ends up going to a chiropractor after exhausting all medical 
possibilities with physicians. And lo and behold, in seeing the 
chiropractor, her medical problems are solved. But now she 
writes irate to the Premier because the possibility of her 
receiving these services from the chiropractors are reduced by 
her inability to afford them. And she writes: 
 

If I had to pay for all or for part of these services, my 
financial situation would not have allowed the medical help 
which was very necessary to me. I cannot understand how or 
why your government would consider removing essential 
services such as this from our medical plan. 
 

It’s not just medical services that were cut. One hundred and 
forty-two technical instructors were cut while the government 
was in hiding, while public funds were being spent. One 
hundred and forty-two technical instructors: 39 at Wascana 
Institute; 32 at Moose Jaw Institute; 67 at Kelsey Institute; and 
even four at the P.A. Northern Institute of Technology, the 
showcase of the government’s progressive policies. So to speak. 
Over 533 student positions at Kelsey have been abolished by 
this government at a time when unemployment is at record high 
for young people between the ages of 16 and 21. 
 
Now it means that of five young people applying to Kelsey, 
only one has a chance of getting into the program for this fall. 
 
The certified dental assistants program had 50 positions 
available for this fall, with as many as 237 people applying for 
admission to this program for September of ’87. This program 
had an employment rate of some 85 per cent for the previous 
year, 1986. But this program was cut, and it’s history now. And 
we are being asked to pass this interim supply Bill to 
countenance the irresponsible actions of this government, this 
record of mismanagement and ineptitude. 
 
But there were certain areas where there weren’t cut-backs. 
There weren’t cut-backs to patronage appointments out in the 
public service, or patronage appointments right in the Premier’s 
office. We’ve already heard tonight about the $10 million worth 
of patronage appointments to cabinet ministers and the Premier. 
A real double standard. 
 
And the issue here then with this interim supply Bill really 
comes down to the issue of credibility. We’re being asked now 
to approve government spending plans, when they should have 
been approved far, far earlier. A government that disregards the 
public and denigrates the parliamentary process now, tonight, 
wants approval for its interim financing and funding, after it’s 
delayed the legislature, fudged on budget estimates, and 
delayed in releasing public documentation and records. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

834 
 

And one wonders what we can expect in the future, for next 
year, or a year or two in the future. A repeat performance, 
perhaps. This government, yes, is johnny-come-late to the 
legislature. It doesn’t want to be accountable. It wants public 
business to be postponed, to be covered up and delayed so there 
is no public accounting. 
 
And that’s because they are fundamentally incompetent; 
because they can’t manage the store. And this interim supply 
Bill that we have here tonight is symptomatic of that very 
incompetence. 
 
It will supply money – lo and behold, the taxpayers can 
probably scarcely believe this – they will supply money to build 
some $8 million worth of roads and bridges for Weyerhaeuser 
corporation in northern Saskatchewan this year. Some 
appropriate management of public funds. 
 
And that’s what we’re being asked to countenance in passing 
this interim supply Bill on June 29. That we should be 
presented with such a Bill – it’s an insult; an insult to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2015) 
 
In order for the government expenditures to continue, I think 
the opposition has no option but to go ahead and approve this 
interim financing in order not to add injury to the injurious and 
insulting policies that the government has practised so far. I 
plan to vote for this supply Bill, but I very much resent it, and I 
fundamentally regard it as an insult to Saskatchewan people and 
their political process. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I hesitated to rise in this 
particular debate on this resolution because the members 
opposite have had no opportunity to speak to this particular 
resolution. 
 
Now there have been some members across the way taking 
advantage of their opportunities to speak in this debate: the 
member for Weyburn, the member that leaps large cities at a 
single bound from Regina South, been saying a few comments 
in this debate, but unfortunately they’re . .  (inaudible 
interjection) . .  There he is again, trying to speak from his seat 
and not from his feet. Because unfortunately their comments 
cannot be recorded in the legislative documents here, and the 
member from Souris-Cannington as well. And it’s important 
that the members across the way be given an opportunity to 
have their feelings about his resolution placed on the record of 
this House. 
 
We have the feelings of the member for . .  the Minister of 
Finance, who put his comments on the record, sufficient to get 
the resolution before the House, and then he left. 
 
Now in the number of years that I’ve been in this House, Mr. 
Chairman, I’ve been able to gaze across the House from both 
sides and occasionally see a rascal across the way. But never, in 
my parliamentary experience, have I 

been able to gaze across the House and see so many rascals in 
this legislature. And these rascals in this legislature are all in 
this together. There’s a conspiracy of rascals here. There’s the 
ones from Eastview, the member from Eastview – he’s part of 
this conspiracy with these other rascals here; the member for 
Nipawin; the member for Wascana who’s had a couple of 
comments in this debate, unfortunately again not on the record; 
the member from Morse; the member from Yorkton; the 
member from Thunder Creek. They’re all part of this 
conspiracy which is before the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s unfortunate that they’re not taking part in this debate 
because we’d like to have their thoughts on the record. Perhaps 
they wish to speak on the Bill when it’s before the House. 
However, I’d like to hear their comments at some time in this 
debate because it’s important that when they should be silent, 
they are vocal, and when they should be vocal, they’re silent. 
And they’re very vocal before the election, and they tend to be 
silent after the election, except for a minimum amount of 
defence which is put forward by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Now this conspiracy practised by the Government of 
Saskatchewan is led by the attitude of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. And the attitude of the Premier of Saskatchewan 
is most adequately summed up by this article that appeared in 
the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on January 19, 1983, “Devine woos 
U.S. investors.” And in this article, quoting in part from the 
Star-Phoenix: 
 

Devine extolled the province’s riches and said Saskatchewan 
has so much going for it that you can afford to mismanage it 
and still break even. 
 

And he also reiterated – and this is something else that our 
Premier has undertaken on behalf of the conservative Party – he 
also reiterated his free trader stance. This article goes on to list a 
number of places the Premier is visiting in the United States to 
take the message to them that Saskatchewan has so much going 
for it that you can afford to mismanage it and still break even. 
And even the Premier of Saskatchewan has exceeded his 
wildest dreams about being able to mismanage Saskatchewan 
and still break even, unfortunately for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, the first Finance minister we had was an interesting study 
in the decline of Finance ministers. And this particular finance 
minister started with the Tory cook book back in ’83. And it’s 
interesting to note that the first, the beginning of this 
conspiracy, started with the first Finance minister in league with 
the premier and all of the members that sat on that side of the 
House and, for that matter, many that sat over on this side of the 
House at that time who are no longer with us today. 
 
Now, how did they start this off, Mr. Chairman? Well, the way 
they started it off was discovered, not only by the New 
Democratic Party, but by the auditor of Saskatchewan. And it’s 
reported in the Star-Phoenix of March 25, 1983. “Provincial 
auditor report backs windfall claim.” And it reads on: 
 

A recent report from the provincial auditor supports the 
NDP’s contention that late delivery of 

  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

835 
 

a . .  cheque saved the provincial government from a 
$300-million-plus deficit this year. 
 

This is the auditor’s report. 
 

The report, tabled in the legislature Thursday, questions the 
Progressive Conservatives’ decision to credit part of a $273 
million cheque from the federal government to the 1982-83 
fiscal year, thus holding their deficit (to about) $220 million. 
 

Now the consequence of crediting part of that cheque to the 
deficit of 1982-83 was that the debt, had they not done that, 
would have been in the neighbourhood of $330 million, rather 
than $220 million. And if it had been credited where it was 
earned, as the auditor states in his report, the surplus left by the 
New Democratic government in 1982 would have been closer 
to $250 million rather than $139 million. And here began the 
fiction of the cook book of the Conservative Party, and this 
conspiracy which they continue on today, and will attempt to 
carry on when the next election occurs in Saskatchewan, if the 
people of Saskatchewan do not become more acquainted with 
the action of the Conservative Party and their conspiracy. 
 
In order to perpetuate the conspiracy, it’s necessary to limit the 
amount of information that is made available or at least delay 
the information being made available to the public and to the 
members of this Assembly. We saw one of the steps last 
December when the government brought in Bill 5 which would 
permit them to do in the cabinet room that which was formerly 
done in the Legislative Assembly with regard to reorganizing 
the government. 
 
And that was followed later, Mr. Chairman, by the release of 
the reports of the government departments. And I have some of 
them here. I have a stack of them here, Mr. Chairman. And it’s 
interesting to note what the dates on these reports were. Here’s 
a Saskoil report, tabled June 18. The auditors’ statement was 
March 3, 1986, but it was not tabled in this Assembly until June 
18, ’87. Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation, tabled June 18; the 
auditor’s statement date was July 25, 1986. The Advanced 
Technology Training Centre, tabled June 18, 1987; the auditor’s 
statement was dated May 9, 1986 – over a year before it got to 
the members and to the public. Western Development Museum, 
tabled June 18 in this Assembly; but the auditor’s statement 
date was June 27, ’86. The Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
annual report, tabled June 18; the auditor’s statement was dated 
December 3, 1986. The Saskatchewan Research Council annual 
report was tabled June 18, but the other dates in the statement 
are August 15, 1986. Canada . .  Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
report, tabled June 22, 1987; the auditor’s statement is dated 
August 15, 1986. The Saskatchewan Beef and Stabilization 
Board, tabled June 22; the auditors’ statement was July 31, ’86 
– almost a year. The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Board, 
tabled June 22; the statement has other dates in it which indicate 
it was ready thereabouts December 22, ’86. The Saskatchewan 
Arts Board, tabled June 18, 1987; the auditor’s statement has a 
date on it June 6, 1986 – over a year this report’s been waiting 
around, hasn’t been presented to this legislature or to the public 
of Saskatchewan. 

Here’s one interesting – my MLA – June 18, the Saskatchewan 
Science and Technology report; the duty minister’s statement 
has a date on it, November 27, ’86 – months and months ago, 
and this is my own MLA, I’m ashamed to say, June 18, the 
Saskatchewan Culture and Recreation report, the letter of 
transmittal is October 1, 1986 – it was a long time in transit. 
Saskatchewan Health Research Board, June 18, ’87, it was 
tabled in this Assembly, the auditors’ statement date is July 24, 
1986. Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission . .  
and I realize this is painful for the member from 
Souris-Cannington because he was holding these reports as one 
of the key people in the cabinet, and I’m sure there’s only two 
or three key people in the cabinet and he is one of them. I’ve 
always regarded him as being a key person. He obviously was 
one of the ones who would have knowledge about these reports 
being held back from the public and from this legislature. 
 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, now 
here’s one that the Premier makes a lot of thunder on, and the 
reason he’s making a lot of thunder on it is that when you got 
an empty drum, you can make a lot of noise on it. It was tabled 
in this legislature June 18, ’87; the auditor’s statement is May 
26, ’86. This report’s been lying around the member from 
Souris-Cannington’s office, or somebody’s office, for an awful 
long time now. Saskatchewan Rent Appeal Commission, tabled 
June 18, ’87, transmittal letter is June 25, ’86 – pretty close to a 
year. Saskatchewan Advanced Education and Manpower, a very 
important department, student aid fund, June 18, ’87 it was 
tabled in this Assembly; the transmittal letter is September 8, 
’86 – been around for months and months and months. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Have you read them all? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh, there are many more. I want to 
assure the member from Souris-Cannington that there are many 
more of these reports that have been around for months, around 
for months, been held back – held back by this government to 
prevent information from getting in the hands of the public, to 
prevent information being presented to the opposition so they 
could begin studying this reports. Instead, all of these reports 
were dumped in the House within a few days of the opening of 
this session. 
 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Superannuation Commission tabled 
June 18, ’87; the auditor’s statement has a date on it, December 
19, 1986. Saskatchewan Public and Private Rights Board, June 
24, 1987; the letter of transmission was January 30, ’87 – it’s 
been around for close to six months. 
 
(2030) 
 
Here’s an important one, the Saskatchewan economic 
development and trade market development fund, June 25, ’87 
is when it was tabled; the auditor’s statement made is May 13, 
’86. Saskatchewan Heritage Fund annual report, tabled . .  
whoops! . .  tabled very recently – probably today – and the 
letter of transmittal has a date on it, October 19, ’86, and the 
auditor’s statement has a date on it, September 24, 1985. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

836 
 

So you see here, Mr. Chairman, what this government has been 
doing is to do things in secret outside of this Chamber — not 
within view of this Chamber – to hold back as many reports as 
they can – and there are many more reports – and keep 
information away from the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
The budget dates, of course, are well known hereabouts. Only 
two times since 1945 has the government gone beyond the end 
of the previous fiscal year before it could get its budget into the 
legislature. 
 
Now the tabling of reports in this legislature . .  It’s important 
that all members of the Assembly be informed, but the delay in 
tabling reports in this legislature was capped today with the 
tabling of the public accounts. And other members have spoken 
about the tabling of the public accounts, so it’s unnecessary for 
me to comment much further on it. But the auditor’s statement 
is October 10, 1986 on this particular one, and it was tabled 
today, and it’s the public accounts for 1985-86. 
 
Now, the Government of Saskatchewan says it couldn’t get its 
budget before the Legislative Assembly because of serious 
financial problems. Well, the province of Alberta, right next 
door to us, our sister province, managed to get its budget before 
the legislature before the end of the fiscal year – the previous 
fiscal year. They were able to do it. 
 
The Government of Canada, which has two problems — it has a 
Conservative government and it has serious financial problems, 
similar to Saskatchewan — it was able to get its budget before 
the Parliament of Canada before the end of the previous fiscal 
year. 
 
Let me give you one more example. The Premier and some of 
his key conspirators over there quite often refer to the province 
of Manitoba. Now one thing they do not refer to in the province 
of Manitoba – they’re silent on – is the fact that the province of 
Manitoba, which is having serious financial problems as well, 
was able to get its budget before its legislature before the end of 
the previous fiscal year. 
 
Now it seems like everyone in Canada is able to get their 
budget before their respective parliamentary bodies before the 
end of the previous fiscal year except the province of 
Saskatchewan. Now I wouldn’t want to blame that on the public 
service of Saskatchewan because for many, many years the 
public service of Saskatchewan got the budgets in, and you only 
have to examine the record, got the budgets in in March, 
February, March, February, March, March, March. And the 
only time it ever went beyond March was April 10, 1985, and 
June 17, 1987 – both under a Conservative government, and 
that’s since 1945, when I was just a little boy. I know you 
wouldn’t believe that. But here you have a government which is 
hiding the budget, following the same path that they are 
following on public documents, the same path they’re following 
on public accounts, the same path with the budget. Keep the 
information away from the public as long as possible – not 
because they can’t get it there; it’s because they’re hiding it and 
it’s a conspiracy. And as I mentioned, all of those members in 
the back row are part of that conspiracy. 

Now what are the consequences of this? Well a number of news 
items which appeared in the Star-Phoenix, for example, indicate 
some of the consequences of the actions of this government to 
municipal government. This headline appearing on May 19, 
long after the fiscal year was started: “Council stymied by delay 
in budget.” This is a report on Saskatoon city council meeting, 
and it talks about the cuts and the suspected cuts, and so forth. 
 
Another one here, “City bus fares may increase.” This is May 7, 
well after the start of the fiscal year. Well, city bus fares did 
increase. Then the budget came down and now the city is going 
to have to make a decision whether it increases those again, 
because even the city was not able to guess how much of an 
increase the province of Saskatchewan was going to put on 
sales tax or that they were going to institute . .  what level they 
were going to institute the gasoline tax at, a tax which they 
vowed never to put on in Saskatchewan again. 
 
“Funding cut-back shocks library board.” This is April 13, well 
into the new fiscal year, where the city of Saskatoon public 
library finds out from the drip-by-drip budget that this 
government has brought in that they’re going to lose 30 per cent 
of their provincial funding. 
 
“Province’s indecision skews city budget plans,” another item. 
This one is back in February when the city was well into their 
budgetary process. And I know this because I’ve had some 
experience with their budgetary process there. 
 
“School board . . ” There’s another one, back in February, 
“School board fears revenue loss if provincial budget delayed,” 
and members across the way, some of them, may recognize the 
name of the chairman of the board’s management and finance 
committee. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s that? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — It’s Dr. Lowell Loewen. I believe he was 
recently at one of your meetings. And what does Dr. Loewen 
say? He talks about a possible loss of close to $7,000 of revenue 
a day because of the delay of this province’s budget. And here’s 
quote from Dr. Loewen, which you can maybe ask him about 
next time you see him at one of your meetings: 
 

“That’s money we can’t afford to lose,” says trustee Lowell 
Loewen, chairman of the board’s management and finance 
committee. 

 
Some of the effects of this government’s actions by bringing in 
their budget later than it’s ever been brought in before. 
 
And it was thought, it was thought in the beginning, and this is 
some of the city’s estimate back in May 5, that the average 
home owner to pay $62.31 more because of the provincial 
government’s budget. Well, I suspect that that will be on the 
light side. And I, interestingly enough, was looking up my own 
tax bill for the city of Saskatoon and it’s up $79.60 because of 
this government’s actions. 
 
Not only do you have these municipal bodies that are suffering 
and are going to have to pass on the extra costs 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

837 
 

of this government’s actions to their ratepayers, either this year 
or next year, or they’re going to delay projects again – some of 
which have been delayed before under this government’s 
budgeting restrictions and lack of finance to municipal 
government. 
 
A member, my MLA, will remember the 51st Street overpass 
which is being built there. There’s a pile of dirt and it’s got 
weeds on it now for four years – been delayed by the city 
government because they cannot proceed with it. And my MLA 
will also know that the city put off repairs to major bridges in 
the city of Saskatoon because of cuts in finance – municipal 
financing – in the city of Saskatoon. And this is happening all 
over the province. 
 
That’s why we view this interim supply as a serious question. 
Not only do we believe that the interim supply was used 
improperly, there tends to be an opinion around that it was 
illegal as well. I think the members across the way, in assessing 
the situation, decided that here may be some validity to the 
suggestion that it was illegal. The consequence of that was that 
they called the legislative in, session into effect on June 17, and 
I suspect that the calling of the legislature would’ve been put 
off even farther had the government of Saskatchewan felt they 
could get away with it. 
 
But there was a public pressure building up; the legality of their 
moves was being called into question. And they hurriedly made 
an announcement the day of the meeting of the New 
Democratic caucus to consider this matter and announced that, 
three weeks in advance, the legislative session would be called 
into session. 
 
These are all serious questions which I unfortunately, Mr. 
Chairman, the members on the government side refuse to 
comment on. We would like to be able to accept the words of 
the Minister of Finance; however, we have learned not to trust 
the words of the Minister of Finance. We prefer to hear some of 
the words from the members that sit on the back benches so we 
can get them on the record on this particular matter. And I 
would implore them to take an opportunity now – you’ve got 
lots of time – take an opportunity now and speak to the 
Assembly on this particular matter. Do you feel that this 
government has lived up to the letter of the law and the spirit of 
the law with regard to budgets, tabling documents, holding back 
information? 
 
And I want to hear the members from across the way. This is a 
routine matter, approving interim supply. It would be a routine 
matter were it routine in nature, because in the past I have had 
the opportunity approve interim supply a number of times. 
Nothing out of the ordinary in the past. But there is certainly 
something out of the ordinary at the present time with regard to 
interim supply, and I would encourage the members across the 
way to put their views on the record so that we will all know 
what they are. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

I am saddened this evening that we stand in this Legislative 
Assembly to debate this motion calling for an interim supply to 
approve spending which has already occurred or will be shortly 
spent – the amount that hasn’t already occurred – the amount of 
$1,197,269,100. 
 
And I recall having walked away from this Assembly at 1:30 in 
the morning on December 24, and going back home to my 
home constituency and people saying, why in the world was it 
that the government chose to call a session three weeks before 
Christmas while everyone is preoccupied, getting ready for 
Christmas, and not paying a great deal of attention to the 
Legislative Assembly? Could it have something to do with that 
ominous Bill 5 that they introduced to allow the government to 
create government departments and wipe out government 
departments, and mix and match, and change budgets and staff 
and mandates of government departments, and do all of that 
behind closed cabinet doors? Could it have something to do 
with that? Could it be a symptom of this Progressive 
Conservative government which tells us that they have a new 
mandate, despite the fact that they did not get the majority of 
the votes in Saskatchewan? Could it have something to do with 
a new fashion of government in Saskatchewan, government 
which would take place behind closed cabinet doors and away 
from the open assembly of the Legislative Assembly? 
 
And people of my constituency said, when are you going to be 
going back? When are you going to return to the Legislative 
Assembly to do the business of this province, to consider the 
budget for the next year and the Bills that were promised in the 
Speech from the Throne? 
 
And over and over again I told constituents in my riding, we’ll 
be back in February. For years and years the session has been 
called in February – we’ll be back in February doing the 
business of the people. 
 
And so January came by and I anxiously looked in my mail for 
my notice for the call of the session in February, and there was 
no letter. Through February I looked through my mail box 
every day looking for the letter to announce the call of the 
session of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, and there 
was no letter. 
 
(2045) 
 
In March I surveyed my postal box every day looking for this 
long-awaited letter to call the legislative members back to the 
session to do business for the people of Saskatchewan, and 
there was no letter. Well I thought surely now that the fiscal 
year has expired, now that we’re into the new fiscal year, we’re 
into April, surely this long awaited letter will arrive and 
checked my mail box throughout the month of April and there 
was no letter. 
 
Well I thought this is virtually impossible, that we couldn’t 
have gone this far, and we found ourselves moving into the 
month of May. For the first half of the month of May there was 
no letter, and then finally, finally the New Democrat caucus 
decided that enough is enough, and we will have to sit down, 
and if it is the only way to force the government to govern, to 
take action in the courts, that we will have to do that, and we 
gathered – four weeks prior to the call – four weeks prior to the 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

838 
 

Legislative Assembly beginning, in the morning and at noon. 
 
At noon of the morning that the New Democrat caucus decided 
that we would have to take legal action to force the government 
of Saskatchewan to govern, the Premier wandered out and said, 
with four weeks notice, when the norm is two – 10 or 14 days is 
normal – but with four weeks notice the Premier said, we’re 
going to finally get to the business of Saskatchewan and you 
can expect your letter in June; and finally I got my letter. 
Finally I got my letter that said on June 17, on June 17 we’re 
going to begin to do the work of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So here we find ourselves tonight, Mr. Chairman. We find 
ourselves here this evening on June 29, debating a Bill to 
provide for interim funds in the amount $1.2 billion which has 
already been spent. And I ask myself: why are we doing this? 
Why are we doing this? Why do the members on this side have 
the concerns that we’ve expressed over and over again? And I 
say to myself, these are the symptoms we are seeing this in this 
debate tonight, a symptom. And I’m not sure what it’s a 
symptom of, because it’s hard to decide. 
 
It’s hard to decide if this is a symptom that we are debating 
tonight because the government has a plan to deceive the people 
of Saskatchewan – option number one. Or is it a symptom that 
we are debating this interim supply Bill tonight because the 
Government of Saskatchewan is plagued with incompetence – 
reason number two. Or is it reason number three, that we are 
debating this Bill tonight because we have a government in 
Saskatchewan which operates by a partisan political agenda and 
a partisan political agenda only, and this government, for the 
same reason that it’s felt that it was in order to call the session 
three weeks prior to Christmas to introduce Bill 5 to conduct 
government behind closed cabinet doors . .  Is it the same 
reason that we are then called in the middle of June to debate 
the government’s business while through the months of July 
and August the people of Saskatchewan go on holidays? Could 
that have something to do with why we’re sitting here tonight? 
And I am astounded . .  I am astounded, Mr. Chairman, that 
after this Bill was introduced, member after member from the 
New Democrat opposition caucus, ten in number, have risen to 
debate this Bill, and not one single member on that side has had 
the courage to stand . .  has had the courage to stand and say 
why it is important to debate this Bill tonight – not one. 
 
Oh, we’ve heard the catcalls; we’ve heard the member from 
Souris-Cannington; we’ve heard the member from Regina 
South; we’re heard the member from Weyburn catcalling across 
the Assembly as to why it’s so important that we are debating 
this now. But not one, not one has had the courage. And I say to 
you, Mr. Deputy Premier, will you stand and have the courage 
to tell the people of Saskatchewan why we are debating this 
interim Bill tonight? And you did not have the courage to 
introduce the budget prior to the end of the fiscal year. Will you 
have the courage to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, let us look, Mr. Chairman, to the 

track record because this government is fond of claiming its 
firsts – and believe me, it’s had some doozies. Let’s take a look 
at the track record of the conduct of the business of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Let’s take a look, Mr. Chairman, 
in modern history. 
 
Let me start with the year 1945 and take a look at the dates, the 
dates upon which the public accounts were made available to 
the members of the opposition and to the people of 
Saskatchewan – the public accounts which outline the 
expenditures that were actually made by government 
departments on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. Let me 
read, Mr. Chairman, to you and to the people of Saskatchewan, 
the track record of the good conduct of business of the 
Government of Saskatchewan since 1945. Let me present to 
you the dates at which public accounts were made available 
following the completion of the fiscal year prior. If you listen 
carefully, Mr. Chairman, you’ll see that there is a pattern. 
 
On February 19, 1945, the public accounts were tabled for the 
year 1943-44, approximately 10 and a half months following 
the completion of the fiscal year. Now without making 
reference to the years . .  Let me just refer to the calendar dates 
by month, from the years 1945 until we get to more current, and 
then we can look specifically at the track record of this 
Conservative government. 
 
We saw the public accounts tabled in the Legislative Assembly 
on February 19, 1945, then February 22, then February 11, then 
February 17, February 21, February 21, February 12, February 
12, February 18, February 15, February 14, February 10, 
February 15, February 17 – this may sound a bit monotonous to 
the member from Regina Wascana, but if you listen carefully, 
even you will be able to understand that there is a trend here – I 
say to you. 
 
They were tabled then in 1959 on February 13, February 15, 
February 14, February 23, February 15, February 7, February 
15, February 14, February 9, February 19, February 5, February 
27, March 3, March 6, February 6. And then we began to see 
the beginning of a new trend, a new trend to deliver these 
reports to the people of Saskatchewan earlier, that started in 
1973. In December 19, 1973, December 17, ’74, January 28, 
March 7, March 28, March 15, and then the beginning . .  In the 
final three years of the New Democratic government, the public 
accounts were reported on December 14, December 12, and 
December 10. In each of those cases, Mr. Chairman, the public 
accounts were presented less than nine months after the 
conclusion of the year in which those expenditures were made. 
 
And then we come, then we come, after 38 consecutive years of 
modern history in which the public accounts were delivered by 
March at the very latest, we then come to the beginning of the 
term, of the first term, of the Progressive Conservative 
government. 
 
And what did we see? Well we saw, we saw the first time that 
this government produced those public accounts, they came in 
in February 24, 1983 – a little later. Perhaps they could be 
excused because they were rookies as they told us and they 
weren’t sure what they were doing. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

839 
 

Well after having a year’s experience in 1984, they came in on 
March 23, the second latest date in modern history. The 
following year, in 1985, we had a new record, another PC 
government first, and we had the latest date in modern history 
in which the public accounts were presented – April 12, 1985. 
Then in 1986, then in 1986, they got their act together, and they 
came in four days before the end of the year, March 27, the 
third latest date in modern history. 
 
And now we have, now we have, Mr. Chairman, another first – 
another first for this track record of this inglorious government 
opposite – the latest date, the reports for 1985-86 being 
presented to us here on June 29, 1987, a full 15 months later, 
Mr. Chairman, a full 15 months following the completion of the 
fiscal year that we had to wait, until today we received the 
public accounts for 1985-86. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that that is a sign the conduct 
of this government in producing the reports of its financial 
transactions is the betrayal of good business practice. It is a 
betrayal of the principle of open government in making 
information available to Saskatchewan people. And most of all, 
it is a betrayal of the trust of Saskatchewan people. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, that’s how they’ve done in producing the reports in 
the context of Saskatchewan history. 
 
How do they fare on the other end? How do they fare in 
producing the plans for the expenditure of budgets? And let’s 
take a quick review again, Mr. Chairman, and take a look at the 
track record for modern history in the governments of 
Saskatchewan over the years beginning in 1945, what were the 
dates in which the governments of Saskatchewan presented 
their plans to the people? These were the plans that the 
government had put together to state what their priorities were 
in the programs that they were going to deliver for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And listen carefully again, Mr. Chairman, because there’s a 
trend. There’s a trend that takes place, not over years, but it 
takes place over decades. And so when were the budgets 
presented? In 1945, the budget was presented on March 15, that 
was by the Tommy Douglas government, after having one 
office in June of 1944. And let me go through the months and 
the dates after that. In consecutive years, Mr. Chairman, we had 
budgets presented on March 14, March 6, February 26, March 
2, March 8, February 21, February 27, march 4, March 3, 
March 2, March 5, March 6, February 28, February 27, 
February 26, February 27. There is a trend again, Mr. 
Chairman. March 9, March 1, February 21, February 19, 
February 25, February 17, March 1, February 18, March 2, 
February 26, March 10, February 9, March 8, March 14, March 
24, March 10, March 7, March 8, March 13, March 5. And then 
March 18 was the budget presented by the member from Regina 
North East in 1982. 
 
And so you will see, Mr. Chairman, over that period there were 
38 consecutive years in which the budget’s plan for the people 
of Saskatchewan was presented in either the month of February 
or March – for 38 consecutive years. 
 
Well, along came 1983. Along came 1983 and a new 
administration which does things in new and different 

and sometimes mind-boggling kinds of ways. So what do they 
say? In 1983, the first budget – they made it, Mr. Chairman. 
They got the budget in before the end of March. In fact, they 
got it in two days before the end of March. They came to the 
people of Saskatchewan and said, here’s our plan for the year to 
come. 
 
In 1984 they got it in a week before the end of March – March 
21. And then we come to 1985 and another first, another first 
for the PC government of Saskatchewan, and the first time in 
modern history in which the government delivered its plan for 
the people of Saskatchewan after the fiscal year had actually 
begun. 
 
In 1985 we didn’t see the budget until April 10, and that was a 
new record. That was the latest budget presented in modern 
history in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1986, they say they got their act together and they delivered 
it five days before the end of the year, on March 26. 
 
And so here we are, 1987, after 82 years of history in the 
province of Saskatchewan, having had only one budget 
presented after the beginning of the fiscal year and that being 
presented by the members opposite. In 1987 was the budget 
presented in April? No. Was it presented in May? No. The 
budget was presented, finally, on June 17, 1987. 
 
What a statement of either incompetence, deceit, or betrayal – 
and it’s hard to make up your mind which it is. 
 
So that’s the track record, Mr. Chairman. That’s the track 
record in producing the reports of the expenditures; that’s the 
track record in producing the plans for the expenditures of this 
government sitting opposite. Well should we expect that having 
done things in this new and phenomenal kind of way, having 
pulled together the best business minds of the PC caucus, that 
they have managed our affairs better then they have ever been 
managed before? They like to tell us how business-like they 
conduct government. 
 
(2100) 
 
So what’s the record? Here is the government that inherited a 
$139 million surplus – a $139 million surplus they inherited. 
And in their first year, and their first year said, well, we’re a 
little wild and reckless and we’re not too sure just what we’re 
doing here. Son of a gun, we haven’t quite figured these things 
out as well as we should have. We know that. 
 
And they told us in the fall of 1982 that we’re going to have a 
record deficit in Saskatchewan. They said we’re going to have a 
deficit of $220 million. We know what to do with surpluses; we 
wipe them out. We’re going to have a deficit of $220 million. 
And at the end of the year along came the Minister of Finance, 
along with his prediction for the next year’s expenditure, and he 
said, whoa. We were a little off. We said we were going to run a 
deficit. We ran a deficit; we kept our promise; we ran a deficit, 
but we missed it just a little bit. And he said, whoops! We were 
$7 million off. It was a little bigger than we thought –not too 
bad. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

840 
 

But he said, you know, we got things under control. We know 
how to run government. Now we’ve been here for a year. 
We’ve found the keys to the washrooms. We know how to 
balance the books and so he said, in our second year, we’ve got 
things in order, and this year we’re only going to have a $317 
million deficit. And along came the end of the year and the 
Minister of Finance stood up again and what did he say? 
Whoops! He said we missed it by $14 million this year. Not too 
bad for the best business minds in the PC caucus. 
 
But you know, we’ve go the problem in hand now, we’ve got 
the problem in hand now, and look out, people of 
Saskatchewan, ‘cause things are getting better. Next year you’re 
only going to have a $267 million deficit. And along came the 
Minister of Finance at the end of the year, and he stood up in 
this House, and what did he say? He said, whoops! Missed her 
by $112 million this year. It was a little bit bigger than we 
thought. But then he told us, we’ve had 3 years to figure things 
out and we have finally got things under control. Next year 
you’re only going to have a $291 million deficit, people of 
Saskatchewan. And oh, we were all so encouraged that finally, 
finally they were going to manage our affairs with good 
business acumen. 
 
And along came the Minister of Finance at the end of the year. 
He said, we were going to have a $291 million deficit, but 
whoops, we missed her again. How much did we miss her by? 
Just a little bit, just missed her by $293 million. You know 
some times things change —a little tough to predict. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s $1,200 a family. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Twelve hundred dollars a family my colleague 
says – and he’s right – in increased debt for every man, woman, 
and child in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But along came 1986-87 when the Minister of Finance said, you 
know, folks, this is an election year. We’ve been at this 
business of governing for four long, lean years, and we have 
finally, we have finally got our act together, and this year just, 
to show you we’ve got our act together, we’re going to have the 
biggest deficit that we’ve ever forecast in the province of 
Saskatchewan. He said, as a symptom of our good business 
management this year we’re only going to have a $389 million 
deficit. And then he stood up, he stood up in this room across 
the way on June 17 and he gave us the biggest whoops of all. 
He said to the people of Saskatchewan, the big whoops this year 
folks is that we made a slight miscalculation and we only 
missed the deficit by $846 million. 
 
But we were reassured on June 17 – and this may sound a shade 
familiar – we were reassured on June 17 that as a sign of the 
good business management of the members opposite with the 
best business minds of the PC caucus and the PC Party, that we 
are only going to have, once again, the biggest deficit projection 
in the history of Saskatchewan. And he said, this year folks just 
to show you that we’ve got our act together, we’re only going to 
run a $577 million deficit. 

Well I dread the day when we get the next report because I’ll 
tell you, Mr. Chairman, those whoops are getting painful. 
They’re getting painful for the people of Saskatchewan, and the 
people of Saskatchewan are beginning to wonder – they’re 
beginning to wonder about the business acumen of the members 
opposite, led by a Premier who told the financiers in New York 
in 1983 that Saskatchewan has so much going for it you can 
afford to mismanage it and still break even. Can you believe 
that? The Premier of Saskatchewan. That was prior to the 
whoopsies. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, is there any doubt why the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying and are asking, can you believe what 
they say when you see what they do, and why the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying every day when they drive by a 
gasoline station up and down Albert Street in Regina and all 
across the province, gasoline 46.9 cents, a reminder that you 
can’t trust a Tory? 
 
And so we find ourselves here tonight. We find ourselves here 
tonight debating this Bill, asking for approval, approval to 
spend money that’s already been spent — $1.2 billion, nearly 
$1.2 billion that’s already been spent, and we’re asked to give 
approval to that Bill and the money is already gone. 
 
And I say, Mr. Chairman, I say in conclusion, that I despise the 
fact. I despise the fact that we are gathered here tonight to 
debate this Bill – whether it’s a symptom of mismanagement, 
whether if it’s a symptom of incompetence, whether it’s a 
symptom of deceit, or whether it’s a symptom of partisan 
politics on the part of the government. Whatever the reason, 
whichever one they choose to tell us as the explanation for this 
exercise tonight, I despise the fact that we’re here. 
 
And I point out in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, that I am the tenth 
consecutive member of the opposition to rise and express our 
concerns and our reservations simply about the fact that we 
have to debate this Bill. I invite just a single member opposite – 
I invite the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan to have the 
courage to stand up and tell the people of Saskatchewan why 
it’s good for them, and why they’ve done such a wonderful job, 
and why we have to be debating this Bill, and what that has to 
do with their best interest. I invite the members opposite, Mr. 
Chairman, to stand up and explain to us what they’re doing 
because, quite frankly, I don’t understand, and I don’t think that 
the people of Saskatchewan understand or accept that we’re 
doing what we’re doing here tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Bringing in your heavy hitters to wrap it 
up? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — You betcha. Always save the best to last, and I 
will give you now a few thousand of my well-chosen words as 
to why this interim supply Bill makes me very nervous I’d just 
like to talk about a bit about the money you didn’t spend. We 
have a situation in agriculture where your budget cut 26 per 
cent out of the agriculture sector – 26 per cent, a quarter of it – 
more than a quarter. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

841 
 

Money was spent by this government on a number of things, 
but one thing they didn’t spend money on, Mr. Chairman, were 
a few things at the University of Saskatchewan. Soil testing is 
one of them. Cut the soil testing out. So now the farmers, when 
they go get their soil tested so they know what fertilizers to put 
on, what nutrients they need, where does the money come 
from? Out of their own pocket. This government spent money, 
but it didn’t spend it on the farmers in that respect. 
 
It didn’t spend money on the farmers with respect to feed 
testing lab — $200,000 a year for feed testing. Beef producers 
in this province looked forward to sending in their samples to 
know exactly what nutrients they have – a cadillac system cut 
out from under the beef producers of this province. This 
government says it’s supporting – I say it’s knocking the knees 
out from the people, the farmers of this province, because the 
money comes directly out of their pocket. And later I’ll tell you 
where they are spending the money. 
 
Something else that happened to the University of 
Saskatchewan was the extension division in poultry. The supply 
and management business in poultry has taken the industry to 
its greatest heights ever seen in this province. We have a 
situation where 25 per cent of the poultry farms were monitored 
as far as egg production, as far as health of stock. They had two 
staff, a veterinarian and another researcher, telling farmer show 
they could improve their production and they brought the 
quality of production up to its highest degree. What does this 
government do? It didn’t spend any of this money supporting 
their farmers who are producing eggs and poultry in this 
province. 
 
What else didn’t it spend its money on? It didn’t spend its 
money on some important social things in this province. It’s 
reducing, in the next four years, its support for agricultural and 
horticultural societies, something the rural people in this 
province could go to, could work together, and have a fair or an 
agriculture, horticultural show to get away from their 
frustrations, to get away from the mental turmoil they’re going 
through. And how does this government respond? No. You 
guys out there – take the money out of your own pocket if you 
want to have any social benefits for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They didn’t stop there, Mr. Chairman, they went a little further 
and they went and grabbed a hold of the 4-H. The children of 
this province who enjoy learning, and combine that learning 
with fun. And they didn’t spend any of this money on that. 
They went even further, a whole $10,000. 
 
But the Premier time and time again tells the Women’s Institute 
that they are the very most important people in rural 
Saskatchewan because they tell their peers and their children 
the benefits and the education aspects of women in rural life. A 
whole $10,000, and what do you do? Knock the knees out from 
under them. Rhetoric, idle rhetoric. 
 
I think some of the money could be spent making a couple of 
trips to Ottawa telling the Prime Minister about why there 
shouldn’t be variable rates, and telling the 

Premier why there shouldn’t be free trade. But do they spend 
money on that, Mr. Chairman? No, because they do not support 
the rural fibre of this province, the farmers and rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And I think, Mr. Chairman, with a record like 
that, the only thing that should accompany a record like that is a 
mug shot and fingerprints. Because I believe that it’s criminal, 
the things they are doing to this province in that respect. 
 
Other things that’s happening, Mr. Speaker, with regards to 
where this interim supply of money went. At the same time, at 
the same time that one minister was on the phone to a client, to 
a person from rural Saskatchewan, saying, why can’t I get into 
the hospital; why can’t I get my cancer treated? At the same 
time that person is on the phone to one minister, down the hall a 
little further, what’s happening? Another minister is on the 
phone to George Hill saying, George, have you got enough 
money? Is 200,000 bucks a year enough for you, George? 
 
At the same time that the dental therapists of this province 
found out that they had the knees kicked out from under them, 
at the same time that they wiped out their entire livelihood, and 
one of them was on the phone to one minister, down the hall 
what’s happening? Another minister says, Tim, is 500,000 
bucks enough for you and your buddies to study how we 
down-size this government? That’s where the money went. 
 
At the same time that the drug prescription plan was being 
eviscerated, at the same time that minister was on the phone 
saying, how much do you need? You know the people of 
Saskatchewan have got lots of money. At the same time that 
was happening, what are they telling to the hospitals? We’re 
closing down your wards. 
 
This is the type of hypocrisy that we have seen, and that’s why 
it’s very, very, very difficult for me to vote for this interim 
supply Bill, although we on this side have the compassion to 
know that there are people out there who need their money. 
And although we know the hypocrisy is there, the idle rhetoric 
is there, and the mismanagement is there; although we know 
that they are sitting here on the other side of this House talking 
about issues that affect us provincially, talking to their federal 
counterparts in Ottawa – I like to call it saying harmony with 
Brian and the brain dead – the same time that’s happening, the 
people, the rural fibre of this province, is being literally wiped 
out. 
 
(2115) 
 
Where is the money? Where is the money? How much of this 
money was spent in rural Saskatchewan to sustain rural life as 
we needed, to sustain the populations of the farm, to sustain the 
populations in our rural towns? Where’s the money? Was that 
money spent? I say no, it was not spent, and it should have 
been. 
 
We see the people in the nursing homes paying more money. 
We see home care, rural Saskatchewan, which is a program that 
has greatly taken the emphasis off the need 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

842 
 

for building more nursing homes, we see their fees increase 67 
per cent for those on full subsidy – 67 per cent increase. That’s 
the type of hypocrisy that this government dictates. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I will not go on any further, but I thought I 
must rise to say . .  to tell you and the members opposite, and I 
would like just one of them, even if you come from the back 
benches, to get up and justify to what you’ve done – justify to 
the people. 
 
And I didn’t mind not speaking in the budget debate. I didn’t 
mind not speaking in this budget debate because I know you 
over there need all the time in the world to try to justify this 
decrepit budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And one more thing, I don’t think you’ll ever 
have enough time in your lifetime to justify this budget. Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I spoke at some length earlier in this debate on this 
committee. I would like to take some time now and address 
some questions to the Minister of Finance dealing with this 
resolution. 
 
This resolution that’s before us asks this Assembly to approve, 
with interim supply, the expenditure of $1.197 billion. Most of 
that money has already been spent by special warrant. I ask the 
minister the following question: in this resolution that is 
provided before us here today, what amount covers the special 
warrant expenditure which you have made already, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I indicated at the outset, it was for the 
special warrants plus the month of July, so you can take 
one-twelfth of the proposed budget, and except for, I think it’s 
$300,000 . .  Provincial Auditor will give you the figure. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just while we’re waiting for your 
officials, I just repeat my question. The questions is this: what 
amount of this $1.197 billion is retroactively to pay for the 
special warrants which your government approved in cabinet 
and spent without authorization of the legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated how we could quickly 
calculate it if we wanted to take a minute. We take one-twelfth 
for the month of July of the budgetary expenditures less, I 
believe, about $300,000, if I recall, on the Provincial Auditor. 
We’ll get it. 
 
If you go to your supplementary estimates, you’ll have your 
special warrants. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Will you introduce your assistant? Is it 
your deputy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, the acting deputy of Finance is Jack 
Vicq. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I just wondered whether you 
can ask your acting deputy who has been very instrumental in 
putting together this interim supply Bill, if he can inform 
through you, this House, how much of this interim supply Bill 
consists of the special warrants which we have to pay for, or 
you have to pay for retroactively? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, you know, I mean it’s just a matter 
of getting someone to add up the various subvotes, but they’re 
all set out in the supplementary estimates that were tabled, and 
they are done in the traditional manner. Again, if you wanted to 
simply add up the information that you have, we will get it 
done, but it’s obviously going to take a few minutes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m really quite shocked. Mr. Chairman, 
I’m really quite shocked. Here we have . .  the minister comes 
to this House; he introduces a resolution; he asks that this 
House pass on this resolution to spend $1.197 billion. That’s 
not loose change. That is hard-earned taxpayers’ money that the 
minister asks us to spend. He has with him the deputy minister 
who does, I’m sure, an adequate job. Surely he can turn and ask 
his deputy, who must have written this Bill, how much of this 
Bill will be to cover the money spent by special warrant through 
cabinet order without ever coming to this legislature. Is it $928 
million? Is it $700 million? Is it $600 million? Very simple 
question, and I would like a very simple answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — You know, one of the real difficulties, Mr. 
Chairman, is giving these guys too much information, giving 
the opposition too much information, because they don’t know 
what to do with it. We’ve given this information to the hon. 
member, the supplementary estimates. He didn’t even take the 
time to add up the information. Now we can go through all the 
subvotes, all the information and add it up and . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . .  taking the time of the House all day long 
to ask for information, and then the hon. member has nerve to 
stand up before the people of the province and say he didn’t 
read the information that he was given by the opposition. Now, 
we’ll go through and we’ll get it all added up for the hon. 
member, as I’ve simply indicated to you that the number that’s 
in the Bill, and I believe you have that number; I gave the 
number to the Leader of the Opposition this afternoon, of 
$1,197,269,100. What I indicated is that we’ll go back and 
we’ll break it down – one-twelfth of that is for July. 
Approximately 300,000 is for the Provincial Auditor, as I 
explained to the Leader of the Opposition today. We’ll do 
one-twelfth and take it back down. Or we can go through the 
process and add up all the information that you have been trying 
for, for I don’t know how long, all day today. 
 
And then you have it, and you don’t know what to do with it. 
You don’t know what to do with it. You stand up all day long, 
Mr. Chairman, and you’ve asked for information after 
information. And you know, Mr. Speaker, we heard some rather 
funny statements today. We had some rather funny statements 
today. I think the accusation was made by several members that 
the Minister of Finance was doing things outside the legislature. 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

843 
 

I’m going to remind the hon. members of a famous Finance 
minister, who pre-dates the Finance critic . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I would ask the member from The 
Battlefords to allow the Minister of Finance to make his . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s not giving an answer. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Are you challenging the Chair? 
Allow the Minister of Finance to make his comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There was a 
famous Finance minister who was well known across Canada 
for his cries of economic “chouse” in the world. We went 
through a budget, hearing about economic “chouse” until 
everybody found out he meant chaos. Didn’t know what the 
word was himself, and yet he was entrusted with the public 
moneys opposite. 
 
Here’s what the member for Finance, the former member for 
Regina North East by the name of Mr. Smishek . .  Do you 
know what he did? He left the legislature; the legislature 
adjourned in December 1, 1976. Do you know what he went out 
and did December 8, 1976? He was afraid to do it in the House. 
He announced a 3 per cent income tax hike, the largest single 
income tax hike, and he was afraid to do it in the legislature. 
Mr. Speaker, all I suggest to the hon. members is that it’s all 
right to get into the political debate, but please, for heaven 
sakes, let’s be a little more accurate than you were today. 
 
And I take a look at some of the other budget debates. I look at 
some of the other budget debates, Mr. Chairman. I know the 
hon. members don’t want to hear this, but the Ontario budget 
has not been brought in within its fiscal year since 1979. 
 
Now I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not all right for a 
Progressive Conservative government, but it is all right for a 
Liberal government propped up by agreement by the New 
Democratic Party. And I think the public in Saskatchewan are 
quite interested to recognize that all the rhetoric we’ve heard for 
some time, and all the inflamed rhetoric turns out, Mr. Speaker, 
to be less than accurate, to say the least. And I think I’m putting 
the best face on that when I say that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a lot of rhetoric today; we’ve had 
numerous members; we’ve had members who wouldn’t 
participate in the budget debate, screwed up their courage over 
the weekend to come. And I refer in particular to the member 
from Humboldt who is two and a half weeks late, afraid to talk 
about agriculture. And today he gave the new agricultural 
policy for the NDP today, and we appreciate that. It was one big 
zero. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that was the sum total of the debate. So I just 
bring everything back into perspective tonight, Mr. Speaker – 
that one New Democratic Party assisting Liberals elsewhere 
have had late budgets for a long period of time, and secondly, 
Mr. Speaker, that the argument that things are not done in the 
legislature. I think there has been an excellent tradition and 
practice set by the predecessor of the member opposite. 

Now we have now taken the time, Mr. Speaker, because the 
hon. Finance critic was not prepared to do it himself from the 
information he had, that about $882,209,100 approximately, 
were very close . .  (inaudible interjection) . .  Well, do you 
want . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you add it up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, no, that’s give or take a couple of 
hundred . .  But again, that’s a quick calculation by the acting 
deputy. Again, I’ll give you the information, but, you know, 
give us the time to go through and get the figures for you. 
We’ve given you the information; you didn’t sue it. We’ll go 
through and calculate it. I mean, we can debate that for a long 
time, and we’ll simply get the calculations. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well isn’t this fascinating, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, you had the time. Mr. Minister, you had since 
October of 1986 to get your act together. Mr. Minister, you 
refused, your Premier refused to call this legislature into the 
session because you said you needed the time. 
 
Municipalities had to wait, and school boards had to wait, and 
hospitals had to wait, and all kinds of local government bodies 
had to wait because you wanted the time. Instead of being able 
to use that time and get your act together and know what you’re 
doing, you come in here and give the greatest display of 
arrogance that we have seen in this House yet, in your speech. 
 
The people don’t trust you; you know they don’t trust you. 
You’re just like your Premier. Somebody gets up and asks a 
question and he refuses to answer it – that’s providing he 
bothers to get up and try to answer it. And then after your 
speech, which was not only irrelevant but verges on the 
stupidity, if I may use that word -–after that, you then provide 
this House with information which is wrong. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Minister, I didn’t write these supplementary estimates; you 
wrote them; your officials wrote them. The buck stops with 
you. And even I know that if you look on page 24, you can see 
under Consolidated Fund, loans, advances and investments, 
$907,037,090. And then if you turn, Mr. Minister, to page 26, 
you can find under summary, budget expenditures, $21 million. 
And if you add just those two lines, you find that the amount of 
money that is in this interim supply that you bring before us 
today, which is going to go toward the special awards, was 
$928 million — $928 million, Mr. Minister. Not only do you 
make a 208 per cent mistake in the estimation of your deficit, 
and your back-benchers should be listening to that, you haven’t 
learned from that. 
 
Today you get up in this House, on this very important 
resolution, and you either mistake by merely $100 million – 
merely $100 million, and it’s, in your opinion, give or take. It’s 
not give or take, Mr. Minister. It’s important. It is important to 
the people who pay the taxes. It is important to the children who 
don’t have dental care. It is important to the 10,000 people 
waiting in hospital waiting lists in the city of Saskatoon, and 
thousands more 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

844 
 

in Regina. And you say: give or take a million here or 100 
million there. What nonsense! 
 
Now that is the kind of mismanagement, and that is the kind of 
irresponsibility that has brought us to an accumulated deficit of 
$3.4 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And who knows, who knows? Is it $3.4 
billion? Anybody who would make that kind of casual castaway 
of an error might say anything he wants. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, finally we have the figure. And I want to 
say in conclusion on this item that it’s my job, and the job of 
my colleagues over here, to ask the questions, and it’s your job 
to provide the answers. That’s why you get the pay of a cabinet 
minister. I’m beginning to wonder, like a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan are beginning to wonder, whether you earn that 
pay. But that’s why you’re in the position you are. The buck 
stops with you. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, may I ask you another question? There has 
been a lot said in the pre-days of your budget on June 17, in fact 
some very notable opinions have been provided by 
constitutional experts and by lawyers, that you were acting 
illegally – that you were acting illegally. Have you, Mr. 
Minister, bothered to take a look at the legal opinion provided 
by the Legislative Counsel on the legality of the special 
warrants which you and your government was passing which 
then became the process of . .  (inaudible) . .  ? Have you seen 
that legal opinion, Mr. Minister, and what is your opinion of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member says that 
his job is to ask questions and ours is to give answers. I suggest 
that part of his job is to be somewhat accurate in his statements. 
 
And we’ve had, for example, numerous statements of the hon. 
member dealing on various factors, one regarding the budget. I 
think he’s had a diatribe in the last little while about oil 
revenues and oil companies that even the Leader-Post saw fit to 
not only refute his statement, but in effect challenge every 
aspect of the hon. member’s premises; and secondly, challenge 
the whole argument that he made about oil royalties, the effect 
of the royalty position of the respective political parties. And 
like the past history of the hon. member, he’s been out by some 
several hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 
And so if you . .  Certainly obviously it’s your right to say that 
people don’t believe me. Obviously they don’t believe you. 
Obviously they don’t believe the members opposite. Obviously 
they haven’t believed you on numerous occasions. So that’s a 
debate that we can continue for some considerable period of 
time. You ask me if I saw the . .  and read the opinion of the 
Legislative Counsel. The answer is no. 
 
Secondly, I have been advised by the Department of Justice that 
the actions taken by the government were that they were legal. 
Secondly, I do refer to the hon. member statements that some 
constitutional experts such as Dr. Eugene Forsey said that what 
the government was doing was . .  Oh, yes he did. He may not 
have liked it. He may 

not have liked it, but he said it. 
 
And then I refer again to the hon. member the practice of some 
other provincial jurisdictions in this country and the federal 
government from time to time, where the budget has not been 
brought in in a fiscal year. So one of the aspects of any 
constitutional legal debate is either precedent – and there was 
ample precedent in the Canadian constitutional practice for 
budgets to come in after the fiscal year – so I take the advice 
simply that I received from the Department of Justice that it was 
legal. Again, I have not bothered reading that of the Legislative 
Counsel. I think the hon. member should know that the 
Department of Justice is, by law, charged with the responsibility 
of advising the government on legal matters, and that’s where I 
would normally take the opinion. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, did you get 
this opinion from your legal department before or after the 
judgement or the interpretation given by the Legislative 
Counsel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, it was obviously before. And I don’t 
have the date as to when it was before, but I have been assured 
by the Minister of Justice that it was before. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That, Mr. Minister, for the benefit of all 
members of this House, who I am sure, on both sides of the 
House, are interested in making sure that this process works in 
the best interests of Saskatchewan citizens. I think it would be 
worthwhile for everyone here to know what your Department of 
Justice said. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared to table, for the members 
information, the decision that was given by your Department of 
Justice on this matter? Since you did get the legal opinion, it 
must have been given in writing, because you know very well, 
as a responsible minister, something like that would be required 
in writing. 
 
Now I think it’s something that would interest us all, as it 
should, if you would table that interpretation. Will you table 
that legal opinion which you received from the Department of 
Justice, so that we can all benefit from the wisdom that was 
provided to you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think the hon. member knows, and he was 
a member of Executive Council, that it is not the practice of the 
province of Saskatchewan, nor has it been, to table legal 
opinions given by the Department of Justice for the operations 
of government – and that has been the practice. I think the hon. 
members all know, and you were certainly part of it, as legal 
opinions were asked as to the legality of the nationalization of 
the potash industry, when you were a government you refused 
to give the legal opinions. You said that that was confidential 
information given to the government. I think there was some 
considerable debate, if I recall, as to whether you should give 
the legal opinion. You refused to do so, and I just remind the 
hon. member when he was member of Executive Council that 
the precedent was well established at that time, and the 
precedent continues that the legal opinions are given for the 
operations’ 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

845 
 

government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister I remind you that it was 
always also the practice to have a budget before the beginning 
of the fiscal year. 
 
Now if you are so concerned about the practice, you obviously 
weren’t concerned about following the practice on providing a 
timely budget. Now we are dealing with a matter of such 
importance to every single citizen in Saskatchewan that the 
appropriate practice would be to inform the people about what 
is the legal thing to do here. Now you stand, Mr. Minister, you 
stand condemned. You have been charted; you have been tried 
by the court of public opinion, and you have been judged guilty. 
 
Now will you provide for us all in this House and the people of 
Saskatchewan, that information which you say you have, 
because if you don’t, the only conclusion we can draw is that 
you never had a legal opinion. That’s what I believe, that’s what 
the public of Saskatchewan believes, and, in fact, I think that’s 
what the case was. You’re doing some more flimflamming here 
and by the fact that you refused to table it, you’re telling us all 
that you never had a legal opinion; you went on your own for 
strictly political reasons, and now you refused to show us 
something which we know you cannot. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I find the logic somewhere humorous. This, 
you know, to quote someone else’s déjà vu all over again in that 
we went through this debate on potash nationalization and that 
was not an everyday occurrence – that was not an everyday 
occurrence. 
 
As a matter of fact we’ve only had one incident in the history of 
– certainly North America – where potash mines were 
nationalized. That was without precedent in any jurisdiction, 
and the hon. member opposite stood up in the House and said, 
yes, we have legal opinions, but no, we won’t give them to you. 
Nothing more important I suggest in terms of the economic 
activities of this province over the last ten to fifteen years, than 
that single stroke of nationalizing potash industries – going to 
cost the province probably close to a billion dollars. But that 
was done by the assurances of members, and several sitting here 
today, that they had a legal opinion, and they adamantly 
refused, time after time after time, to give that opinion to the 
people of this province, and they were asking for it. 
 
Secondly, let’s also put in perspective, at the time of potash 
nationalization, the House leader taking the legislation through 
the Assembly was the then attorney general, who had the legal 
opinions, if there were legal opinions. So for the hon. member 
to argue precedent, this great importance, the delay – I’ve given 
examples of other provinces having a budget past he fiscal year. 
I’ve indicated to you that there was a legal opinion. I’ve 
indicated to you what the practice of the province has been 
historically and what it is today. So to take your arguments that 
because it hasn’t happened before in the province, is not a fair 
one when one looks at past political debates in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, I 

want to go back to the issues raised during the question period, 
and the disgusting spectacle of a Premier who is too cowardly 
to meet the challenge in the legislature, and continually referred 
questions which only he could answer – because they dealt with 
his state of knowledge – to you, who patently couldn’t answer 
them. 
 
I guess one can say, Mr. Minister, that at least the Premier 
wouldn’t lie to the House. But that’s about all one can say. It 
was obvious by his silence that he was unable to deny the 
allegation, that he knew the facts of the case when he made 
contrary statements in October. By his silence, Mr. Minister, he 
stands condemned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I said earlier, Mr. Minister, that at least one 
can say that he wouldn’t lie to the House. Nobody can say that 
about you with any sort of certainty, because your comments 
just simply don’t hang together. I want to know, Mr. Minister, 
what it was that you didn’t know in October. In your economic 
statement which you gave in March, you claimed the $300 
million revenue shortfall, and you blamed that on oil, and you 
blamed it on potash, and you blamed it on agriculture. Oil 
prices, Mr. Minister, had already settled in the 10 to $15 a 
barrel by that time. The unanimous opinion of oil analysts was 
that that was where it was going to stay. The potash prices had 
fallen in 1985, and certainly the agricultural situation was no 
surprise. So the revenue shortfall, you knew all the facts before 
you made up your budget. The other 500 million was an 
overexpenditure. 
 
All of those, Mr. Minister, were in place before the election. I 
want to know what it was you didn’t know in October that took 
you by surprise on November 1. What was it you didn’t know 
in October that could have led to a statement of that sort during 
an election campaign? Or, Mr. Minister, were you just being a 
politician? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I believe that the comments made by the 
hon. member are less than warranted as they apply to the 
Premier. I think it fair to say that the Premier has participated in 
most question periods. And so I don’t ‘think your comment 
frankly holds much water. 
 
I find it a little interesting, Mr. Chairman, that the hon. member 
just said that oil prices had bottomed out in 10 to $15 a barrel 
range. I think that was his statement. I think I’m being accurate 
when I . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — No, you’re not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, no, when I use his figures . .  (inaudible 
interjection) . .  Settled at 10 to $15 . .  (inaudible interjection) 
. .  Well, you know, the difference between 10 and $15 is 
somewhere around $100 million. Now what’s a million, $100 
million, the hon. member asked. So, so, you know, you can 
have, you can have your range right there when you begin to 
talk about those figures. 
 
(2145) 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

846 
 

But let’s take a look at what figures you do not get . .  
(inaudible interjection) . .  No, what you do not get until you 
begin to approach your fiscal year end. And I’m sure that 
you’ve participated in the budget process; you know some of 
them. You’ve got your corporate income tax figures; that is, as 
you get closer to year end, you get a more accurate assessment. 
Your sales tax, you get the same thing. As you get closer to 
your fiscal year end, your estimates get more precise. Tobacco, 
tax, the same. Oil, we’ve discussed. Potash, uranium, all of 
these – the closer you can get in most cases to your year end, 
the more precise your statement will be. 
 
Let’s take a look at some things that did come into play. We’ve 
got he Saskatchewan Pension Plan. We frankly did not know 
the cost of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. We did have the 
discussions with the Provincial Auditor as to what the reserve 
should be. We did make some policy decisions, some 
significant ones. 
 
For example, we had proposed revenues from land bank sales. 
As I indicated in my economic statement, there was a reduction. 
We made the policy statement to the effect of $100 million, that 
we would not take projected revenues that we had put in, and 
we had debated in last year’s budget, into the revenues from last 
year – we chose not to take them. One can name some rather 
significant figures in all of those that I’ve given which would 
indicate a difference. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — When the Executive Council had finally made a 
final decision on the 1987-88 budget . .  When did you make the 
final decision and send it off to the printers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can get you the exact date, but I would 
think it would be in the last three weeks. Somewhere around 
there. Yes, about three weeks. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Will you put a . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If you want confirmation of the dates that 
this was done, February or March, it wasn’t done then. And it 
wasn’t finalized then. I think it was printed maybe ten days, 
fifteen days before the budget, somewhere in that time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — What you’re telling me, if it was sent to the 
printers by June 1, that the members of the Executive Council 
would have known what was in the budget by June 1. Am I 
correct? Then the members of the Executive Council would 
have known what the expenditures and revenues, the estimated 
expenditures and revenues, were in this budget. Correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We got them back from the printers, I’m 
told, somewhere about June 12th. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — In other words, what you’re saying to me is that 
certainly by June 1 everybody -–certainly the Premier – would 
have known what the estimated expenditures and revenues were 
in the 1987-88 budget. Is that correct? The Premier would have 
known what the estimated expenditures and revenues were in 
this budget by June 1. Correct? 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Pretty well. There were still some relatively 
small policy decisions being made in agriculture and, if I recall, 
property management capitalization, and a few items like that. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, did you change your figure of 
$577 million deficit after June 1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If it was, there’d be modest changes, just as 
you normally go to final printing you start to get some minor 
changes. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — What you’re telling me, then, is that the Premier 
should have known that the forecast deficit was around $577 
million. Is that correct? The Premier should have known that. 
 
Why then do you think the Premier, as quoted in the 
Star-Phoenix would have told the Canadian Club that the deficit 
for this year, 1987-88 – five days before you came into this 
House and presented the budget – why would the Premier tell 
the Canadian Club, and here are his words: 
 

. .  the deficit . .  will likely be $1 billion. 
 

Only out $423 million, five days before you presented the 
budget in this House. Why? Why would the Premier do this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m sure that the Premier was probably 
referring to last year’s deficit rather than next year’s projected 
deficit. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I could read the whole article to 
you. The Premier was referring to this budget, the budget that 
you represented in this House. Or is the Premier in the habit, as 
you are, sir, of saying, oh well, within the neighbourhood of 
five or $600 million dollars, somewhere in there – somewhere 
in there, take my word for it. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, that statement is in the Star-Phoenix. The 
Premier was referring to your budget. Are you saying that the 
Premier was purposely deceiving, or was he simply 
incompetent? What was he? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I am sure that anybody was referring to 
what the deficit for last year would be, and it was better than a 
billion dollars. This year’s projected estimated deficit is 577. 
And I’m sure that anybody could interpret that one way or the 
other, and I suspect that’s what was said. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — One further question. I want to read to the 
minister: “The province could borrow more money,” Devine 
said, “but the deficit for the coming year (the coming year) will 
likely be $1 billion.” I think you’ve answered it for me, Mr. 
Minister. That’s all I have. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. My 
question to the Minister of Finance regards the accuracy of 
reporting of the minister in comparison to the accuracy of his 
officials. I happened to notice in the Public Accounts of 
1985-1986 on page 576, under revenue for the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund, the original estimate for 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

847 
 

oil revenues derived to the province of Saskatchewan, the 
original estimate was $641,700,000. The actual total by the end 
of 1986 was $638,661,000 – a little over $3 million short. 
 
My question to the Minister is this: if, in fact, your officials 
were able to predict within $3 million the amount of revenue 
accruing to the province of Saskatchewan, which in terms of 
economic forecasting is within a fine science, what happened 
between 1986 and 1987? Were the officials of your ministry 
out, which I don’t think they were, or were you up to your old 
tricks of trying to put forward a political case using statistics 
and facts and figures which were dreamed up, not by your 
department officials but in some political back room? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, in the previous year the OPEC 
(Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) agreements 
had been . .  had stood up and there was stability in the oil 
industry; and last year there wasn’t. And I can assure the hon. 
member that of all the opinions we had from experts as to what 
the range of the oil prices would be last year we had none that 
went as low as $10 and, you know, it started out at 30. So the 
previous year was very stable and that the collapse of OPEC 
during the year was not foreseen by anyone. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — The facts of the matter were that oil prices were 
unstable throughout 1985 and 1986, and the facts speak for 
themselves in terms of the fluctuations of oil price. My 
question, it’s a short question again, is: were your officials out 
in their estimate to you for the budget ‘86-87? Were your 
officials out, or were you out and just made up those statistics, 
facts and figures, for your own political purposes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member knows that the minister 
is responsible, not the officials. And I think, if the hon. member 
were fair, that the OPEC uncertainty began, if I recall, 
somewhere around December of 1985. There was a good deal 
of uncertainty – yes, there was – during that period of time. You 
may recall that the federal budget came out, and their figure was 
considerably higher than the figure that I put in our budget. 
And, of course, we had the debate at the time, during the 
budget, after our budget had gone to print, oil prices had even 
dropped during that interim, and we were high at that time. So 
I’ve assured the hon. member that we had numerous ranges. As 
the year went on, obviously those ranges got more broad as 
prices became much more volatile, but at the time of the budget 
preparation we were well within the ranges. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, this 
evening we have watched the Minister of Finance; we have put 
questions to him; we have sought answers from him; we have 
received no straight answers to any of the questions that we 
have asked. 
 
The reputation of this minister is so damaged that the credibility 
with the public doesn’t exist any more – a man that went into 
the Finance portfolio and indicated a $389 million deficit, and 
he heaped upon the people of this province, because they 
wanted to get elected, a budget deficit of $1.2 billion. He has 
poured on the backs of taxpayers across this province interest 
alone on the debt of $294 million a year. And this minister, 
here, 

comes forward now with no credibility. The Premier today 
demonstrated that he’s up to the same games – give the public 
no answers. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion here, that we 
have listened; we have asked; we have been fair to the minister 
to reply to the serious questions put forward by my colleague. 
He has refused to do it. The public has lost confidence in him. 
This side of the House has lost total confidence in him and, 
accordingly, I am going to be moving, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That the following words be added to the resolution: and that 
the salary of the Minister of Finance be reduced to the sum of 
one dollar. 
 

I move that, seconded by my colleague, the member from 
Regina Centre. I think that fairly reflects, Mr. Chairman, what 
the people of Saskatchewan feel in respect to the performance 
of this minister and, accordingly, I so move that motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. 
 
(2202) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas —18 
 

Blakeney   Solomon 
Prebble   Anguish 
Brockelbank  Goulet 
Shillington  Hagel 
Koskie    Lyons 
Tchorzewski  Calvert 
Rolfes    Trew 
Upshall   Smart 
Simard   Koenker 
 

Nays —31 
 
Duncan   Martin 
McLeod   Martineau 
Andrew   Sauder 
Berntson   Johnson 
Lane    McLaren 
Smith    Hopfner 
Swan    Petersen 
Muirhead  Baker 
Maxwell   Toth 
Schmidt   Gleim 
Hodgins   Neudorf 
Gerich    Gardner 
Hepworth  Kopelchuk 
Hardy    Saxinger 
Klein    Britton 
Meiklejohn 
 
(2208) 
  



 
 

June 29, 1987 
 

848 
 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas – 50 
 
Duncan   Gleim 
McLeod   Neudorf 
Andrew   Gardner 
Berntson   Kopelchuk 
Lane    Saxinger 
Smith    Britton 
Swan    Blakeney 
Muirhead  Prebble 
Maxwell   Brockelbank 
Schmidt   Shillington 
Hodgins   Koskie 
Gerich    Tchorzewski 
Hepworth  Rolfes 
Hardy    Upshall 
Klein    Simard 
Meiklejohn  Solomon 
Martin    Atkinson 
Martineau  Anguish 
Sauder    Goulet 
Johnson   Hagel 
McLaren   Lyons 
Hopfner   Calvert 
Petersen   Trew 
Baker    Smart 
Toth    Koenker 
 

Nays – 0 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the sum of 
$1,197,269,100.00 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $62,090,000.00 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 
March 31, 1988. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the sum of 
$62,090,000 be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly I move that the 
resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the resolutions 
read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 13, an Act for Granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year Ending March 31, 1988, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, and under rule 
48(2) I move that the Bill be now read a second and a third 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:17 p.m. 


