













































October 1, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 1, 1987 

 

2995 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 

legislature, a number of people in your gallery, sir. These 

people have come from virtually all over the province, and 

these individuals I introduce to you today, Mr. Speaker, have 

been part of a very large team that has helped our government 

and our department restructure the post-secondary education 

system for the 21st century. And it would not have been, 

without the help of this team in planning and co-ordinating and 

building towards a couple of pieces of legislation that we’ll 

later address today. 

 

In anticipation of second reading of those Bills, Mr. Speaker, 

they have joined us here today in the gallery, and although these 

individuals deserve to be named individually, since there are a 

fair number of them, I will give you some indication of who has 

joined us here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have the chief executive officer of the new institute, and the 

assistant to vice-president of marketing extension. As well we 

have institute principals and assistant principals, presidents of 

campus faculty associations, the president of the faculty council 

of Saskatchewan, the president of the campus student councils, 

Mr. Speaker, the president of student executive councils of 

technical institutes of Saskatchewan, the president of the STI 

alumni, the chairman of Kelsey Foundation; our community 

colleges as well, widely represented with the college board 

chairman, and as well their principals, or acting principals as 

may be the case, executive directors of the Saskatchewan 

Community Colleges Trustees Association, The Gabriel 

Dumont Institute is represented here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as well, the man who has been chairing our interim 

governing council, Dr. Fred Gathercole, joins us. People here 

from the Advanced Training and Technology Centre, the 

Meadow Lake Vocational school is represented here today, 

people who have worked on transition teams, Mr. Speaker, and 

as well, officials from my department who have worked long 

and hard along with these many other individuals to help. 

 

And I would ask all of these members to rise and be 

acknowledged by the legislature, and I’ll ask all members of the 

legislature to join with me in welcoming them here today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on behalf of members on this side of the House, I want 

to join with the Minister of Education in welcoming 

professional educators from around the province to our 

legislature. 

They’ve served our technical institute system and our 

community college system in this province very well, and I 

welcome their presence here today as do all members in the 

Assembly, I’m sure. I hope that they will enjoy the debate that 

is to follow on these Bills, and I want to warmly welcome them 

to the Assembly and say that we, on this side of the House, look 

forward to working with you in the coming years in building the 

post-secondary education system in this province and making it 

better than ever. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 

and through you, in your gallery, two distinguished gentlemen 

from New Zealand: Mr. Colin Brydon, regional manager and 

chairperson of operations committee; and Mr. William Ryan, 

policy development manager of the New Zealand Accident 

Compensation Corporation. That would be similar to our 

Workers’ Compensation Board in Saskatchewan. They’re in 

Canada to discuss policy and operational procedures pertaining 

to claimant estimate, as well as plan the co-ordination of 

rehabilitation programs. They will be stopping in Vancouver, 

Toronto, Ottawa, and Winnipeg and meeting with various other 

agencies. 

 

We are very pleased that they could come to Saskatchewan 

where we have a long-established program. I’d like them to 

rise, and I’d like members of the Assembly to welcome them to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I just want to add our words of welcome to 

that of my friend opposite. I hope you find your visit to Canada 

and Saskatchewan useful. 

 

I’ll just add the comment that unless your workers’ 

compensation scheme runs as badly as ours, this will 

undoubtedly be an education in what not to do rather than what 

to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly, 

two young people from Brownwood, Texas, in the U.S.A. 

That’s somewhere down near Dallas, and I’m not sure how far 

or how close that is. They’re seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. I would ask them if they would stand up and be 

recognized. 

 

Their names are Misty Hockett and John Burelson. And along 

with them is somebody I shouldn’t have to introduce, is Marilyn 

Rice, and I’d ask her to stand, and her daughter Vicki. The 

young folk are here in Regina today, looking to start a new 

business venture maybe in Saskatchewan, and I’m sure we all 

wish them well in their endeavour. 

 

And I would ask all members to greet them and welcome them 

to the legislature and to Canada. Thank you. 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

2996 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Social Assistance Transportation Allowance Cuts 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 

question this afternoon to the Minister of Social Services. 

Today in Saskatchewan a number of cuts take place for people 

who in this province require social assistance. It’s a 

continuation of this government’s policy to punish the victims 

of its failed employment policies. 

 

And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, about a specific cut, and 

that is the transportation allowance which up until today 

provided people on assistance a monthly bus pass; an amount 

approximately equivalent to a monthly bus pass. And I ask you, 

Mr. Minister, this: if you want Saskatchewan people on social 

assistance to work their way off the welfare rolls, how do you 

expect them to do that without a proper means of 

transportation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

transportation allowance, this was not part of the basic social 

services package but was considered to be a special need. It was 

a special need that was provided predominantly in the urban 

areas and seldom in the rural areas, so that people in rural 

Saskatchewan were somehow travelling to where they had to 

go; people in the urban areas had a special need of 

transportation. 

 

What we are doing is standardizing this so that there will be 

transportation for those people who need transportation to have 

their children go to school where there is no school bus, or in 

urban areas where the distance is greater than normal, that there 

will be transportation for all of those special needs. But there 

will be not a special need transportation for people who are of 

normal health and capable of looking for work. And that is part 

of an overall reform package, and this is one element of it. 

 

In addition, the rates will be increasing on January 1 to $17 per 

adult, $13 per child, and that will assist in transportation. But 

there is not a specific amount set aside for each category of 

what a person needs. There is a basic allowance and it’s paid, 

and people decide what they spend it on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if 

transportation is a special need, it’s a special need for everyone 

on social assistance, whether they live in urban or rural centres. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And I say, Mr. Minister, that your policies of 

your government have been cruel and insensitive. They have 

been that, but they have also been ineffective at reducing the 

number of people on social assistance. 

Do you deny that the number of people receiving social 

assistance has increased by 14,000 since your government took 

office? Do you deny that the cost for social assistance in 

Saskatchewan today is double what it was when your 

government took office, and that you are not only hurting the 

poor but you are failing to reduce the dependency on welfare? 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister: when are you and your Premier 

going to realize that the most effective welfare reform package 

would be one of full reform to employment so that you provide 

employment opportunities for people on assistance to get off 

assistance and start working again? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I can tell the member opposite that his 

party’s position is a guaranteed income. My personal position, 

and I think every right-thinking person in Saskatchewan — 

probably most of them being a small “c” conservative or a small 

“l” liberal — believe that a more sound policy would be a 

guaranteed job. And we are trying to work in that direction, and 

in particular in Social Services, with the employment 

development program, such as the Meewasin Valley and Par 

Industries and many other small projects that we’ve used as 

pilot projects. 

 

We are working in that direction, to having everybody have a 

job rather than everyone have a guaranteed income. And the 

difference is that a job means you get paid to do something; a 

guaranteed income means that you get paid whether you do 

anything or not. That’s the difference between the NDP 

philosophy and our philosophy. 

 

And we believe that everyone should have a job and are 

working in that direction. The number of cases on social 

Services is down considerably this year over last year. I do 

agree that we are paying much more money in Social Services 

than you ever did. I do agree that we are paying more per case, 

and I would expect that you would be satisfied with that, 

because one minute you say it’s too low, and the next minute 

you say you’re spending too much. Make up your mind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think, before we go to the next question, I 

would like to draw members’ attention to questions and 

answers. Now we saw a long question. But before that, 

unfortunately, we saw a supplementary that had at least three 

questions, and perhaps four; it was one or the other. Now I’d 

just like to bring that to the attention of the members, and then 

if both try to avoid what they’re doing, we’ll have a good 

question period. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister 

from a member of a caucus that supports a full employment 

policy as welfare reform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it deals with another example of 

what seems to be your attempts to go out of your way to  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

2997 

 

punish the victims of your failed employment policy. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you confirm that during the month of 

September in the city of Saskatoon more than 200 people on 

social assistance sent their change of address to the Department 

of Social Services, and will you confirm that the person 

responsible for entering those changes into the computer was on 

holidays and that they had no permission to hire someone to 

replace that person, and as a result people on social assistance 

had to wait seven to 10 days — seven to 10 days — to get their 

cheques, which is an eternity for someone who’s living in 

poverty? 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, is that an example of yours and 

your Premier’s sensitivity to the need of the poor, and when are 

you going to start punishing the victims of your failed 

employment policies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in past years there’s 

been a tradition that you could accept a statement made by 

members opposite at face value, and then you could deal with 

them. But that has not been the case this session and therefore I 

will have to look into the allegations to see what is fact and 

what is fiction, and I can then report back. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — New question, Mr. Speaker. New question. Mr. 

Minister, it is fact, and I ask you to address it because poor 

people are paying the price of your insensitivity and 

incompetence. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you as well, today, admit that, effective 

today, new income exemption rules are going into place which 

in effect mean that everyone on social assistance who is able to 

find work receives less money, is able to keep less money than 

they were yesterday? And I ask you, Mr. Minister, how could 

you support these new income exemption regulations which in 

effect put up road-blocks to Saskatchewan’s poor who are 

trying to work their way off the welfare rolls of Saskatchewan? 

How can you support that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in January when the 

next increase goes into effect, Saskatchewan’s welfare rates will 

be the second highest and possibly the highest in Canada — 

very close to the highest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — A new question to the Minister of Social 

Services, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you know that there are 

many people on social services who through programs like the 

Saskatchewan skills development program are taking an 

education while they’re on social assistance. You’ve cut off 

their travel allowances too, and how do you expect them, Mr. 

Minister, to be able to get to school when you won’t even pay 

the costs of a transit pass to cover their transportation? How do 

you expect those people to get an education when what you’re 

really doing is making it harder and harder every month for 

them to  

pursue an education and better themselves? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are pleased that 

the NDP have finally realized that our government implemented 

the Saskatchewan skills development program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — That 2,500 people are now taking 

training. That we, in addition to the training, where necessary 

we pay for baby-sitting and other such costs out of the 

Department of Social Services, and in addition we just 

increased the training allowance by $10. Now what is the 

member talking about? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Closure of Ciba-Geigy Chemical Plant 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question to the minister of unemployment as well, and it is a 

new question. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have just seen how your government’s 

policies throw up obstacles in front of people who make an 

attempt to get back into the work-force, and this is further 

compounded by your failed economic policies which are 

forcing more and more people out of the work-force and onto 

social assistance. 

 

I ask you this question, Mr. Minister: are you aware of the 

closure today of the Ciba-Geigy chemical plant in Regina, and 

are you aware . . . Well the members may laugh, Mr. Speaker, 

about the closure of a plant, which puts people on 

unemployment, but I don’t think it’s funny. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — And, Mr. Minister, are you also aware 

that this is going to put, in addition to all those who are 

unemployed, 12 more full-time employees on the 

unemployment rolls and 10 seasonal employees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — For the member from Regina North 

East, the pronunciation is Ciba-Geigy, and I could perhaps send 

it over to you if that would help you. 

 

This particular company, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, the 

members ask a question; they don’t seem to want to be quiet to 

listen to the answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular company, this . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — This particular company in conjunction 

with another company in Ontario by the name of May & Baker 

— May & Baker will be closing down an Ontario facility. This 

facility will be closed  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

2998 

 

down in Regina through an arrangement. The Regina operation 

will do the formulating of all the chemicals for both companies 

and vice versa in Ontario. There will still be the same . . . Mr. 

Speaker, there will still be the same amount of chemicals being 

formulated out of the one office — same amount of chemicals 

being formulated. It’s a rationalization of the industry and of the 

business. 

 

For the members opposite who have nobody that is familiar at 

all with business, the reality is when the market and the value of 

the price goes down and the farmers aren’t buying as much, you 

must look for business ways to rationalize that. That’s exactly 

what they’re doing. That is common in the business world, 

something the members opposite know exactly nothing about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary to the minister, who I’m 

sure can spell the word airplane, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, would you explain to this 

House how this closure of this chemical plant begins to make 

good on your Premier’s election promises to expand the 

production of agricultural chemicals in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the production, 

regardless of this move, is still going to be the same. The 

production is going to be the same in Saskatchewan. The 

member is misinformed on this as he has been misinformed on 

a variety of issues. The production is going to be the same. We 

are working to attract other industries into this province to deal 

with that. 

 

Besides that, this particular company will be in fact doing more 

research in the province of Saskatchewan. There are three plants 

in Saskatchewan, two in Alberta, one in Manitoba. We have 

three, and in the future there will be more in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and more production. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I personally spoke to the 

president of this company in Toronto yesterday, and are you 

now . . . I have my information from him. Are you denying in 

this House that there are going to be 12 . . . not going to be 12 

people who are going to lose their jobs, permanent people and 

10 seasonal people? Are you denying that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member indicated 

in his earlier statement that there would be less production in 

the province of Saskatchewan. That’s exactly what he said. I 

indicated to you that that was in fact wrong, okay. 

 

With regard to the employment, I indicated that the two 

companies were rationalizing. They are probably laying  

off people, and that is going to be to save money as they have 

to. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had a question 

from the member . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question, a 

new question to the minister. Mr. Minister, the closure of this 

plant, I say to you, is just one more symptom of how badly you 

have failed in your campaign promise to build our economy. 

Are you aware that during the first eight months of this year 

245 Saskatchewan small businesses have declared bankruptcy, 

and that is 12 per cent higher than for the same time last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If the hon. member had of been in the 

House during estimates he also would have known that the 

number of new jobs . . . new businesses started in Saskatchewan 

is up some 2,000 over last year compared to about 1,200. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — There are about 12 more businesses 

going bankrupt. For every business that goes bankrupt, there’s 

100 or 200 more starting. That is part of the free-market 

economy, Mr. Speaker. That is part of the free-market 

economy. The member opposite does not understand that. 

 

Besides that we have a new facility in P.A. to build a new paper 

plant. We have a new facility in Regina to build a heavy oil 

upgrader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We have Marubeni-Hitachi building a 

new plant in Saskatoon. We have Hunter’s building in North 

Battleford. I can go on and on and on. That is building, that is 

not buying, and that’s what separates your side of the House 

from this side of the House — we build; you buy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Movement of Grain at St. Lawrence Seaway Port 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, as you’re undoubtedly 

aware — probably the opposition aren’t . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Please. Order. Order. The member has a right 

to ask the question and has also the right to be heard. 

 

Order, please. Order. Order. I ask for the co-operation of the 

members to allow the member to ask his question. Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, we’re . . . or Mr. Premier, we’re 

aware that there are currently 80 maintenance engineers who 

are tying up the movement of grain through the St. Lawrence 

Seaway because of their strike action. 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

2999 

 

At a time when Saskatchewan farm families are already facing 

severe duress because of current economic conditions, and 

when any stoppage of the movement of grain will halt farmers 

from hauling to the elevators for badly needed cash flow, what 

action have you taken, Mr. Premier, to urge the Prime Minister 

and the Minister of Transportation to end the strike; and, Mr. 

Premier, what response have you received? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I think the 

Premier also has the right to answer the question, even though 

some hon. members may not like to hear it. But that’s one of the 

elementary rules of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s fair that at 

least one side of the House is interested in agriculture and has 

the courage to ask a question that is extremely important to the 

farmers of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I will say to the hon. member from 

Moosomin that I have sent a telex to the Minister of Labour for 

Canada, encouraging him to resolve the dispute as quickly as 

possible. 

 

I will also advice the member that I will be discussing the issue 

with the Prime Minister and members of cabinet tomorrow, and 

will be encouraging them to take whatever action is absolutely 

necessary to make sure that grain movement continues in this 

province because farmers in Saskatchewan and farmers across 

western Canada particularly cannot live under any sort of 

sustained strike. And we must take whatever measures are 

necessary to make sure grain continues to move in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’ll direct my 

question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, you may or may not know 

that in the Lakehead right now there is space for approximately 

three weeks of deliveries, three weeks of deliveries from the 

prairie provinces from farmers. My question to you is, Mr. 

Premier, why do you get up on this floor, set up by a member 

opposite, to divide the people of this province from agriculture 

to urban? Why is that your theme? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would appreciate if the 

hon. member would listen very carefully. The concerns about 

agriculture in this province are not isolated to rural people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — People in Regina, in Assiniboia, in North 

Battleford, in Yorkton, in Prince Albert and, indeed, Humboldt, 

people — senior citizens, people living and doing business — 

are concerned about farmers’ income because when the farmer 

has money they spend it in town. There’s a tax base to build 

roads and schools and hospitals. 

When there’s strikes, do you know what happens? You can’t 

market your grain. You can’t get the income. You can’t raise 

the revenue, and towns and villages and senior citizens and 

school children, and people of all walks of life, urban and rural, 

are hurt. Mr. Speaker, the hon. member should realize that this 

legislature should stand full bore, man to man, woman to 

woman, the entire House, in backing Saskatchewan agriculture 

and marketing grain, and not to play political issues, saying it’s 

rural versus urban. When are you going to figure that out? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — You travel, you travel across this 

province telling farmers that it’s an urban province — you 

travel, and you’ll see how far you get. People in this province 

want to see a comprehensive agriculture policy across the 

country, and not just confined to somebody like you that just 

thinks it’s an urban problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Unemployment in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Indeed a 

sorry sight. My question is to the minister of unemployment. 

And it’s a new question. 

 

Mr. Minister, today there are 36,000 people unemployed in 

Saskatchewan. Today there are 36,000 people unemployment in 

this province. Are you aware, sir, that over the last 12 months 

Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada to have suffered a 

decline in employment, in jobs — we’ve lost 2,000. 

 

In light of that poor performance and why you try to divide 

worker from farmer perhaps, sir, you and your government 

should pay attention to providing jobs for all the people of this 

province. I ask you, sir: are you going to introduce a winter 

works program in this province this winter so that the 

unemployed, whether they’re not working in rural 

Saskatchewan or not working urban Saskatchewan, can have an 

opportunity so that we don’t have to send them off to Ontario 

and Calgary as in the Ciba-Geigy example? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, this government doesn’t 

have a minister of unemployment. But we feel that someone 

should respond to the nonsense that we just heard, and that 

really what the people should consider is: how does a grain 

strike at Thunder Bay create jobs in Regina? What does that do 

for Saskatchewan? Is it positive or is it negative? Is it positive 

or negative in Rosemont constituency? And I submit that 

Saskatchewan, all 1 million of us, are in this province together. 

Our economies are interrelated, our jobs are interrelated, and if 

we can’t sell wheat, even at 2.52 a bushel, we are all going to be 

a lot poorer, and the members of the opposition should keep 

that in mind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3000 

 

Mr. Lyons: — A new question, a new question. Mr. Speaker, 

thank you, again to the same minister. Mr. Minister, 

Saskatchewan is losing jobs and last year it lost jobs at the rate 

of 6,000 people, which for the third year in a row made it one of 

the worst record of out-migration. 

 

And the Ciba-Geigy example is a perfect example of what’s 

happening in this province. We’re losing jobs, people are 

leaving, and perhaps, perhaps, perhaps, since we’ve got an 

interrelated economy, the Premier should have asked Mr. 

Peterson of Ontario to annex this province so that the people 

here can have jobs, and the people here can have opportunities. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you not believe, do you not believe, sir, that 

it’s your responsibility and the government’s responsibility to 

initiate economic activity so that the people of this province 

have jobs instead of shipping them off to Ontario or shipping 

them off to Calgary. Don’t you believe that’s your 

responsibility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the 

second or third lowest rate — we’re kind of tied at that — in 

unemployment. That means we have the second or third highest 

employment rate in Canada. And that is . . . has got a lot to do 

with the projects that are even visible to the members from 

Regina if they open their eyes, like the upgrader, over 1,400 

people working there right now; probably most of them paying 

union dues to members opposite; with people working on a $54 

million Wascana Hospital, those people are employed. 

 

There are many projects in this province. The convention centre 

— I know it is free enterprise and you don’t like to think about 

it, but it is there. Those are jobs. I saw the concrete being 

poured yesterday. And that should be kept in mind. And we 

don’t have to spend days and days in this legislature listening to 

the nonsense from the opposition about spending more money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

rise on a point of privilege. We have given notice to you on this 

point. And I rise as a result of questions that were asked 

yesterday to the Premier in question period. These questions are 

recorded in Hansard on page 2979 of yesterday’s Hansard. 

 

And the point I raise is regarding the statements made by the 

member of Moose Jaw North in the House where he referred to 

a situation as to statements attributed to myself on Monday, and 

I quote. The member from Moose Jaw North said: 

 

. . . on Monday the Minister of Social Services informed 

this House that the legal aid deterrent fees were introduced 

without prior consultation or approval from the 

Government of Canada. 

 

And I’ve quoted the page from Hansard. That question, Mr. 

Speaker, was asked to the Premier in my absence, and  

the member raised the point in my absence at the time. Out of 

the 88 sitting days, I’ve been present for at least 81. When I was 

not present, the member from Moose Jaw North raised a 

question to the Premier and made an allegation of something 

that I said. And I’ve read it for you and it is in the record. 

 

This is not a dispute between members, Mr. Speaker, as 

Hansard clearly records on September 28, 1987, at page 2881, 

where I gave only one answer on that day. And the answer is: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not so sure that was a question at all. 

However, I’m pleased to see the federal government is 

monitoring legal aid, and I would hope that if they think 

more money should be spent, that the federal government 

will agree to pay more money. 

 

In the meantime we are providing a fair and adequate 

service to the poor and to those people who can’t afford to 

pay the full . . . (legal fare). And some people are paying a 

little towards their legal aid, and that seems fair. And we 

will have to see how it goes. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is not a dispute between members, but a 

clear misrepresentation, an intentional misleading statement 

made to the Premier of Saskatchewan yesterday in my absence 

when I was not here to even defend it. 

 

And that has been going on constantly, that the members 

opposite will raise questions as matters of fact, Mr. Speaker. 

They have been getting away with it because it has been a 

dispute between members. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, you have the evidence clearly before you 

on the record, in Hansard. The member opposite should be 

dealt with accordingly, apologize at the very least, or be dealt 

with in other ways, because you cannot operate in a Legislative 

Assembly — that is the reason for the rule — you cannot 

operate if, whenever a member raises a point, the members in 

the House have to question whether it is accurate or not. And 

when members opposite intentionally mislead the House, the 

House cannot function. The Premier cannot answer questions 

when he has to question the question itself, nor can anyone else. 

 

And for that reason I raise the point of privilege. I ask you to 

consider the record, which is quite clear, rule on it, and deal 

with it accordingly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point of order 

raised by the member from Melville . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Point of privilege? Sorry, Mr. Speaker. He makes claim that 

I intentionally mislead this House. And I wonder just where that 

claim should be directed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let me, as a matter of fact, respond to that by using the 

same evidence as the minister. Mr. Speaker, in reference to his 

point of order, let me quote from Hansard, page  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3001 

 

2881 of September 28, when I asked my question, and I said: 

 

And I ask, Mr. Minister, if you can confirm that, in spite 

of the fact that legal aid is a cost-shared program funded 

almost equally by the federal government and by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, that as a matter of fact you 

failed to consult with the federal government before 

introducing your unfair legal aid fees. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me quote verbatim, again, the minister’s 

response and see if he denies that as a matter of fact that was a 

statement of fact. What does the minister say? He says: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not so sure that was a question at all. 

However, I’m pleased to see the federal government is 

monitoring legal aid, and I would hope that it they think 

more money should be spent, that the federal government 

will agree to pay more money. 

 

Did he deny that he failed to consult? Mr. Speaker, he then goes 

on to another sentence and he says: 

 

In the meantime we are providing a fair and adequate 

service to the poor and to those people who can’t afford to 

pay the full fare for legal aid. And some people are paying 

a little towards their legal aid, and that seems fair. And we 

will have to see how it goes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a very clear and specific question. The 

minister chose not to respond to the question, and one can only 

conclude, by the fact that he failed to deny the accuracy of the 

supposition that I put forward, that it is anything other than 

accurate. And, Mr. Speaker, I submit the same evidence that the 

minister put forward here in response to his supposed claim for 

point of order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to begin my remarks by once 

more pointing out to hon. members that hon. members cannot 

accuse other hon. members of intentionally misleading the 

House, even if it is put in a context of a question. Unfortunately 

we heard that now, and unfortunately we heard that yesterday 

afternoon during debate from one other member. 

 

So I’m drawing this to the attention of those members. They 

know who I’m speaking about, and I’m once more asking the 

co-operation of hon. members to refrain from those kinds of 

accusatory and provocative language in this House. 

 

As to the hon. member’s point of privilege, I have studied the 

matter referred to, and I have reviewed it, having received 

notice from the hon. member, and I find that it does not 

constitute a prima facie case of privilege. 

 

Beauchesne’s, citation 19(1) states: 

 

A dispute arising between two Members, as to allegations 

of fact, does not fulfill the conditions of  

parliamentary privilege. 

 

This, in my opinion, is a dispute concerning two members 

regarding facts, and therefore I do not rule that is a prima facie 

case of privilege. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

Yesterday in question period the member from P.A.-Duck Lake, 

in posing a question, indicated that: can you tell us if Mr. Cohen 

is, in fact, related to the Premier’s deputy minister, one Norman 

Riddell? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular individual is no relation to Mr. 

Norman Riddell . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Let me talk to 

the point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m raising a point of order. The individual is no 

relation to the deputy minister. The member opposite raised this 

intending to mislead this House, and I think that is . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 

do not find that that is a point of order. The hon. member . . . I 

know he wants to reply to it; however, he too made an 

accusation there that I know he perhaps shouldn’t have. I would 

just like to once more draw hon. members’ attention to the fact 

that accusing people, in whatever form, of intentionally 

misleading the House is not acceptable. I just bring that to your 

attention. 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. You just 

concluded, moments ago, ruling that the member from 

Melville’s point of privilege raised was, as a matter of fact, 

unfounded. And you will recognize, Mr. Speaker, that in 

making his case he accused me of misleading this House. 

 

And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that you would ask . . . that you 

would require the member from Melville to withdraw this 

unfounded and unparliamentary accusation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have drawn the attention of hon. members to 

the rule that exists in this House that those type of provocative 

and accusatory statements should not be made. Unfortunately, 

we’ve heard that today; unfortunately we heard that yesterday 

in debate, and I don’t think it would serve any purpose to have 

all those people now stand up and apologize and withdraw. 

 

However, I think that hon. members should take this very, very 

seriously, that this type of situation cannot continue. And hon. 

members should discipline themselves that they don’t do it. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, on the comments made by 

the minister opposite, I wish only to say, were he to have 

answered any one of the questions that I asked yesterday in 

question period, he wouldn’t have had to storm out of the 

House this afternoon. 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill NO. 46 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, today is a historic day 

for Saskatchewan. It’s a historic day for Saskatchewan, it’s a 

historic day for Saskatchewan education, and it’s a historic day 

for the people of this province, adult and child alike. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about why we are making 

the changes that we are making in post-secondary education. I 

want to talk about how we determine what those changes 

should be. And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what 

indeed those changes are. 

 

To gain a full appreciation as to why this Bill, and to why the 

companion piece of legislation, an Act respecting Regional 

Colleges, to understand and to fully appreciate why they are 

before the legislature today, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, Mr. 

Speaker, and indeed all members of the legislature to take off 

their legislative hats for a moment, to take off those hats and put 

on your hats as parents, the parents of our precious children, 

children who, too soon, become young adults taking their place 

in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I take off my hat as Minister of Education 

and look around, the first question that I ask myself is: what 

kind of world will my children live in, and how can I help them 

find their place in the world. And what do I see? I see a country 

rich in resources and opportunity, but a country struggling with 

a volatile and unpredictable global environment, a global 

environment characterized by changes in the value of our 

products on the world market, whether it be our wheat, our 

potash, our uranium, or our softwood lumber; a global 

environment where our old economic and business certainties 

are threatened — our once certain wheat markets, our once 

certain wheat customers are now our competitors, Mr. Speaker; 

an environment where individuals and institutions are 

struggling to cope with the demands of this new economy, yet 

an environment, too, where new professions and new 

businesses and new opportunities and new jobs are literally 

being born overnight. 

 

So how do I, or we, answer my daughter’s question, or my 

son’s questions: dad, what should I study; what should I be 

when I grow up? A tough question, Mr. Speaker, a tough 

question to answer, and one that becomes more challenging 

each day because when I look around me I see another set of 

concerns on top of the challenge of earning a living. 

 

The world my children will live in faces the puzzle of keeping a 

balance on one hand between growth and  

industry, and on the other hand the dangers and risks which so 

often come with that kind of prosperity. For example, Mr. 

Speaker, my son and daughter see the paradox on one hand of 

the advantages of cheap nuclear power versus the tragedy of 

Chernobyl. They see the paradox on one hand of a wheat 

surplus in much of the western world versus the starvation in 

Africa. Indeed, a puzzle and a paradox for our children, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So the next question that comes to mind goes beyond the usual 

set of concerns that we all feel as parents — will my child be 

able to adapt to the world that’s coming? — to a deeper 

question. And that question is: what kind of world do we want 

for our children? What can we expect for our children? 

 

Well we read and hear from those who forecast the future about 

a number of realities that we’re facing. For example, we know 

from demographic surveys that there are some changes in the 

make-up of our population. Over the next few years that 

population age group of 0 to 18 is expected to stay, for the most 

part, stable or rise slightly; the 18 to 24 age group, for the most 

part, is going to remain about the same size; but there’s gong to 

be a dramatic increase in the 24 to 65 age grouping, Mr. 

Speaker. The “baby boomers” are moving through the system; 

they’re getting older — the greying of North America, it’s 

sometimes been referred to. The point that’s significant here, 

Mr. Speaker, is there is not another wave of baby boomers that 

are going to come into the system. There is not another wave of 

“yuppies.” 

 

And that’s got some tremendous implications for our industry, 

Mr. Speaker, if it’s to remain competitive. Because for the 

employers today, what I would say to them is: what you see in 

terms of the work-force, for the most part, is what you’re going 

to have, and you better look after it. 

 

Other societal changes abound, Mr. Speaker: both parents 

working; single parents; more women in all professions and in 

all occupations; natives seeking more training opportunities; 

more opportunities for the disabled; child abuse on the rise, Mr. 

Speaker; the spectre and the tragedy of AIDS; a society where 

everyone is busy, busy, busy, Mr. Speaker — some have called 

this time-poverty. These are some of the societal and population 

trends that we must acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, in the world of 

the future and that our children will live in. 

 

The other thing that seems fairly certain, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the world is changing, and it’s changing more rapidly than ever 

before. Futurists and economists have put several labels on this, 

Mr. Speaker. Some call it the information age, some call it the 

technological age, some call it the service economy, some call it 

the post-industrial era, some simply label it the new economy. 

Take your choice, Mr. Speaker, of the labels, but what it all 

means is that they all agree that the world is changing, and it’s 

going to change more rapidly than ever before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in Saskatchewan we see this change as we move from no 

longer depending on extracting, refining, and processing raw 

materials to having to depend on  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3003 

 

technological research and the processing of information for our 

well-being, a relative shift, Mr. Speaker, from a resource-based 

economy to this knowledge-based economy. 

 

Well let’s look at an example of this because when one talks in 

those kinds of terms, moving from the resource-based economy 

to the knowledge-based economy, it’s very easy for us to be 

written off as yet another one of those futurists with yet another 

one of those labels or another one of those theories. 

 

So how do we relate this to our children and to the adult 

population of this province this very day, Mr. Speaker? How do 

we relate the change that’s coming upon us? Well I would use 

this example, Mr. Speaker, and I suppose it’s because of my 

farm roots, but indeed farm roots are pretty prevalent across this 

province; almost all of us to this very day still know an aunt or 

an uncle or a grandfather or a grandmother on the farm. 

 

Well back in my grandfather’s day, Mr. Speaker, his economic 

and social well-being — his well-being depended on whether he 

had a good team of horses and men with strong backs, Mr. 

Speaker. The well-being of his farm, whether his farm 

succeeded or not, depended on that team of horses for the most 

part. 

 

In my father’s generation, Mr. Speaker, his economic 

well-being did not depend on whether he had good horses or 

not, it depended on whether he had wherewithal to purchase a 

new tractor — the classic would be, I suppose, the Massey 44. 

His well-being depended on not whether he could have more 

horses in the stable but whether he could have all the 

horsepower — in just one example of the mechanization that 

took place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we move from the agrarian age, if you like, to what some 

have called the Iron Age. And that determined . . . his economic 

well-being depended on that tractor, if you like. 

 

Now if my son chooses to farm, Mr. Speaker, his success will 

not depend on whether he’s got good horses or a good tractor; 

his success will depend on knowledge. His success will depend 

on his ability to apply new technology and the ingenuity to 

develop the seed or the cell of the future — a seed, Mr. Speaker, 

that these biotechnologists might design, that for our province 

would be drought resistant and flood resistant and high yielding 

and resistant to wheat midge, and the list goes on and on and 

on. 

 

His success or his well-being might depend on those genetic 

engineers who can replicate the super cow in his herd virtually 

overnight with embryo transfers and embryo splitting, Mr. 

Speaker. It is this kind of science and this kind of knowledge 

and this kind of technology, Mr. Speaker, that will determine 

whether his farm would fail or succeed. 

 

So what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that the key to our success 

as individuals, to our children’s success, to our province’s 

success, and indeed to our nation’s success will depend not 

merely on natural resources, not on  

cheap labour, not on nimble fingers but on brainpower, 

education, intelligence, the application of knowledge, Mr. 

Speaker. And I use that farm example to try and give an 

example as to what this change means in a very real way. It’s a 

major fundamental structural change. 

 

And what do we know about intelligence, the new commodity, 

Mr. Speaker. Intelligence has universal global distribution. It’s 

found everywhere, unlike raw materials, unlike oil, unlike 

copper, unlike potash, unlike iron ore. Intelligence is found 

across this world, Mr. Speaker. So that dashes some pretty 

classic notions that we have this very day about this economy 

that we are today trying to struggle with. It dashes some pretty 

classic theories about: you’ll be a success in the world, you and 

your people, if you’ve got rich copper mines or rich iron mines 

or rich potash mines. How much copper is there in a computer 

chip, Mr. Speaker. Not very much, I would suggest. Now being 

number one will depend on who is the best educated, the 

smartest, the one with the most up-to-date, relevant knowledge, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The key question then becomes this, Mr. Speaker, given this 

change, and given this rapidity of this change, and given that 

knowledge is the key to having our young people deal with the 

change, in fact fashion the change, Mr. Speaker. The key 

question then becomes one of: how do we deal with the 

implication of change, the implications of the knowledge-based 

economy? 

 

Well a half a century ago, Mr. Speaker, the designers of our 

education system were looking for ways to prepare their 

children in advance for the world that they would find. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, it is our turn. And we must be honest with 

ourselves, Mr. Speaker; we must be brutally honest. We must 

be prepared to ask the tough questions, tough questions like, 

Mr. Speaker, do we have the right education system for our 

children in the world of tomorrow? Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, 

do we have the right educational system? 

 

Do we have the resolve to make changes, Mr. Speaker? And 

I’m not talking about piecemeal changes, because the economy 

is not undergoing piecemeal change. It’s undergoing some 

fundamental structural change, as I tried to illustrate, Mr. 

Speaker. So do we have the resolve to make change, and what 

changes will we make, Mr. Speaker? These are the kinds of 

tough questions that we have to be prepared to face up to. We 

need to be willing to take up this challenge; we need to find a 

way to create more and better choices about the world we and 

our children will live in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we accept that, then the question becomes, how; how do we 

do this; how do we raise these questions; how do we generate 

these choices? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would submit to you that that is what this 

legislation is all about. How did we get . . . If that, Mr. Speaker, 

lays the groundwork for why we must make changes, then the 

question became, as I said earlier, how did we get to the point 

where we . . . the changes we are proposing here today? 

 

Well I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t single-handedly. 

And earlier today I introduced some  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3004 

 

several individuals in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who have done 

some fair amount of thinking about this, not just over the last 

few months, but indeed in some cases probably over a year or 

two or three, who saw these changes and the implications of 

that change coming long before I did. We’ve had a lot of help, 

and there’s been a lot of work, Mr. Speaker, go into this. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I could tell you as well that educational 

reform, if that’s what we’re talking about in the broadest sense 

of the word, is happening the world over. If we look at 

Saskatchewan, not only have we had to address the 

post-secondary education system, but as well the K to 12 

system some three or four or five years ago — worked out a 

new blueprint called Directions, in so far as do we have the 

right system for our young children. 

 

The University of Saskatchewan, recognizing that the world 

was going through some fundamental structural changes as 

well, embarked on a project some several months ago — an 

excellent project, I might add — entitled Issues and Options, 

where they have asked some of the same questions and looked 

at some of the same choices. 

 

The community college system, Mr. Speaker, and to their 

credit, have gone through a self-analysis and published a paper 

that helped frame our thinking, called A Better Tomorrow. 

 

And when I was in Helsinki at the European ministers of 

education meeting, Mr. Speaker, I heard from all over the 

European countries, and as well the rest of the western world, 

how they too were examining what they did and wondering 

what they should do. 

 

(1500) 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, our Premier raised the whole 

question of a national educational strategy at the last meeting 

when the premier met just a month or so ago. And as a result of 

that, Mr. Speaker, the minister of education, meeting just this 

week in Vancouver, are embarking on defining a new national 

education agenda, and I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that 

that’s long overdue. 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, in this province, the city of 

Saskatoon at the end of this month, there will be a 

post-secondary education forum examining — people across 

Canada, a national forum — examining, in my mind, the reality 

of the question of: what are the implications of the new 

economy? What are the challenges and the opportunities? How 

do we make it accessible? And of course, the question of 

funding, as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well given that we have universities, and the community 

college, and the K to 12 system, and what I heard at the 

premiers’ meeting, in the sense across this country and across, 

indeed, the western world, Mr. Speaker, it seemed to make 

sense to stand back, given that we had a number of jurisdictions 

reviewing this, and look not just at individual parts, not just at 

the community college, not just at the universities, not just at 

the technical institutes, but to stand back and look at the entire 

post-secondary  

education system and see how it should, indeed, fit together. 

 

Well as part of that process, we, in this past winter, Mr. 

Speaker, along with my Legislative Secretary, the MLA for 

Regina Wascana, went and held meetings in about 20 

communities across this province, Mr. Speaker, met with 500 

groups, individuals, and associations to get their views on 

whether there should be change, and if so, what, to look at some 

of these tough questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well what did we hear, Mr. Speaker? What were the basic 

themes? What were the points that were raised time and time 

again by these individuals, albeit in different locations each 

time? The question of accessibility came forward time and time 

again. More people in more places in this province want more 

courses, Mr. Speaker. That’s the easiest way of putting it — 

more people want access to more courses in more places in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, and access by all groups, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They wanted a high standard of education and a relevant 

education. They wanted it sensitive to the market, to the 

market-place, and excellence should be the byword. They 

recognized, Mr. Speaker, that critical thinking and initiative 

would have . . . would help us shape change, not merely cope 

with change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They recognized that this system must meet the educational 

needs of older workers, that 25 to 65 category that’s going to be 

the growing category, Mr. Speaker, of natives, of the disabled, 

of women. 

 

And we must have a flexible system. Flexibility in terms of 

method, place, and delivery, Mr. Speaker. Flexibility in terms 

of when courses are offered, Mr. Speaker, as well. And they 

said this system must give full value for the dollar, top-rate 

management, and full accountability. These were the messages 

that came loud and clear at these 20 meetings across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, what was the result of all of this, Mr. Speaker? How did 

we get, as I said earlier, to this piece of legislation today? Well, 

the step that preceded it after these various examinations by 

various groups and meetings, we put together a blueprint which 

I have tabled in this House in estimates a couple of months ago, 

entitled Preparing for the Year 2000. It deal with the adult 

education side of our educational system. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, what this legislation does is take that 

blueprint and start the building. And it’s a very exciting 

building project, Mr. Speaker, and a very exciting future for all 

of us. And other parts of this blueprint are in various stages of 

construction, Mr. Speaker, and I would suggest to you some of 

those initiatives, including the initiative relative to illiteracy that 

is now a national initiative, you’ll be hearing more about in the 

days to come as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as well, other parts of that blueprint include things like our 

commitment to distance education, to use these satellites that 

fly around the world, and the fibre optic technology, and 

whatever other kinds of new technology, to take educational 

programming out of the Reginas and the Saskatoons and the 

Prince Alberts and the Moose Jaws  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3005 

 

of the world, and putting it into every corner of this province, 

Mr. Speaker — the Nipawins, the Stanley Missions, the 

Beauvals, the Swift Currents, the Weyburns, the Estevans, the 

Humboldts, and the Melforts of this province, Mr. Speaker — 

more programming in more places throughout this entire 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that distance education hold potential . . . very much an 

exciting area for us, Mr. Speaker. It’s always intrigued me, Mr. 

Speaker, that we could line these satellites up around the world 

and have 90 per cent of the population probably have access to 

last night’s Blue Jays’ game, but we can’t seem to get those 

satellites lined up to deliver educational programming, Mr. 

Speaker. Well we’re going to attack that area, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s too important not to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — When construction is complete, Mr. 

Speaker, we will have built a continuum of education to service 

our people, almost literally from cradle to grave; the 

kindergarten to grade 12 participating with the new institute, the 

regional colleges and the universities, to create a seamless 

education system to serve our basic educational needs, and 

continue to serve us through our lives as we frequently access 

the services to upgrade our skills. Or as Marshall McLuhan 

said, I think seven or eight years ago, Mr. Speaker, the job of 

the future will consist largely of learning a living. And with this 

seamless educational system, Mr. Speaker, it will be much 

easier to make that a reality here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Well specifically, Mr. Speaker, now having outlined why we 

are proposing the changes, how we got to the choices that we 

did examine, I would now like to go into the details of the 

specific details of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Firstly, the Bill provides for the amalgamation of the four 

technical institutes in Regina, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and 

Prince Albert, the urban community colleges in those same 

cities, the Advanced Training and Technology Centre in 

Saskatoon, and the Meadow Lake Vocational Centre, into one 

new institute, Mr. Speaker. The new institute will be called the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology. 

 

And since April, four teams under the tutelage of Dr. Fred 

Gathercole have been working hard to ensure that that 

amalgamation process would be completed prior to students 

returning to classes this fall. I am pleased to announce that all 

the amalgamation teams who, by the way, consisted of college 

boards, principals of the colleges, and senior management of the 

institute at each location, have had their final meetings and have 

completed their task. And, Mr. Speaker, I say thanks to them 

all; it’s been a job well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Secondly, this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

rationalizes the delivery of skill training in the institutes by 

removing the duplication of courses between institutes, and 

eliminating or reducing the number of courses whose graduates 

had low or no employment prospects. We’ve talked in this 

House before about, are  

you doing anybody a favour by putting into a course where 

three or four out of 10 graduates cannot find full-time 

employment, Mr. Speaker. There’s no sense turning out buggy 

whip manufacturers when the world wants CAD-CAM experts. 

 

What has resulted is the creation of centres of excellence at 

each campus that will now nurture the expertise available in 

each of these areas. The institutes had in the past tried to be all 

things to all people — a laudable objective certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, but impossible to achieve, given the finite resources of 

manpower and budgets and materials. 

 

Today each campus will work towards developing its 

specialties. STI in Moose Jaw will specialize in construction 

technologies, advanced manufacturing technologies, industrial 

construction trades, and business administration. 

 

Each campus has unique features as well. STI leads the 

province in development of co-operative education programs. 

Co-op education provides students with an opportunity to 

alternate on-campus study with an on-the-job component. 

 

Kelsey in Saskatoon will specialize in mechanical technologies, 

mechanical trades, advanced electronics, health sciences, and 

community services, Mr. Speaker. Kelsey and the Advanced 

Technology Training Centre, located as they are in the middle 

of Saskatchewan’s own, what some would call, Silicon Valley, 

will also concentrate on the delivery of training in high 

technology. 

 

Wascana will now focus on agriculture, health sciences, 

secretarial, and general industrial. And Wascana has been a 

leader in computer-based education in Saskatchewan. This 

individualized approach allows students greater flexibility in 

scheduling when they enter a course, and allows them to 

proceed at a rate, at their own rate, to graduation. 

 

The Northern Institute of Technology, the newest of our 

institutes, has six major program centres of excellence, Mr. 

Speaker: renewable resources, transportation, business and 

secretarial, industrial trades, hospitality, and cosmetology. And 

when the Northern Institute of Technology opened in 

September of ’86 it represented state of the art training in 

competency-based education in North America. This type of 

programming allows the greatest flexibility for students to 

access skill training suited to their needs, and allows for the 

delivery of all or any part of the program as needed. 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as a well-know fact to all of us, has 

only one million people. And in deciding to amalgamate all the 

institutes, we have created the core of a comprehensive, 

skill-training education system. Institute campuses have a dual 

responsibility. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear on this 

because in my sense, in so far as the people who might report 

on this and/or others who might have comment on it, there’s 

been some suggestion that somehow this move to create a 

single campus somehow represents centralization. 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3006 

 

And that’s why I say, Mr. Speaker, I want you and other 

members here to take particular note when I say that institute 

campuses have a dual responsibility. They have the 

responsibility to provide the best possible on-site, core 

skill-training possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And secondly, and equally important — and I underline the 

word equally, Mr. Speaker, because there should be no doubt in 

anyone’s mind when we’re talking about accessing, more 

people accessing more programs throughout the entire province, 

that the second mandate here, of providing extension services to 

the entire province in their area of specialization, is fundamental 

to that whole word, that term of accessibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There has been some debate about somehow now that this 

single institute . . . somehow we have to get beyond, Mr. 

Speaker, merely looking at this concept as in the past at Prince 

Albert, or Saskatoon, or Regina, Moose Jaw; their territory was 

somehow was the 22 miles or the 27 miles around the city, or 

the 33 miles or the 32 miles. That is a notion of the past 

economy. That is a notion that does not recognize the 

companion Bill, The Regional Colleges Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have an institute with four campuses and four centres of 

excellence, and they will do on-site core programming, but 

equally, Mr. Speaker, we expect them to feed that programming 

across this province, through the pipeline known as the regional 

college network. And let me be clear on that. Their community 

does not become the 10 or 12 or 13 miles around their city — 

their community, Mr. Speaker, becomes the entire province of 

this country. And yes, we’ll use satellites, and yes, we’ll use 

fibre optics, and yes, we’ll use tutors and teachers across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so when I hear some talk about this somehow represents 

centralization, I say to myself, Mr. Speaker, they simply do not 

understand what these two pieces of legislation mean. They 

simply do not understand what distance education can do in this 

province. And I want to be very clear on that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To this equation, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we add the regional 

college system, and these are companion pieces of legislation, 

for in Saskatchewan one cannot exist without the others. The 

colleges are now mandated to deliver an expanded array of 

technical institute programming. As well the colleges will be 

augmenting their relationship with the universities to deliver 

more first and second year university programs as well, Mr. 

Speaker, to the rural areas of this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we go through these initiatives and every 

one of them means increased accessibility; that is the bottom 

line here, Mr. Speaker. And while I’m on the topic of 

accessibility, Mr. Speaker, accessibility to all regions and all 

groups, let me add that we are on the brink of a major 

breakthrough in working with the native community to form a 

partnership in education. A native studies division will be 

created as an integral part of the new institute to ensure that 

natives are given fair and equitable access to the full range of 

educational opportunities provided by the institute, Mr. 

Speaker. 

It would be useful perhaps, Mr. Speaker, as well, for me to 

outline The Institute Act in some technical detail so it is on the 

record. And I’ll move through this as reasonably expeditiously 

as I can, Mr. Speaker, I know some of this was debated during 

estimates, but I think it should be on the record because of the 

historical nature of today. 

 

To outline The Institute Act in a more technical sense, the Act, 

Mr. Speaker, is designed to accomplish three things: create a 

province-wide comprehensive skill training institution; provide 

it with a mandate broad enough to service the needs of the 

province in the next century; and (c) ensure that its operational 

procedures allow it the maximum flexibility to provide access 

to the largest number of people in the province. 

 

And I would elaborate on these points, Mr. Speaker. First, the 

new institute is the amalgamation of the four technical 

institutes, four urban community colleges, as I said before, 

ATTC (Advanced Technology Training Centre), and the 

Meadow Lake Vocational Centre. 

 

The amalgamation combines the best quality of each system, 

namely, skill training, state of the art institution, flexibility and 

responsiveness to the rapidly changing needs of business — a 

critical mass large enough to provide highly specialized training 

and upgrading on and off campus, expertise in adult basic 

education and its distinctive needs, advanced technology 

training and career counselling, and a variety of training 

delivery methods such as co-operative and competency-based 

education that can be tailored to the needs of the student. 

 

The institute, coupled with the regional colleges and the 

Northlands Career College, will provide a unified and 

co-ordinated delivery of vocational and technical education to 

all parts of the province, Mr. Speaker. The mandate of the 

institute provides it with the widest powers to enable it to serve 

the changing needs of the community. 

 

The Act clearly spells out what the business of the new institute 

is. The institute will provide academic, scientific, trade, 

technical, and vocational courses and programs of study; 

university programs in Moose Jaw and Prince Albert through 

agreement with the universities; continuing education courses 

and programs identified as needed by the community; credit 

programs in rural Saskatchewan delivered by way of contract to 

the regional community college; career counselling services; 

programs and courses; and an important area, Mr. Speaker, 

adult basic education and academic upgrading. 

 

It will form a partnership, and this is as well important because 

we’ve heard this time and time again, Mr. Speaker, about being 

relevant and sensitive to the market-place. It will form a 

partnership with business, industry and labour to ensure that the 

training it provides not only satisfies its clients but leads with 

the state of the art instruction and equipment. 

 

(1515) 

 

To ensure that the institute remains in tune to the changing 

needs of the community and the labour market  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3007 

 

there’s a requirement that its mandate undergo a thorough 

review every five years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We expect the establishment of SIAST, the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology, to provide the 

province with the means of combining resources of the 

technical institutes and colleges to address the significant new 

program initiatives and directions which lie ahead. 

 

And I would like to mention just three of these, Mr. Speaker. 

Because once again we have had some fair debate in this House 

over the past several months, to crying, lamenting — and not 

necessarily all wrongly — some changes in some of our 

programming, some decreases in some areas. As I said before, it 

seems to me that there’s a little gain for anyone to take the 

particular course of study. At the end of the day, three or four 

out of 10 find employment in that area. 

 

So we hear much about that side, Mr. Speaker. But it seems to 

me it would be particularly irresponsible of us if we did not 

think about the other side. What are the training opportunities of 

the future; where are the jobs of the future; and do we have the 

programming in place to deliver those opportunities for our 

young people? 

 

So it is imperative that all programs remain current, particularly 

in areas like engineering, agriculture, health, business, 

management, and the trades. Equally it is critical that they make 

more extensive use of tools like computers, to provide adults 

with greater access to computer-assisted and computer-managed 

learning opportunities. 

 

Fibre optics possess the possibility for interactive, two-way 

exchanges between instructors and students at a distance. 

Satellite transmissions will provide individuals with greater 

access to learning across the province but particularly, in the 

North, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The application of advanced technology, such as computers and 

robotics to the manufacturing process has already begun to take 

place. Programs will need to prepare graduates with skills 

related to the use of these technologies in the manufacturing 

process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

New program initiatives will need to be developed that reflect 

the changing needs of workers in the market-place. It will be 

essential to develop programs in tourism, hospitality, and 

recreation aimed at providing the industry not only with 

entry-level graduates but also with managers, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Program initiatives to the resource sector including 

new industrial materials, biotechnologies, geological and 

environmental sciences will be critical if the province is to 

maintain a competitive edge on world markets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would suggest to you that all of those areas, whether it be 

biotechnology, or the geological or environmental sciences, Mr. 

Speaker, or the tourism industry, those, Mr. Speaker, in a 

diversifying economy are the jobs of the future. And we must 

not forsake our children in terms of having the training 

opportunities available for them. 

As it relates to the question of governance, and certainly one 

that has had some fair amount of attention paid to it at the 

institute level for now some, probably a year or two or maybe 

even more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the kinds of things, I suppose, 

if I as minister had merely heard the issue of governance being 

raised merely at the individual institutes . . . And one could 

have said that they have a vested interest, and perhaps there’s a 

broader story. 

 

But the reality is when I went across this province, Mr. Speaker, 

and met with people, it didn’t matter what the town, the issue of 

governance came up. And so it was quite plain, Mr. Speaker, 

that something had to be changed there. The kinds of adjectives 

I heard and the kinds of terms I heard describing it, and not 

necessarily always fairly, but certainly the adjectives and terms 

were there — words like inflexible, too slow, stifles initiative, 

unresponsive, always have to check with Regina; terms 

describing all that is wrong with the present system, Mr. 

Speaker, where the technical institutes are part of the 

Department of Education, formerly the department of advanced 

education. 

 

So there was no question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, changes had to 

be made, and a number of changes have been put into place as 

you well know. The institute will be moved out from direct 

control of government to an appointed board of directors. These 

directors will represent business, industry, labour, education, 

the arts and community groups throughout this province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. In effect, I hope to name a board that is a 

microcosm of the province to guide its progress. The board will 

be responsible for the development of an annual budget, 

overseeing the general operations of the institute and fostering 

an environment that will support program renewal and 

encourage new initiatives. 

 

The institute will use modern management techniques to ensure 

that its new mandate is delivered. That means setting 

measurable annual goals and objectives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

undertaking strategic long-term planning that will enable it to 

anticipate certain trends and prepare the institute to address 

them, developing a strategy to maintain the relevance of its 

programs, standardizing courses and ensuring credit transfers. It 

will establish regular meetings with regional colleges and the 

universities so we have that seamless continuum, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and give technical advisory boards an expanded 

provincial mandate. 

 

What will all of this mean, Mr. Speaker, in a very real and 

tangible way? One can talk about the various mandates and 

goals and objectives and what the board shall do and not do and 

the detail of the legislation. But for those out there in 

Saskatchewan this very day, to get a sense of the perspective of 

what this new Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology really means, a perspective that’s sometimes useful 

in the mind’s eye, Mr. Speaker, is this. That this new institute 

will become the second largest post-secondary institution in the 

province, second only behind the University of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re talking about today. It will have 

an estimated $125 million in building and facility assets and an 

annual operating budget of approximately $60 million. 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3008 

 

The legislation ensures that the institute as well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, run on a break-even basis. No deficits are allowed. 

The government will continue to provide a core operating grant 

so that there should be no mistake about our government’s 

commitment to post-secondary education. Nevertheless, there is 

an expectation that further revenues will be produced from 

outside sources, including corporate fund raising and greater 

utilizing of alumnae contacts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that’s a particularly relevant point and one I know that 

the business community is increasingly sensitive to because 

they too are reading the signals of the world that’s changing, 

Mr. Speaker. They too realize that their success as a company is 

linked to the success of their individuals in terms of them 

having skilled and knowledgeable minds. That is the new 

commodity of the future, Mr. Speaker. The business community 

will have to be not merely some kind of patron, which has been 

the classic kind of adjective that has been ascribed to business 

in the past, they now must become proactive partners, Mr. 

Speaker. Many have done much already, but we even look to 

more from that area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To ensure the full flexibility of the institute, it will be allowed 

to set aside funds for over year end for especially earmarked 

program initiatives. 

 

It is expected that a certain percentage of the core grant and the 

profits of the institute be set aside — this is a particularly 

exciting area, Mr. Speaker — will be set aside, some funds for 

applied research and development, and for the purchase of new 

technological equipment, and for staff development, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s particularly important to the employees, Mr. 

Speaker, at this new institute. And now I want to say a few 

remarks specifically relevant to the employees themselves — 

what of them? 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, some several months ago there was lay-offs 

in our institute system. We’ve had some early retirements, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve lost some experienced people as well. And yes, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been some uncertainty. But I want to tell 

you and all the employees of our institutes that that is all behind 

us. We now have an exciting, brand-new structure here that will 

be literally, Mr. Speaker, the best in the western world. And it 

will be the best because much as we can have fancy buildings, 

Mr. Speaker, and computer-assisted and competency-based 

educational systems, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, it’s the 

people who are in that building that will make the difference. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the employees of the new institute 

constitute the institute’s most valuable resource, and it will only 

be through their hard work and dedication that the goals of the 

new institute will be achieved. 

 

I want to start off by saying, Mr. Speaker, because the questions 

come like this. Will employees of the urban colleges and 

technical institutes and the Advanced Technology Training 

Centre become employees of the new institute? And the answer 

is, Mr. Speaker, that urban college institute and ATTC 

employees, including those currently on leaves of absence, 

seasonal lay-off, or  

re-employment lists, will become employees of the new 

institute. 

 

There will be no staff lay-offs resulting from the amalgamation, 

Mr. Speaker. And I know some couple of weeks ago I was out 

meeting with the institute faculties and staff, and there was 

some rumours going around about the day this legislation is 

passed that there will somehow be another wave of lay-offs. 

And let me be clear on that. There is job security, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well then the question becomes: will, through this legislation, 

in-scope employees continue to be represented by their union? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the employees who transfer to the new 

institute from the college and institutes will not continue to be 

represented by their current union. However, Mr. Speaker, and 

this is an important “however,” this does not mean that they 

cannot choose to unionize after they transfer to SIAST if they 

so wish. The employees of the new institute have the legal right 

to choose how and by whom they want to be represented in 

their dealings with the institute as the employer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So let me be very clear on that — employees have always had, 

and will continue to have in this province, the freedom to 

choose. Mr. Speaker, it’s not up to me to tell who should 

represent them. It’s up to them to determine who they want to 

represent them and how they want to be represented. 

 

Then there are questions about well, somehow, and the rumours 

were going around, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of somehow when I 

become part of this new institute, my wages will be cut 20 per 

cent. That was one other of the rumours that was going around, 

Mr. Speaker. Well nothing could become further from truth. 

There is pay security, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The larger issue there is: will the collective bargaining 

agreement still apply? And the answer is no. However, before 

anybody jumps to an erroneous or inaccurate conclusions once 

again, Mr. Speaker, I will say that the majority of the terms and 

conditions which employees currently have, whether it be the 

pay, will be continued upon their employment in the new 

institute. I think of things like vacation leave, and I mentioned a 

couple of other ones already about pay levels, Mr. Speaker, and 

there are others. 

 

Now that doesn’t mean to say there aren’t things that won’t 

have to be negotiated because there will be. Currently with the 

amalgamation there’s eight or nine different bargaining units, 

some have 32-hour work weeks, some have 36, some get paid 

twice a month, some are paid once a month. So yes, there are 

things to negotiate. But we must keep in mind that the jobs are 

security, and the size of that pay cheque is secure as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that would only be right and decent for the 

employees of this fine new institute, Mr. Speaker, because they 

are the ones who are going to make this the finest institute there 

is in North America, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3009 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, parents, 

legislators, and ladies and gentlemen, this Bill represents the 

culmination of a lot of hard work by a lot of people, some of 

whom I hope to be joining later yet today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

for a reception. It represents the work of a lot of people, and I 

would have to, as well, acknowledge the work by a lot of 

people in my department, officials as well, members of this 

caucus, and people right across this country . . . province. 

 

I have today attempted to lay out why — and that why, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is equally relevant for this Bill as it is for the 

companion, Bill, the Act respecting Regional Colleges — lay 

out why we are proposing these changes. I then went through, 

Mr. Speaker, how we arrived at those changes, what the choices 

were, and, in fact, outlined today what one of those major 

decisions was. 

 

And so now it is up to all members of this legislature to decide 

in their own minds, and I have no doubt where this caucus is 

coming from, but I ask all members to wholeheartedly support 

this Bill, and I particularly say this to the opposition. They have 

a choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the choice here is one really 

of either we cling to the past, to the notions of the old economy; 

cling to the notion that somehow the Massey 44 will do the job, 

Mr. Speaker; be a change resister, if you like, in their case; or 

they can join with us, and I say this in a very sincere way, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they can join with us in building a bright 

future for our children and young adults — a future in my mind, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has challenge, yes, but plenty of 

opportunity, and a future of greater accessibility and a future, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, of excitement. 

 

Simply put, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and this is why, when I 

started today, I asked all members to put aside their legislative 

hats for a moment and don their hats as parents, which many are 

— simply put, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is at stake here is our 

children’s well being. Up until this point in our society, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, each succeeding generation has always 

enjoyed a better standard of living than the one that came before 

them. My father enjoyed a better standard of living than his 

father did. I’ve enjoyed a better standard of living than my 

father did. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we do not respond in our education 

system, as hard as the questions may be and as hard as the 

choices may be in terms of making change, we are in danger for 

the first time perhaps in the history of this country and indeed 

of the western world., Mr. Speaker, of having a generation 

whose standard of living will not increase as ours has, and as 

has our fathers did before us. That is really what the issue here 

is, Mr. Speaker, the well-being, the continued well-being of our 

children and this adult population, indeed the well-being of the 

province and the well-being of our entire country, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So the choice should be clear, Mr. Speaker, cling to 

the past, be a change-resister, or come with us and build the 

future. 

 

(1530) 

 

I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, if we do not grapple  

with the future, that we might be relegating our children to the 

Massey 44’s and stone boats, or worse yet back to the dump 

rakes and the horses. It would be like relegating them back to a 

time when we produced buggy whip manufacturers when the 

world wants biotechnologists. 

 

To not respond would be to let our children — it will be to let 

our country down and our province down. We cannot let our 

children, our province, or our country down, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I say we meet this challenge by supporting Bill 46, An 

Act respecting the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology, and I do so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure for 

me to be able to take part in this debate today. 

 

I want to say to the minister that we on this side of the House 

support the notion that the education system in this province has 

to expand and adjust to meet, as you call it, the information age. 

And I suppose, Mr. Minister, that that’s about where the 

agreement stops because we on this side of the House think 

that, in the past few months, instead of preparing the technical 

institute and community college education system for the year 

2000, as you like to talk, has taken us back to the year 1967. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are asking the public of Saskatchewan to 

believe that the man who’s been responsible in this government 

for laying off or giving early retirement, forced early retirement 

to some 2,000 people in the public service over the last few 

months, including over 140 technical institute instructors and 

administrative staff at our technical institutes, and at least a 

couple of dozen more in the community college system, is now 

the same man who today claims that the lay-offs are behind us, 

and that we’re somehow into a new era of building with this 

newly created super-institute. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I want to say to being with, that the structure 

that you set up is not the key here. The question is going to be 

how the staff that you’re working with in the institutes feel 

about the new system. And the first mistake that you’ve made, 

Mr. Minister, which is symbolic of the policy of your 

government, is that you failed to meaningfully consult with the 

staff and the faculty and the students in Saskatchewan’s 

community college and institute system before you brought 

down this Bill today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Your idea, Mr. Minister, your idea of 

consultation is a quick trip around to the four Saskatchewan 

technical institutes two weeks ago to announce that the 

amalgamation Bill was going to come down and to respond to 

questions from the audience. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I think that the feeling of faculty and staff 

and students in the technical institute system in this province 

was summed up by your visit to Prince Albert, where when you 

went to Prince Albert and you laid on your fancy rhetoric and 

made your announcement, the faculty at the Northern Institute 

of Technology greeted you with what you deserved — which 

was absolute  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3010 

 

silence. They didn’t have a single comment or a single question, 

and it’s not because that faculty doesn’t have excellent ideas 

about what the future of post-secondary education in this 

province should be. It’s because you, sir, and your government 

intentionally left them out of the process of shaping the future 

of the technical institute and community college system in this 

province. 

 

And I say, Mr. Minister, and members on this side of the House 

say, that we have outstanding professional educators in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And, Mr. Minister, you only get as much as 

you put into the process. You failed to consult the staff of 

Kelsey or Regina Plains Community College or the Prince 

Albert Regional Community College or STI. Those faculty 

members — as they told you at the meetings that I was in 

attendance at — faculty members again and again pointed out 

to you that they had not been meaningfully involved in the 

process. 

 

I stand by that accusation today, Mr. Minister, and I say to you 

that instead of rushing through an amalgamation, which you are 

now trying to do today in a period of four of five months, you 

should have gone about developing a new structure for the 

technical institute and community college system in this 

province if you think the changes are needed. And we on this 

side of the House thought the changes were called for. You 

should have done that over a period of 12 to 18 months in full 

consultation with the faculty and staff and students involved in 

open meetings, Mr. Minister, where anyone who was interested 

in education could come and attend and express their views, 

instead of at closed meetings where the only people that were 

there were people who were invited by you and your staff. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And that’s the crux of the issue in my mind, 

Mr. Minister, is the question of process. 

 

And the second issue, of course, is the issue of funding. I noted 

with interest, Mr. Minister, that you didn’t say a word about 

new funding for the institute and community college system. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is important because if the 

minister is expecting the existing technical institute and existing 

community colleges in this province, which will soon I take it, 

be referred to as regional colleges; if you are expecting those 

institutions to deliver a major extension initiative in rural 

Saskatchewan in university education and technical school 

education, which we on this side of the House would strongly 

support; but if you were expecting that to be done under your 

existing budget which represents a significant budget cut in 

fiscal year 1987-88 over fiscal year 1986-87, then you are sadly 

mistaken, Mr. Minister. You’ve just finished laying off over 

140 professional educators; you’re retired dozens of others who 

had years of experience in the educational system, and now 

you’re asking us to believe that you’re going to launch a major 

new extension initiative in this province, Mr. Speaker, after all 

those lay-offs. 

And I say, Mr. Minister, that you’ll only be able to do that with 

substantial new funding, and I didn’t hear a word about new 

funding in your second reading speech today, and I found that 

to be very interesting. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to move to the question of the 

structure of this new institute. This Bill has only been before us 

for a day, and I think that that’s very typical of the way your 

government has gone about preparing legislation for the people 

of Saskatchewan in this session. 

 

The tradition of this House has always been that if you have a 

major piece of legislation you bring that piece of legislation 

down, you put it before the people of Saskatchewan and provide 

an opportunity for public comment for a month or two, and then 

debate begins in earnest. And I find it interesting that debate 

begins on this Bill today, only 24 hours after it’s been tabled in 

this Assembly, and after there’s obviously, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, been no opportunity for public comment. 

 

But I think that some things about the Bill are obvious. And the 

first thing that I want to address, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the issue of centralization versus decentralization. 

Because we on this side of the House believe that in order to 

have a responsive educational system, in order to have a 

post-secondary education system that is responsive to 

community need, that is responsive to changing employer needs 

in our province, that we have to have a post-secondary 

education system that is geared, provisioned for local input. 

 

And in our mind, Mr. Minister, what you are doing with this 

Bill today is centralizing the decision making process in 

post-secondary education in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Now albeit, Mr. Minister, that does offer some advantages, I 

don’t deny that. And we on this side of the House don’t deny 

that it offers some co-ordination advantages. But with that 

centralization, Mr. Minister, come a great many disadvantages. 

 

And in our mind the major disadvantage is the lost opportunity 

for student input, for faculty input, and for community input in 

the governance of the technical institutes and the community 

colleges. And I want to address this for a moment, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because the premise of the community college system 

when it was set up in communities like Saskatoon and Regina 

and Prince Albert and Moose Jaw was that it was going to be a 

system that was geared to responding to community need; that 

there would be local boards that would be sensitive to 

community need. 

 

And what you are doing by way of this legislation is abolishing 

those local community college boards and replacing them, as 

you’ve said yourself, with one central board made up of 

between 10 and 20 people that you will appoint. And we will no 

doubt see, if the record of your government bears any 

resemblance to the record that will come with this Bill, we’ll 

not doubt see, apart from probably the appointment of two or 

three outstanding professional educators in this province, a 

large number of patronage appointments by your government, 

which has been the record on the appointments of all your 

boards. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we on this side of the House  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3011 

 

want to outline what the potential alternative to this is, because 

we don’t claim for a minute that the existing system didn’t need 

changes. And we’re of the view, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the time has come for making provision in the 

educational system not only for autonomy but for local 

autonomy and for elected boards — for an elected component 

to our boards. 

 

And my challenge to you today, Mr. Minister, is to bring 

forward amendments to your legislation that will make 

provision for community input and for opportunities for board 

members to be elected. And I lay out to you today, sir, an 

alternative structure for your changes to the post-secondary 

education system. 

 

And I say to you that we on this side of the House, instead of 

supporting one large super-institute with a board appointed by 

government, call on the Government of Saskatchewan to 

establish four boards, amalgamate the community college and 

the technical institute in Prince Albert — NIT (Northern 

Institute of Technology) — together under one board, and make 

provision for an elected student representative, at least one, at 

least one elected representative from the faculty and staff, and 

an opportunity for elected representatives from community 

organizations that are interested in post-secondary education in 

the city of Prince Albert. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And establish the same model, establish the 

same model in Saskatoon and Moose Jaw and Regina. And, Mr. 

Minister, I think that this model, and the effectiveness of this 

model, has been clearly demonstrated by the historical record of 

the regional college in the city of Prince Albert. 

 

That regional collect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has been operating 

for many years with a great deal of success, and I think that 

what has made the Prince Albert Regional Community College 

stand out from the other community colleges in the province of 

Saskatchewan is its ability to be responsive to community need. 

And I think that’s been demonstrated by the large turn-out of 

hundreds of people at public meetings in Prince Albert when 

you set about abolishing that regional community college board, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

And what we’re suggesting today in this legislature is that you 

establish a local council in each of Prince Albert, Saskatoon, 

Regina and Moose Jaw; that council to be made up of 

community organizations in each of those centres and their 

surrounding geographical area that are interested in adult 

education. They will be made up of organizations that vary 

from the Red Cross and the Metis society through to the local 

cancer foundation and the chamber of commerce and a large 

variety of other organizations that will be interested in 

education, whether it be from the point of view of being 

employers or whether it be from the point of view of being 

consumers of education in this province. 

 

(1545) 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, establish that kind of a council 

in each of those communities — it will no doubt  

have anywhere from 50 to 100 organizations involved in it — 

and then let those organizations and the representatives that 

they send to that council elect three or four members on to each 

of the boards that will run the amalgamated community college 

and technical institute in each of the centres of Saskatoon, 

Regina, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert. 

 

In all, Mr. Minister, what I’m suggesting to you is a local board 

in each one of those four centres made up of approximately 10 

to 12 members. The details should be worked out in 

consultation with the people who will be affected, but that 

makes provision for two things: one, for elected representation 

from faculty and staff at the technical institute and community 

college in that centre; and second, that makes opportunity for 

elected representatives from interested community 

organizations who are concerned about the future of 

post-secondary education in this province. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Minister, if you’re concerned about 

getting a province-wide perspective on the boards of each of the 

institutes, and I think there’s a good deal of merit to that, there’s 

nothing to stop you from appointing two or three members to 

the local board that will bring that kind of a perspective with 

them. And our suggestion, therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

that this piece of legislation be amended and instead of one 

super-institute being created, we have four locally autonomous 

institutes and community colleges run by boards that are largely 

made up of elected members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, if you’re concerned about 

attaining excellence in the community college and technical 

institute system, and if you’re concerned about providing and 

obtaining public input in that system, then you’ll look seriously 

at the model that we’re proposing today. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I have a second challenge for you. And that 

is, if you are so certain — and I’d be grateful for your attention 

— if you’re so certain that your system that you’re proposing 

here today is good, then instead of rushing it through the 

legislature as you obviously propose to do, you’ll be prepared to 

make provision for public hearings on this Bill. 

 

Take it to the education committee of this Assembly, which 

hasn’t met once since your government was established five 

years ago, and let that education committee of this Assembly go 

all around the province and obtain public response to this major 

restructuring of our post-secondary education system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — You’ve said yourself, Mr. Minister, you’ve 

said yourself that this constitutes a major restructuring of the 

post-secondary education system in this province. And we agree 

with that, Mr. Minister, and we say therefore that this Bill 

deserves to get the kind of public scrutiny that the people of 

Saskatchewan want to give it. Put your education committee to 

work in this legislature, and let’s go out and have all-party 

hearings in  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3012 

 

this province to get public response to this Bill. 

 

I would welcome that, and I think we’d be very well served by 

the public comment that we’d receive from professional 

educators and interested members of the general public who, as 

of yet, have not had an opportunity to be consulted in open 

forums on your plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, I want to address another 

issue before adjourning the debate today, and that is that you 

claim that you are taking so-called good care of the employees 

who have been working for you in the technical institute and 

community college systems of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I, of course, beg to differ. I say that never before have we 

had a Minister of Education and a Department of Education that 

has treated its professional educators with such arrogance, with 

such insensitivity, and with such callousness. 

 

Laying off 142 professional staff virtually without notice, and 

in some cases asking them to leave their offices on the same 

day that they got their notice, is the kind of record that any 

Minister of Education ought to be thoroughly ashamed of, and 

the kind of record that members on this side of the House will 

never practise, I can assure you. 

 

But I want to turn specifically to the Bill and point out to the 

minister, as he has acknowledged himself, that despite the 

requests at each of the meetings that I attended to have him 

ensure that employees in the technical institute and community 

college system would have their union rights protected under 

section 37 of The Trade Union Act, the minister has made a 

conscious decision not to do that. And I want to point out to the 

members of the public, and all members of this Assembly what 

a significant decision that is, because it’s always been tradition 

in this province that when members of an institution, when staff 

and faculty and employees of an institution are transferred from 

one institution to another, their collective bargaining agreement 

and their trade union rights are transferred with them. 

 

And what you are telling every employee in the technical 

institute and community college system in this province, most 

of whom are represented by Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Union, is that the union that represents them now 

will not represent them the day that this Bill comes into effect. 

And I say, Mr. Minister, that you have no business disregarding 

the tradition of the collective bargaining rights and trade union 

rights of employees in this province, and that’s exactly what 

you’re choosing to do. And this is symbolic of the way that 

you’ve been treating technical institute and community college 

staff ever since you became the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — So I can assure you, Mr. Minister, that we’ll 

also be introducing amendments to this legislation which will 

force your government, if they’re adopted, to recognize 

employee rights under section 37 of The Trade  

Union Act. 

 

I might note, Mr. Minister, that there are a number of other 

concerns which employees in the technical institute and 

community college system ought to rightly have upon 

reviewing this Bill. As I’ve said, I’ve had less than 24 hours to 

review the Bill, but a number of things strike me as serious 

questions right off the top. And I want to mention two or three 

of those to you before adjourning the debate today. 

 

One is that instructors and faculty in the technical institute and 

in many of the community colleges are presently covered by the 

long-term disability plan that’s operated by Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union. It’s less than clear what kind 

of disability plan your government is now proposing that they 

have with the creation of this super-institute. 

 

There is also no mention of seniority and seniority rights for 

long-time employees of the technical institute and community 

college system. And I’m not accusing you of ignoring their 

seniority, I’m simply saying that the Bill doesn’t address that 

issue. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, surely you’re not going to tell this 

Assembly that people who’ve worked for you loyally in the 

education system for 15 or 20 years are not going to have their 

seniority recognized with the creation of this new institute. I 

hope that you’re planning to recognize their seniority, but 

there’s no reference to that in the Bill, and I hope that you’ll 

clarify that issue. 

 

There’s no mention of the question of grievance procedures 

either, Mr. Minister. There’s no indication of a dispute 

settlement mechanism under the Bill. I hope you’ll also clarify 

that matter. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’ve outlined a number of concerns that members 

on this side of the Assembly have. I hope that instead of rushing 

this Bill through the Assembly you will consider my suggest for 

setting up public hearings on the Bill. That will not delay the 

Bill, Mr. Minister, for more than a matter of three to four 

weeks. I think it’s the least you can do, given the sweeping 

changes that you’re proposing to make, and I urge you to 

consider that suggestion. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 47 — An Act respecting Regional Colleges 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as I 

mentioned in my remarks on Bill No. 46 that much of the 

rationale for why we’re making the changes in our . . . whether 

it be in our regional college system, the community college 

side, or the institute urban college side, the rationale is the same 

for both Bills, and that’s why they are companion pieces of 

legislation. 

 

I’ve talked about some of the social and demographic  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3013 

 

changes the world is undergoing, as well as some of the 

economic changes the world is undergoing. And so I won’t go 

through that again, but I would want it to be on the record that 

the rationale, the “why” if you like, is the same for this Bill as it 

was for the previous Bill. 

 

When one looks at Bill No. 47, Mr. Speaker, An Act respecting 

Regional Colleges, as I mentioned at a meeting that I think my 

hon. colleague the member from Saskatoon University was at, 

in fact, when I met with regional college of community college 

chairmen and chairpersons and their principals, really what this 

Act could be called in a more functional sense is an Act 

respecting accessibility to adult education in this province., 

because that’s really what we’re talking about here, Mr. 

Speaker — accessibility. That’s what this Bill means in its 

purest terms. 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, during the meetings I held across 

this province, and the hon. member in his earlier remarks 

relatives to the Bills that fact us, are before us today, suggested 

somehow that there’s been no consultation. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

say again, and I say again for this record that I have difficulty 

with that observation because I don’t know what you call 

conferences that were established last year by the Department 

of Advanced Education, Leadership 2000, which in many ways 

started it, the Issues and Options paper that the university has 

undergone, the Better Tomorrow that the community college 

has done, the 20 meetings that I attended across this province 

last winter. He wants public meetings now. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, where was the hon. member last winter? We 

cannot run this government by paralysis by analysis, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s a job that has to get done because the world is 

changing, and is changing day by day. 

 

We had 20 meetings across this province — myself, my 

colleague from Regina Wascana — 20 meetings; 500 groups, 

associations, individuals including, Mr. Speaker, unions, 

employees, employers, business, industry, educators, students, 

parents, school boards, teachers, service clubs, volunteer 

agencies across this province, Mr. Speaker. And they told us in 

clear, and in no uncertain terms . . . and I’ve gone through what 

we heard, but I’ll say it again, Mr. Speaker, because we heard 

time and time again that there was the question and a lack of 

accessibility to a wide range or educational opportunities, 

particularly in the rural areas. 

 

People told me that they wanted more skill training, more 

university courses to help them upgrade and keep their children 

closer to home, keep them in the community. We hear a lot of 

talk about the community. Well what better way, Mr. Speaker? 

Not that you can do everything in the community. You cannot 

replace the milieu of a campus, whether it be a technical 

institute campus or a university campus. You cannot do 

everything there. 

 

But that first or second year of university or institute 

programming, if we could provide more of that in their own 

communities, it’s a lot cheaper for the individuals, cheaper for 

the parents, Mr. Speaker — more basic education to help adults 

upgrade their skills in reading  

and writing and giving them an opportunity to be eligible for 

technical institute or university training. 
 

They suggested things like the distance education. They told us 

people working in rural areas needed upgrading of skills 

without having to travel hundreds of miles, leaving jobs and 

families behind. 
 

I listened again with interest when the hon. member talked 

about Regina and Prince Albert and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. 

We must look beyond, Mr. Speaker. What of the rest of the 

province? What of Meadow Lake? Yes, it’s a tragedy and a 

hardship to have to drive from Regina to Moose Jaw to take a 

course that was once here. But what of that individual from 

Meadow Lake or Nipawin? Are you not thinking of him? You 

can’t have this narrow view of merely that the core should be in 

four centres of this province. 
 

The issue for us and our government is how do we get that core, 

whether it be university programming or technical institute 

programming, delivered across this province? And that’s what 

this Bill is about. The pipeline will be the regional college 

network, Mr. Speaker, and the Northlands Career College. That 

is what is going to make education accessible across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — A phrase used at one of the meetings 

was that the system will have to bend to improve access to 

non-traditional groups. Natives, Mr. Speaker, the disabled — 

greater attention has to be paid there; and a recurring major 

issue, Mr. Speaker, the need for retraining those already in the 

work place. 
 

I was on an open line show this very morning, Mr. Speaker. 

One of the questions that was put to me by a caller was, I’m in 

the work-force now and I want to be able to have training 

because that’s how I’m going to keep my job with this 

technological change, he said, and I’ve got to be able to take 

those courses at night. That’s why I say we have to have a 

system that’s flexible in terms of method, time, and place, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 

The need for retraining those already in the work-force — 

persons representing women’s groups, natives and people with 

disabilities spoke passionately, Mr. Speaker, about social 

inequalities. That again I heard across the province time and 

time again. 
 

(1600) 
 

Well with respect to this new Act, specifically, Mr. Speaker, I 

would touch on a couple of areas, a technical review, once 

again, of the meat of the Act, if you like. But first I would like 

to give some background and some history to put it in 

perspective for all members. 
 

Community colleges were first established under legislation in 

1973 — four colleges, so-called pilots were established in La 

Ronge, Humboldt, Melville and Swift Current. By 1975-76, 11 

more were in place, including colleges in Regina and 

Saskatoon. Within another couple of years, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Indian Community College and Lakeland 

College were  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3014 

 

established and finally the North East Regional Community 

College came into being in 1980. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, it is fair to say that in 1972 it was very 

clear that the community college system was being established 

to serve rural Saskatchewan. It was to provide learning 

opportunities for rural adults that did not have ready access to 

the two university campuses or the then three technical institute 

campuses, or the larger libraries and the services they provided, 

or the YWs and the YMCAs or the evening class at the 

university extension department and the institute the extension 

departments offered, and the many private vocational schools 

located mainly in Regina and Saskatoon, and the story goes on 

and on. 

 

I have no doubt that that community college network was put in 

place to try to address the inequality, if you like, Mr. Speaker, 

in the system. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the colleges were established to 

serve those adults who were not being sufficiently served, and I 

suppose one word we could say rural adults. And what was the 

mandate of the college system, Mr. Speaker, back then in the 

early ’70s? The mandate, as I understand it from the legislation, 

was left very general and broad in scope — “to provide any 

programs requested by adults,” and that is in quotation marks, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In those early years, we look at the history of the community 

college system in those early years. Over 80 per cent of the 

programs delivered were hobby and recreation courses. It was 

useful for residents to finally have a focus in the community for 

all these courses that were in several instances previously 

offered by school boards, recreation associations, and others. 

 

During the last decade the world has changed and the colleges 

have matured, Mr. Speaker. Rural residents have gradually 

requested more credit and specialized skill training, upgrading 

and updating courses, and university programs. The college was 

now trying to attract the young person who needed career 

counselling or adults who wished to broaden their 

employability to be able to relate to an increasingly 

sophisticated and technologic world. 

 

The world of the community college, in fact, Mr. Speaker, has 

changed so dramatically that last year only 5 per cent of its 

programming was devoted to the hobby and recreation area. 

The people were telling us, by the courses they were wanting 

and taking, Mr. Speaker — it went from 80 per cent in the early 

’70s to last year of 5 per cent. 

 

And that should tell us something. That should tell us that the 

system has matured and they want more sophisticated 

programming in these colleges, Mr. Speaker. And yes, Mr. 

Speaker, we have been criticized by some for our change in 

policy regarding the hobby and leisure programs, and whereby 

we have asked the regional college to make arrangements for 

their delivery by other means, Mr. Speaker, as was done in the 

past — I suspect in the late ’60s and even the early ’70s. 

 

Clearly, as I have indicated before, Mr. Speaker, the  

colleges and the adults of the province were sending a signal to 

the government — 80 per cent down to 5 per cent. They were 

sending a signal to change the focus, redeploy your resources at 

the colleges to a clearer mandate, one that is directed at credit 

programs and courses that enhance employability. 

 

Now that doesn’t mean to say, Mr. Speaker, that there aren’t a 

number of people that haven’t been substantively helped 

through the leisure courses. I particularly recall stories of those 

who got their first chance to enter a system that ultimately led 

them into some adult basic education, and their first entry was 

often with hobby and recreation programs. But we expect these 

to continue as a vital part of the community being delivered by 

volunteer or community recreation associations and so forth, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well specifically, The Regional Colleges Act — and move to 

the meat of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. The major objectives of The 

Regional Colleges Act are threefold: to clearly establish in 

legislation a new mandate for the colleges; to established 

updated and flexible management practices; and third, to 

establish the new Northlands Career College. I would like to 

elaborate on these points. 

 

The mandate of the colleges explicitly spells out the business, 

once again, that the college is in. They will provide technical 

institute and university programs under contract, 

cost-recoverable training, career services, and adult basic 

education, upgrading, and literacy programs. The colleges will 

continue to work co-operatively with businesses to ensure that 

training is provided to meet the labour market needs of the 

communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the next year — and this is particularly exciting, Mr. Speaker 

— in the next year we will be working with the two universities 

to establish a common first and second year arts and science 

program that will allow students to access either university after 

successfully completing two years at a regional college. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, is that not going to be another historic day in this 

province’s educational history when, for the first time, you 

don’t have to go to Regina or Saskatoon or the Prince Alberts of 

the world, or wherever — two or three spots to this very day, to 

get that first and second year arts and science . . . access it in the 

communities, maybe at night even in some instances, and get 

that first and second year university and be able to go to either 

campus. 

 

I mean, to me, Mr. Speaker, it is a sad comment in this province 

today when we don’t have transferability between our 

institutions, our educational institutions. We are too small a 

province for that kind of bottle-neck, Mr. Speaker. And this is a 

point I have raised with regional colleges, I’ve raised with the 

institute, and I’ve raised with the boards of governors of our 

two universities. And, Mr. Speaker, we will be undeterred in 

our goal to have standard first and second year arts and science 

classes across the province through our regional college 

network, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what a great day that will be for members of this 

legislature, again, Mr. Speaker. A strong partnership will be 

forged between the regional colleges and the new institute. The 

institute will continue to provide the  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3015 

 

expertise and vocational and technical programs. The regional 

college network, as I’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, will act as the 

pipeline to take this training out to all areas of the province. 

 

To ensure that the college remain attuned to the needs of the 

community, I’m proposing a new item that is vital for evolving 

educational enterprise — the requirement for a regular review 

of its mandate every five years. It will be an opportunity to 

assess their past achievements and look ahead to the future so 

that we discipline ourselves to look at where we’ve come from 

and where we’re going, Mr. Speaker. It will be a time to make 

any of those mid-course corrections that are needed in this 

rapidly changing world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve previously mentioned, the institute Act and 

the regional colleges Act are in two parts — companion parts of 

an integral whole. To make the new world of the colleges closer 

to the institute you will note that we expect the colleges and the 

institute to conduct their affairs in a similar manner. The 

colleges will continue to be led by a seven-member board of 

directors appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council in 

additional to their normal powers, which I will not go through, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Board members asked, during this legislation and during our 

consultation, asked that a variety of changes be made to make 

their work more efficient and more effective, and this has been 

done. And we can go through those changes in the Committee 

of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are, too, giving them more autonomy, the college boards, in 

their personnel management. As it relates to the question of 

space for our colleges, Mr. Speaker, it has been an issue for 

some time. Colleges have been saying there is a need for more 

permanent facilities — if not owned by the colleges, at least 

longer-term leases are required. In some rural areas and in the 

North this has become a critical need as the regional college 

attempts to provide specialty technical training. 

 

The new regional colleges Act, Mr. Speaker, will provide 

colleges with an increased capacity to raise funds for these new 

facilities. Similar to the new institute Act a section clearly 

outlines the necessity of colleges to run on a break-even basis 

— no deficits are allowed. As in the current colleges Act, the 

requirement remains for colleges to have their budgets 

approved by the minister. However the need for these so-called 

“double approvals” has been eliminated. Once the annual 

budget plan is agreed to, no further approvals are necessary, Mr. 

Speaker; that’s what I’m talking about in terms of more 

autonomy. 

 

The new Act also allows the colleges to use the same wide 

variety of financial instruments for borrowing, lines of credit, 

issuance of notes, etc. that the institutes have, Mr. Speaker. You 

can see the parallel design on our two structures. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, there is a section which provides for the 

smooth transition of staff and property from the former colleges 

to the new ones without disruption. We are all aware here, too, 

that the specially skilled and  

experienced staff are the college’s most valuable resource. 

Therefore special care has been taken to ensure that the 

employees of the non-urban colleges will continue as 

employees of the regional colleges. Salaries, benefits and other 

terms and conditions of employment will not change as a result 

of the formation of the regional colleges. I reiterate, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is the employees who will achieve, for the 

regional colleges and the new institute, the goals of tomorrow. 

 

And now I want to spend some several moments discussing, 

Mr. Speaker, because this Bill mandates it as well — the 

Northlands Career College. The creation of the Northlands 

Career College will be a landmark I believe, Mr. Speaker, in 

providing educational services to the North. They intend to 

combine the regional strengths and contacts of the three 

colleges into a new college with a new focus, Mr. Speaker. 

Careers for Northerners — that will be the new focus. 

 

This is another piece of the mosaic, Mr. Speaker, which will 

help us to address more seriously than ever before the concerns 

northern people are constantly raising with me. Concerns about 

young people leaving school and not finishing their high school 

education; concern about needing upgrading courses that will 

allow them to enter university or technical institute training; 

concerns about accessing programming in La Ronge, Creighton, 

Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Cross, Cumberland House, 

La Loche, and other northern communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Northlands Career College will provide the 

North with a clearer focus of attention, a clearer mandate, and a 

more efficient and effective operation. The multi-purpose lab in 

La Ronge, the residential vocational complex in Buffalo 

Narrows, and existing facilities in Creighton, Beauval, will 

become satellite facilities of the college. These facilities will be 

used to deliver technical and vocational programs, broken from 

the institute and the university systems. 

 

Further, northern employees, business industry and government, 

and people in traditional enterprises will have access to these 

facilities for modular training in specific job-related skills. 

Learning centres will continue to be the college’s major contact 

facilities in many northern communities. These centres will 

provide a wide range of educational and career counselling and 

will offer individual progress academic upgrading. 

 

Career information access stations from schools, friendship 

centres, and other community facilities will provide a focus for 

the distribution of printed materials offering the services of the 

college. The Northlands Career College will assume certain 

aspects of certain . . . of rather . . . Mr. Speaker, the Northlands 

Career College will assume certain aspects of current junior 

colleges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Bill I mentioned at the outset that what . . . 

Another term, if you like, that came to my mind when I looked 

at this Bill and what it can do for Saskatchewan, as I said, it 

could be an Act respecting accessibility to adult education. And 

certainly that’s true, even more true in the northern part of this 

province than anywhere else. 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3016 

 

And as well when I read this reference, Mr. Speaker, to junior 

colleges, I suppose in a functional sense and in another day and 

another time and another place I might have called this Bill an 

Act respecting junior colleges. Because when you look at it and 

what our expectation is, that too, that junior college, in a way, 

says it in a word perhaps more aptly than the term regional 

college. 

 

So I would want people to have that understanding in their 

mind’s eye, Mr. Speaker, that junior college . . . if an image of 

that conjures up in the mind is not . . . they’re not too far off the 

mark in terms of our expectations. And certainly that’s true with 

the Northlands Career College. 

 

The Northlands Career College will provide professional and 

paraprofessional career development training through 

co-operative projects between employees and their provincial 

universities. The college will offer academic support and 

counselling needed to facilitate the . . . (inaudible) . . . 

university level career training. Further, the college will provide 

support and counselling for year one and two university credit 

courses offered in the North. 

 

Because functional competency in the basic academic areas of 

mathematics, communication, and applied science is becoming 

a prerequisite for an increasing number of occupations, Mr. 

Speaker, the demand for competent development teaching must 

be addressed. The role of the northern secondary school system 

and competence development should be explored as soon as 

possible, and a working group composed of staff in the northern 

division and secondary system should be assigned the specific 

task of addressing this issue in the North, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the new initiatives that we 

have, or will be undertaking, that we will be striving for in the 

North. And I can only say to you and to the members of this 

Assembly and to the public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, stay 

tuned, because for northern Saskatchewan an exciting future 

lies ahead. 

 

One final word too about personnel. We have again provided 

for an orderly transfer of employees from the three northern 

colleges to the new northern career college. Again, no lay-offs 

will occur as a result of this amalgamation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well in conclusion, the new regional college network, the start 

of a new and exciting chapter in educational history, Mr. 

Speaker, is well on its way as yet another part, another building 

block in our blueprint. And I urge, once again, all members of 

this legislature to support Bill No. 47, An Act respecting 

Regional Colleges. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, and Mr. Minister, we on this side of the House feel 

more disfavourably disposed to this initiative than we do to the 

one that we’ve just been debating prior to this. We’ll not be 

supporting your proposals for a super institute, but we do 

welcome your initiative to offer more university and more 

technical institute classes in rural Saskatchewan communities. 

(1615) 

 

Our concern, however, Mr. Minister, is going to be to ensure 

that your offerings are going to be high quality offerings in rural 

Saskatchewan, and that in so initiating this extension program, 

you do not erode the quality of education at the University of 

Saskatchewan, at the University of Regina, and in the existing 

technical institute system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I noted in the debate on Bill 46, Mr. Speaker, that the real 

issue here, in terms of seeing whether the regional college 

network that the government is proposing is effective, will be 

when the 1988-89 budget comes down and we see what kind of 

budgetary provisions are in place for this major extension 

initiative. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, once again if the minister is proposing 

that this extension initiative be done largely out of the budgets 

that the University of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan have now — and I hope he’s not proposing that 

— then the quality of education at our two university campuses 

will be seriously eroded. But if he’s proposing that this will be 

new money to launch an extension initiative in rural 

Saskatchewan, then I say that I’m sure the people of rural 

Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan will welcome 

the initiative. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to specifically comment on a couple 

of changes that once again we as members of the opposition 

would like to see the government seriously look at with respect 

to this Bill. 

 

Our concerns are largely the same concerns that I expressed 

about Bill 46, Mr. Speaker. First of all we’re concerned that 

employees in the community college system are not going to 

have their trade union rights recognized and transferred with 

them to the new regional college system that the minister is 

proposing to create. 

 

Once again this government is choosing to break the 

long-standing practice of transferring trade union representation 

when employees are transferred from one institution to another; 

he is breaking that long-standing practice and telling unionized 

members, unionized employees of the community college 

system, that their union rights will not be recognized in the new 

regional college system that he’s creating, Mr. Speaker. And we 

will be bringing forward an amendment to change that and to 

insure that those union rights are recognized. 

 

And second, Mr. Speaker, we’re once again proposing to the 

government that they ought to look at the notion of at least 

partially elected boards rather than appointed boards in the 

regional college system. We see no good reason, Mr. Speaker, 

why the board of a regional community college should simply 

be made up of appointments by the Minister of Education. We 

think that the local geographical area that the regional college 

will serve would be much better served by a board that was at 

least partially elected. 

 

And our proposal once again, Mr. Minister, is that you look 

seriously at the very successful Prince Albert model and apply 

it to the new regional college boards and  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3017 

 

ensure that at least four of the seven members of a regional 

college board are elected members — elected by community 

organizations that are interested in post-secondary education 

and the service that post-secondary education provides in their 

region of the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that if the minister was to look at 

those two changes to the Bill, we may have a Bill which all 

members of the House could be satisfied with. 

 

So in summary, Mr. Speaker, we expect to be opposing Bill 46 

because of the sweeping changes that the minister is making 

which we don’t think in many cases are reflective of the desire 

that faculty, staff, and students and employers in this province 

have who are interested in education, and that are not reflective 

of the concerns that community leaders have about education. 

 

And we will be more favourably disposed to Bill 47 if the 

minister would be prepared to consider the amendments that we 

put forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — I would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 41 — An Act to 

amend The Provincial Auditor Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for allowing me to 

participate in this debate, a debate surrounding An Act to 

amend The Provincial Auditor Act. This Bill, contrary to what 

the Minister of Finance says, does not strengthen the audit 

process, nor does it maintain accountability of all Crown 

corporations. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The 

Provincial Auditor Act weakens the role of our Saskatchewan 

auditor, Mr. Lutz. 

 

This Bill lessens the role of the auditor and undermines the 

political independence — an arm’s length relationship of 

auditor and provincial government. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I 

would argue that the Tories are trying to muzzle yet another 

watch-dog agency that reports directly to this legislature. It’s a 

well-known fact, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Auditor and 

the Conservative government have been at odds over access to 

information for some time now. Mr. Lutz has been trying for 

some time to get information out of the Crown Management 

Board. To date this request for information has been futile. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now have a situation where the Provincial 

Auditor is considering legal action to force the Conservative 

government to give information that by law he is entitled to and 

by law the government must give to the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Why is it, Mr. Speaker, that the Crown Management  

Board refuses to give the Provincial Auditor the cost associated 

with the use of private sector auditors? Is it more costly or is it 

less costly than the use of the Provincial Auditor’s office? 

That’s a question that the people of this province have a right to 

know, and Mr. Lutz has the right to ask for that information and 

be given that information. 

 

As members of this legislature, a legislature that the auditor 

reports directly to and is accountable to — and he doesn’t report 

to the cabinet, and he doesn’t report to the Premier, and he 

doesn’t report to the members opposite — we have the right to 

know, and Mr. Lutz has the obligation to provide the 

information to us, and the government has the obligation to 

provide the information to Mr. Lutz. By making the request the 

Provincial Auditor is simply doing his job. By denying the 

request the Conservative government is violating the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lutz’s efforts to determine whether the Crown 

Management Board’s books were examined by the private 

sector in the same manner as his office would have examined 

them in the past is a reasonable request, and a request that the 

government and the members opposite should secede to. The 

denial of this information is a denial of the members of this 

legislature. It is a denial to the people of this province, and it’s a 

denial to the people of this province because it is the people of 

this province who have put us all here. They’re the ones who 

elected us. To deny us access to information is to deny the 

people of Saskatchewan information. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, the government wants to change the 

auditor’s Act. They want to amend the Act so that Conservative 

members, and Conservative members only, will know the state 

of the Crown corporations and other agencies. 

 

Now the government argues and the member from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Finance, argues that the 

provincial government can still scrutinize the audits done by 

private sector auditors. But the real question is, can they? Can 

he audit those books when private sector auditors have been 

involved? 

 

With changes to the Act, the Provincial Auditor no longer has 

the right to instruct a private sector auditor to do the following. 

Under the old Act, the old section, the Provincial Auditor had 

the right to instruct another auditor to do the following: include 

any procedures that the Provincial Auditor deems necessary to 

allow the Provincial Auditor to fulfil his responsibility under 

the Act. 

 

With the amendments to the old Act, the Provincial Auditor will 

no longer be given this authority. As a result of this amendment 

to the Act, the Provincial Auditor loses the right to instruct an 

appointed auditor to provide information to the Provincial 

Auditor over and above what is strictly necessary, MR. 

Speaker. Mr. Lutz loses the right to request further clarification, 

and in effect, Mr. Lutz cannot properly fulfil his function as the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

In effect, Mr. Speaker, the changes to the auditor’s Act 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3018 

 

emasculates the ability of the Provincial Auditor to look into the 

affairs of government beyond what the government is willing to 

allow the auditor to see. 

 

And that’s an important issue, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial 

Auditor at this stage can request information and, by legislation, 

the members opposite, the Government of Saskatchewan, is 

obligated to give the Provincial Auditor that information. These 

amendments today, I suspect, are here because the government 

wants to hide its mismanagement and its incompetence. Could 

this Bill be a cover-up? Well I think it is, Mr. Speaker. I think 

this Bill is a cover-up of their fiscal mismanagement and their 

incompetence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, with the amendments to the Act 

it now appears that private sector auditors don’t have to supply 

the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Lutz, with documents that they use 

to produce their audited reports. In effect, while the Minister of 

Finance may say that the Provincial Auditor can still scrutinize 

the audits done by private sector auditors, the Provincial 

Auditor, with these changes, Mr. Speaker, has no way of 

verifying the validity of the private sector auditors’ audited 

reports. Now how is that scrutiny, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a further problem with this Bill. They 

have deleted probably the most important provision of the 

existing legislation. They have deleted the power of the 

Provincial Auditor to conduct further examination or audits of 

accounts, records or financial statements of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, a Crown agency or a Crown corporation that the 

auditor may consider necessary. In short, this Bill limits the 

ability of the Provincial Auditor to conduct a thorough 

investigation of the public books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with these changes in the auditor’s Act the 

government will only have to give the auditor documents that 

they want to give him. The government will be able to withhold 

documents; the Provincial Auditor will be unable to do anything 

about it. I think that’s important. The government, with these 

changes to The Provincial Auditor Act, can withhold 

documents, and the Provincial Auditor, the watch-dog for this 

legislature, will be unable to do anything about it. 

 

Now right now, Mr. Speaker, the government can be taken to 

court to gain access to information and documents. The 

Provincial Auditor up until now has not had to do it. And it’s 

interesting that the Provincial Auditor is considering legal 

action because the Crown Management Board will not give 

over information that’s been requested. Under the proposed 

changes to this legislation the Provincial Auditor will be unable 

to take any kind of court action to force these members, this 

government, this cabinet, that Premier, to provide information 

to the auditor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill substantially weakens and undermines the 

power of the auditor. It takes away his power to examine the 

accounts of this province in as great a detail as he deems 

necessary. It takes away his power to instruct a private sector 

auditor to include any procedures  

necessary to allow the Provincial Auditor to fulfil his 

responsibility under the Act. It also takes away his power to 

request further information from private auditors when they 

submit their audited report. It takes away his power to request 

and receive from private auditors, documents used to produce 

their audited reports. The auditor has no way of verifying the 

validity of those reports. And finally, Mr. Speaker, it takes 

away his power to do whatever is necessary to fulfil his 

function, his statutory function, an obligation to the people of 

this province through their elected representatives. 

 

(1630) 

 

These amendments, Mr. Speaker, are not in the best interests of 

the people of this province. These amendments take away our 

right to know how those people are spending the public’s 

money. And that’s an important point, Mr. Speaker. This Bill is 

another muzzle. They’re muzzling this legislature. They’re 

muzzling every watch-dog agency that’s directly responsible to 

this legislature, and when they introduce these amendments, 

they’re muzzling the Provincial Auditor who, by statue, is 

responsible to this legislature, and that’s unacceptable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — This Bill takes away very specific powers of 

the Provincial Auditor and should be defeated, Mr. Speaker. It 

should be defeated. 

 

This Bill is before us today because these members opposite do 

not want the people of this province to know what’s going on. 

We’ve had enough of closed cabinet door meetings. We’ve had 

enough of these people stymieing the electoral process by 

refusing to give us an agenda so that we know what’s going to 

be happening the next day in the legislature. We’ve had enough 

of that. We’ve had enough of ministers and members playing 

games. We’ve already had a major rule change which will 

effectively stymie committee work. We’ve had it, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s important that the people of this province know what 

every one of those members opposite stand for because they 

certainly don’t stand for democracy, Mr. Speaker, because if 

they did, they would not be bringing this Bill forward today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more to say about 

this and I now beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 42 — An Act 

respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 

resulting from the Enactment of The Provincial Auditor 

Amendment Act, 1987 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for 

giving me the opportunity to make a few remarks on Bill No. 

42, which is a consequential Bill of 41. And one simply can’t 

discuss Bill 42 without Bill 41 because Bill 42 wouldn’t exist 

unless Bill 41 was here. 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3019 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the members on this side have already indicated 

there is a lot of fear that one has to express when we have Bills 

coming forward of the nature of Bill 41 and Bill 42. Up until 

now, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has the role of not 

only auditing all of the departments of the government but also 

the Crowns and all agencies which expend government or 

public funds. 

 

With this Bill, Bill 42, Mr. Speaker, that is no longer true. And 

what will happen is that the Executive Council will take upon 

itself the powers that before were given to us in this Assembly 

through the Provincial Auditor. And let me explain this to the 

people of Saskatchewan so that they will understand what the 

debate is all about. 

 

In the past and up until now, the legislature has appointed the 

Provincial Auditor and has told him, through legislation, what 

his role should be, and it has been a very comprehensive role 

and a very complex role. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance took upon 

himself to ignore the law of the land and simply said that he 

would implement new policy, which is contrary to the law that 

presently exists, and that he would hire private auditors to do 

the examining of the books of some Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance did this knowing full well 

that under the present law only the Provincial Auditor is 

allowed to examine the books of any Crown agency or any 

Crown corporation or any department, with the exception, Mr. 

Speaker, of any Crown corporation that is designated as such 

that they can be examined by private auditors. Other than that, 

only the Provincial Auditor is allowed to examine those books. 

 

I think it’s incumbent upon democratic governments to abide by 

the laws that are made by democratic governments and made by 

the legislature. And for a minister of the Crown to ignore those 

laws and simply saying, I know what the laws are, but I’m not 

going to abide by them because I’m going to implement a 

policy that I think is right, and I don’t care what the legislature 

says, and then, Mr. Speaker, to try and absolve himself from the 

error or the sin that he has committed, he brings in a Bill which 

he makes retroactive to January 1 in order to cover up his own 

misdeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in second reading of Bill 42, the Minister of 

Finance said that an opportunity was given to the Provincial 

Auditor to participate in this policy change. And he said, now 

the Provincial Auditor is changing his mind. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

there is sufficient evidence by the Provincial Auditor that he has 

requested for some time to participate in this particular change, 

and to no avail. 

 

And I refer all members to a brochure or a write-up on Crown 

corporation accountability by the Provincial Auditor wherein he 

states: 

 

I responded to the minister in January 1987, asking that his 

officials contact me when they wish to discuss this matter. 

 

And the matter was the hiring of private auditors. He says  

on February 19, 1987: 

 

I wrote to the minister indicating that I had not heard from 

his officials regarding the change in policy, and brought to 

his attention some serious concerns that I had. 

 

Which were summarized as follows, and I quote: 

 

In summary, as the officer of the Legislative Assembly 

appointed specifically to assist the members of the 

Legislative Assembly in its responsibility to hold the 

executive government accountable, I believe that any 

legislative enactments to permit the appointment of private 

sector auditors should not in any way detract from my 

ability to satisfy myself as to the true state of affairs of all 

public money, including that managed by Crown 

corporations, in order to report with confidence to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem here is not the hiring of private 

auditors. That is the prerogative of the government if they so 

wish. The problem here is that the present law doesn’t allow the 

Executive Council, the Premier and his cabinet ministers, to 

hire private auditors at this time, because the law that presently 

exists says that the Provincial Auditor shall audit all the books 

of every department, every Crown corporation, and every 

agency except those that are specifically stated that can be done 

by private auditors. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the problem that we are debating today — 

the accountability of the government to this legislature and 

hence to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, the diminishing role that the 

members opposite, the Premier and the cabinet, have inflicted 

upon the Provincial Auditor in spite of the fact that they know 

that by law the Provincial Auditor has an obligation and a 

responsibility to examine all those books, and no one else. That 

is, Mr. Speaker, what we are debating today. 

 

And members opposite should note that the law is there to be 

upheld, particularly by those people who make the laws. And 

the executive branch of government should not become so 

arrogant and so powerful and so overbearing that they can 

simply ignore the Legislative Assembly, and say we don’t care. 

We are going to do what we want to do, and we don’t care what 

the law is. 

 

If they want to change the policy, and they want to change the 

law, then let them bring in legislation first, have it passed by the 

Legislative Assembly, and then act on that legislation. They 

can’t do the reverse. That, Mr. Speaker, does not only diminish 

the role of the Provincial Auditor who is an employee of this 

Legislative Assembly, but it’s also an insult to us as members 

of the Legislative Assembly. They are simply saying we want 

you to rubber-stamp. We want you to rubber-stamp something 

which was illegal, and we’re going to correct it now and you 

have no right to question it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in Public Accounts this was debated  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3020 

 

to some extent, and in my questioning of the president of the 

Crown Management Board as to whether or not he didn’t 

realize that the law says that the Provincial Auditor has the right 

to that information, his answer to me was, Mr. Speaker, that he 

had been instructed, he had been instructed not to give that 

information to the Provincial Auditor, although he was required 

by law to do so. 

 

And it is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, as to who instructed 

him not to give that information to the Provincial Auditor. In 

questioning him further, he said it was the board of directors of 

the Crown Management Board. But, Mr. Speaker, who is the 

vice-chairman of that Crown Management Board but the 

Premier of this province. That, Mr. Speaker, is a frightening 

situation when one looks at it, that the Premier of this province, 

knowing full well what the law is, instructs the president of the 

Crown Management Board to refuse information to the 

Provincial Auditor whose job it is to audit all the books — 

except those which are excluded — to refuse that information to 

the Provincial Auditor, knowing full well that they are 

contravening the law of this land. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what we are debating in these two Bills, 

and that is what we are so determined to make the public aware 

of. We are not opposed to private sector auditors if it can be 

shown — and we had them before in 1982 when we were the 

government — and if they can be shown that they are 

cost-effective, then fine. But how can the Provincial Auditor, 

how can the Provincial Auditor know whether they are 

cost-effective and whether or not the public’s money is well 

spent unless, Mr. Speaker, that information is made available to 

the Provincial Auditor. 

 

So Bill 42, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill that does several things: first 

of all I think it’s an insult to the Legislative Assembly because 

it is retroactive in a sense because it’s a consequential Bill of 

Bill 41; and secondly, it certainly does diminish the role of the 

Provincial Auditor who is an employee of this legislature. He is 

not an employee of the executive branch of government. He, 

Mr. Speaker, is the watch-dog to make sure that the executive 

branch of government is spending our money wisely, 

efficiently, and effectively. 

 

And therefore the report is tabled in this legislature through 

you, sir, but to us, and not to the executive branch of 

government. And that, Mr. Speaker, is something that I think 

every member in this House must try to protect, that we don’t 

let the executive branch of government diminish our roles as 

members of the Legislative Assembly and the roles of those 

people who are employees of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I want to use two examples, Mr. Speaker, of what is so 

frightening because this is not the first time that this has 

happened. We saw what happened to the Ombudsman when he 

had the audacity to criticize the executive branch of 

government. When he criticized the executive branch of 

government, he was severely criticized by members of the 

Executive Council, and he’s no longer with us. He’s no longer 

with us. 

 

(1645) 

 

When the Provincial Auditor did the same thing, and is  

very critical, so what did they do? They want to restrict his role. 

They’re saying, all right, if that’s the way you’re going to deal 

with your role and you’re going to be too critical and you’re 

going to carry out your duties and responsibilities very 

religiously and that means criticism for us, what do we do? 

Well, we simply reduce your role. We make sure that you can’t 

carry out your function and your role in that manner. That 

again, Mr. Speaker, I say is a frightening trend, and we should 

avoid that with all our strength. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other people who wish to 

speak on this Bill, and because they could not be here today, I 

beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resume the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 43 — An Act to 

repeal The Public Utilities Review Commission be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I have wanted for 

some time to address a few words on this question. This 

government came into office on a promise of open and 

accessible government. 

 

It’s interesting to see, Mr. Speaker, how thin this has worn over 

the five years they’ve been in office. One of the signs, I 

suppose, of a government getting long in the tooth is they get a 

little tired of the public. And I suggest that’s what’s happening 

with this . . . that’s what this evidence is — that’s what the Bill 

is evidence of — evidence, Mr. Speaker, that this government’s 

getting long in the tooth, getting tired of the public. I say, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a very short step between the government getting 

tired of the public, and the public getting tired of the 

government. And the polls show that perhaps the feeling’s 

mutual. 

 

Mr. Minister, the PURC (Public Utilities Review Commission) 

legislation which we all voted on back in 1982 and which was 

one of the flagships of the current administration, and which I 

think received the unanimous support of the House, I believe, 

was intended to provide public input into the setting of utility 

rates. It’s a bit more complex than that, but not very much. 

 

The utility rates before that had been set by order in council. It 

was democratic in the sense that those who made the decisions 

were answerable to the public. And I often believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that part of the ‘82 results stemmed, in part at least, 

from very high utility rate increases in the previous period. It 

was also a period of very high inflation. There probably wasn’t 

much the former government could have done except to 

increase the utility rates. But if there weren’t any options, that 

wasn’t explained to the public, and perhaps that was one of the 

failings with the system of cabinet simply setting them, 

announcing them, is that there’s no system of explaining that to 

the public. 

 

The advantage that the Public Utilities Review Commission had 

is that it gave the public an opportunity to participate, gave the 

public the assurance that the decision was being made on a cost 

basis and on a sound financial basis. And so it accomplished 

two objectives,  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3021 

 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was an educational result — the public had an 

opportunity to see why the rates were being increased. It gave 

them an opportunity to participate, and we can all think of 

examples where that was done. One can think, for instance, of 

some of the industrial companies which have long complained 

that the rates which they pay are too high. They had an 

opportunity to say so, and indeed PURC found in their favour. 

The government reversed that, but they had a forum in which 

they could present their view. 

 

So for those reasons the previous method, which had 

accountability in the sense that the government was accountable 

to the public — that proved to be painfully true in fact — 

lacked accessibility. It was not an accessible system. the public 

misunderstood it. This was brought in instead — the PURC 

system. It was, I think, warmly received by the public and, I 

think, was relatively popular. That it had some flaws was, I 

think, misunderstood, although, I think, was not seen by the 

public. The system did have some flaws. 

 

Perhaps because of the number of lawyers involved — I don’t 

know — it became very complex — the process. It wasn’t easy 

for a farmer in Souris-Cannington to go to PURC and say, I 

think my power rates are too high, and I wish you devils would 

do something about it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 

that’s true. That’s true. That’s true. No one in 

Souris-Cannington would think of addressing any comments to 

anyone but he local MLA. I could have picked a much better 

example, and that’s Maple Creek. I’ll leave that alone, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Suffice it to say the procedure was complicated perhaps because 

there was a lawyer as chairman; I don’t know. I think in some 

ways it was a failure of this government to set the rules of 

procedure. I always think it’s a mistake for a government to 

allow a regulatory agency to set its own rules of procedure. 

Those rules will be inevitably designed for the convenience of 

the regulatory agency and not the convenience of the public. To 

some extent that’s what’s happened here. A solution would 

have been for the government to have established some rules of 

procedure which would have simplified the process. It could 

have been easily done, but they didn’t. 

 

It was also a fairly expensive process. And once again I think 

that had something to do with the complexity of the process. 

That again could have been cured by simply promulgating some 

rules for that body, though what we have in fact now is that 

they’ve thrown the baby out with the bath water. They have one 

more case of an election promise broken, Mr. Speaker, one 

more case of this government getting tired in office, tired of 

listening to the public; thus they simply cut the public off. And I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that that will work until this government’s 

mandate runs out, and then they’re going to find the public 

equally tired of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is now no way in which the . . . the public 

really have no effective means of addressing any concerns or 

comments they have with respect to power rates. The theory 

once was that they did that through their  

MLAs. The fallacy with that approach, though, is that the 

MLAs don’t . . . is that the public do not know about increases 

in utility rates before they become fait accompli, and that was 

the problem with the old process. 

 

I am one, Mr. Speaker, who supported the pre-’82 process — 

while we were in office — but I now say, and say openly, that 

it’s not acceptable to the public. That’s in fact what this 

government is going back to, the pre-’82 procedure. It’s not 

acceptable to the public. Utility rate increases which come out 

of the blue, as they now will, are not acceptable, and this 

government is going to pay a heavy price for this particular 

promise which was broken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government came into office talking about 

accessibility, talking about open government. They now are 

proceeding in the opposite direction, and it’s part of a pattern 

which we’ve seen — a fairly marked pattern, actually, which 

we’ve seen since the election. 

 

We saw the Provincial Auditor’s legislation — the cutting out 

of the Provincial Auditor from at least a supervisory role over 

the private accounting firms — once again government which 

prefers to operate in secret, prefers not to be held accountable. 

This is part of the same process. 

 

As an alternative, Mr. Speaker, the government could have set 

up an advisory body which solicited opinions from the public 

but left the ultimate decision to cabinet. There are many ways, 

Mr. Speaker, in which the public input could have been 

solicited, but this simple repeal of the legislation provides none 

of that. 

 

The public will now have no means, Mr. Speaker, of addressing 

their comments to the . . . If the government House Leader 

indicates he wants to go in the Committee of Finance before 5, I 

will adjourn debate and . . . Mr. Speaker, I’ll move to adjourn 

debate at this point in time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


