













































July 29, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 29, 1987 

 

 

1467 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, yesterday I received certain 

petitions which were laid on the Table. I have examined the 

petitions under rule 11(7), and hereby present them for reading 

and receiving. 

 

The first group of petitions were: 

 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, 

praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

urge the Government of Saskatchewan not to limit the 

universal accessibility of Saskatchewan people to ensured 

chiropractic services. 

 

The second group of petitions were: 

 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, 

praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

urge the Government of Saskatchewan to retain the 

school-based dental plan. 

 

And the third group of petitions were: 

 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, 

praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

urge the Government of Saskatchewan not to change the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 

you, and through you to the members of the legislature, Sean 

Carragata and Peter Tolman, who are seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. Sean is the president of the University of Regina 

Students’ Union, and Peter is the external vice-president for the 

University of Regina Students’ Union. 

 

I had the opportunity to meet with them just a few minutes ago 

to discuss, among other things, the post-secondary education 

conference that’s going to be held in this province here later this 

fall, which I think is going to be a very exciting event and one 

that will set the course, I believe, for post-secondary education 

across this country for the next decade or two. 

 

Although it is summer, the students at the university are being 

well served by their executive, not the least of which are the 

president and the external vice-president who are, albeit that it 

is summer, hard at work on their behalf. I would ask for Peter 

and Sean to stand and be recognized, and for all members of 

this Assembly to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Legal Aid Commission Fees 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, my questions involve the 

Minister of Social Services, but I will address them to the 

Premier. 

 

I questioned the minister in this Assembly about the Legal Aid 

Commission’s plan to begin charging fees to poor people for 

the services rendered by the legal aid clinics. I did this on July 

22 and he answered my question in these terms, Mr. Premier, 

and it’s reported at page 1319 of Hansard. He said: 

 

I believe the member opposite knows that I have no direct 

control over the Legal Aid Commission and very little 

influence over what they do. I am merely the minister who 

sends cheques to the Legal Aid Commission to pay the 

bills. 

 

And later he said: 

 

However, they have not as yet communicated that 

information to me. And I understand from the media, and 

maybe you have better sources, that they’re considering 

some charges, and I will study them when they send them 

to me. 

 

Now in light of that statement I would like the Premier to 

explain, on behalf of the minister, a document which I have in 

my hand and which I’m prepared to table after question period, 

which is a letter from the deputy minister of Social Services, to 

the acting chairman of the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 

Commission. The letter is dated July 16, 1987, and I quote: 

 

I wish to inform you that Treasury Board Minute no. 1229 

relating to the Department of Social Services Budget has 

approved an immediate implementation of a $50 per case 

charge for legal aid services applicable to non-SAP clients. 

This approval was based on your cost recovery strategies 

submitted to Treasury Board. 

 

Now the question that I have for you, Mr. Premier, is: was the 

minister misleading the legislature last week when he answered 

my question in those terms, or did his deputy minister fail to 

inform him of the treasury board decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the 

specific question in the absence of the Minister of Social 

Services. I would only say that at . . . The statement I think two 

days ago in the House, I think the head of the Legal Aid 

Commission indicated . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’m sorry. The minister 

has taken notice and no explanation can be given. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, which again 

ought to be answered by the minister, but which I will direct to 

the Minister of Justice. Another reason that I  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1468 

 

was surprised with the answer given by the Minister of Social 

Services, denying all knowledge of these charges, is that I 

understand in a meeting with the Legal Aid Commission earlier 

this year he told them that budget cuts were forthcoming and 

asked them for ideas. 

 

Now in light of that, and in light of the document that I’ve just 

referred to, indicating treasury board has approved the fee, I 

would like the minister to confirm that this is the history of this 

matter, that it is the history of this matter that he raised the 

subject of budget cuts with the commission and got this 

response from them — the idea of a contribution plan — and 

that this was approved by treasury board, in fact, and 

communicated to the commission on July 16. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think, from my knowledge of what has 

transpired in the House — and I will simply obtain that 

information for you, bring it back to you — but it would seem 

to me that the way this thing unfolded is far more detailed than 

the hon. member would have us believe. But I will take notice 

of that and bring it back to him. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 

absence of the Minister of Social Services, I will direct my 

question, a new question, to the Premier. Mr. Premier, there is 

another troubling aspect to this July 16 memo from the deputy 

minister of the Department of Social Services to the Legal Aid 

Commission. It says, and I quote from that memo of July 16 . . . 

 

Mr. Premier, in light of the fact that the Minister of Social 

Services just walked into this Assembly, Mr. Premier, you’re 

off the hook, and I’ll direct my question to the Minister of 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you are aware that on July 16 of 

this year your deputy minister sent a memo to the Legal Aid 

Commission and, in part, it says, and I quote to you, Mr. 

Minister: 

 

Revenues generated by the commission cannot be used to 

cover additional expenditures but must be returned to the 

province: The most efficient and effective method to 

account for your revenues would be to reconcile the 

collection at year-end (and I underline this last phrase, Mr. 

Minister) and we will reduce your final grant payments by 

that amount. 

 

Mr. Minister, in light of that memo and the fact that the Legal 

Aid Commission suggested a fee schedule as a way to make up 

its 8 per cent, $500,000 reduction, and the fact that none of 

those fees will go to the Legal Aid Commission and that they 

will go directly to the Minister of Finance to help pay for the 

provincial deficit, will you admit to this Assembly, Mr. 

Minister, that that is a tax on the poor, albeit a hidden tax on the 

poor? And I ask you, Mr. Minister, to justify to this Assembly 

how you justify that hidden tax to the poor of Saskatchewan. 

Will you justify that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The memo you refer to, I have had an 

opportunity of looking at. And it’s clearly a case of bureaucrats 

quibbling about money. And that’s what that letter and the 

letters going back and forth suggest. 

 

I can tell you that that is not a final policy of this government, 

now was the letter personally sanctioned by myself. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, if you . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes. And while I’m on my feet, I wanted to 

remind you, as I had mentioned yesterday, to direct all remarks 

to other members through the Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — My apologies and, Mr. Speaker, a 

supplementary, directed again to the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you do not sanction memos submitted by your 

deputy minister, then who is responsible in this Legislative 

Assembly for those memos submitted by your deputy minister? 

 

I submit to you, Mr. Minister, another question: that in light of 

the fact that two groups — Lawyers for Equal Justice and the 

Canadian Native Law Student Association — have both spoken 

out strongly against this destruction of the principle of legal aid 

because they see this plan as unfair and possibly even open to 

court challenge — in light of those concerns, Mr. Minister, will 

you reconsider this unfair plan and look for other ways to cut 

the deficit? Will you consider attempts by your government to 

cut the salaries of some of your political staff, or to apply cuts 

to the advertising, the self-serving . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The 

supplementary question is getting way out of line and lengthy. 

As a matter of fact, you have asked two in quick succession. So 

please, if you have a question, put it directly without any further 

preamble. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — The question directly, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister is this. Why not cut the political fat of your 

government instead of making the cuts on the poor of 

Saskatchewan? Will you answer that question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I can say, Mr. Speaker, that the majority 

of the public is in favour of the policy that is in place. I’ve even 

read favourable comments in the media that this is a reasonable 

way of proceeding, and therefore we will not be changing the 

policy. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, a question for the Minister of 

Social Services. The minister has acknowledged that he is 

familiar with the memorandum of July 16, which I’m going to 

table after question period. And I refer him to the  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1469 

 

first paragraph of that document which makes it clear that the 

treasury board had approved the implementation of a user fee 

system at least six days before the minister answered my 

question in the House on July 22, 1987, to the effect that he was 

merely the minister who sends cheques to pay the bills, and 

who had not received any information from the commission as 

to any user pay program. 

 

My question to the minister is simply this: did you deliberately 

mislead the legislature last week when you answered my 

question; or is it a matter of your deputy minister not telling you 

what’s going on in your own department? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The hon. 

member for Regina Centre has been kind of carrying on a 

running commentary since the beginning of question period. 

Please refrain from that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question 

is no, I did not mislead this Assembly, either negligently or 

deliberately. At the time I had no knowledge of the treasury 

board minute, nor does it matter, because the treasury board 

minute, which we will not produce but which is referred to in 

that letter, would indicate that the situation is that legal aid was 

considering a fee and that treasury board was not opposed to 

that fee and had for some reason granted approval. 

 

Now treasury board does not need to grant approval, nor can it 

require the Legal Aid Commission to charge a fee. And it is 

quite clear, as I said to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, in 

the day in question, that we did not oppose a fee for those 

people who were capable of paying some form of fee. So it is 

totally consistent. What we are doing here is we have members 

opposite playing around with little memorandums, little 

documents that I have not seen and that I did not sanction at the 

time. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary. It’s not a question of the 

opposition playing around with anything. It’s a question of 

getting straight answers from ministers in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister. Will the minister admit that in January or February of 

this year he met with the Legal Aid Commission, warned them 

of impending budget cuts, and asked them to come up with a 

plan whereby they could help cover the budget cuts that would 

be coming? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I met with the 

commission. I advised them that the government was going to 

have to reduce expenses in all areas, and asked them to think 

about ways of efficiently reducing their expenditures. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A supplementary to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Will the minister admit that he received as one of the 

options from the Legal Aid Commission, the option  

of imposing a contribution system on the users of the legal aid 

plan, and that this option went forward over the minister’s 

signature to treasury board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — There were two questions there, Mr. 

Speaker. The answer to the first question is, yes, this was one of 

the options that they had indicated they would consider. And 

the second question, with respect to my signature to somewhere 

or other, I don’t recall ever sending anything of that nature to 

treasury board. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister on the 

same subject. Earlier this week I asked the minister some very 

direct questions as to whether or not certain instructions had 

been given by the government to the Legal Aid Commission, 

and Hansard records that the minister, on several occasions, 

responded that he did not recall any such instructions, or not to 

his knowledge, I think was some of the language used. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, how a decision of treasury board could 

be taken on a subject that is absolutely germane to your 

responsibilities and you not know about it. And how could your 

deputy minister write to the acting chairman of the Legal Aid 

Commission on a very critical subject to many people in 

Saskatchewan, directly falling within your responsibility, and 

you not knowing about it? How could that have happened? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t particularly 

concern myself with treasury board, because they have no 

jurisdiction over the Legal Aid Commission. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

document that has been referred to in the House today in terms 

of cash flow arrangements between the government and the 

Legal Aid Commission was mentioned by the minister in a 

previous answer where he said, I think, something to the effect 

that this was just an argument among bureaucrats about how the 

money should flow, or something to that effect. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’re in a position today to 

elaborate upon that comment a bit further. What was the 

government’s proposition to the Legal Aid Commission in 

terms of cash flow, and what was the Legal Aid Commission’s 

response to the government’s position, and what is the state of 

affairs now in terms of this flow of cash to deal with legal fees 

under the legal aid program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The answer to most of that question is, I 

don’t know, because I didn’t instruct any bureaucrats to quibble 

about money that I didn’t know might be there. And when I 

found out about this I said, you wait until there is any money, 

until they’ve made a decision, and then we’ll quibble about who 

gets it. 

 

And in particular, Mr. Speaker, this issue has not been resolved 

because it has not come to my level or the level of my cabinet 

colleagues. The bureaucrats do not run this government, cabinet 

does. And cabinet will decide on that issue. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that in that 

memo of July 16 your deputy minister directed that the funds 

collected from fees to legal aid clients will go  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1470 

 

directly to the Minister of Finance, will you ensure that those 

fees collected will go to help for the operations of the Legal Aid 

Commission? Will you at the very least give that assurance to 

those who are responsible, to ensure that Saskatchewan people 

who are poor can get legal protection in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, at the time I answered the 

question for the member from Gravelbourg, I thought that if 

there were any fees which I knew were being considered — we 

did not direct them to charge fees, but if there were any fees, I 

thought they would use them for their purposes. This issue has 

now arisen with the technicalities of The Department of Finance 

Act and whether they have the power to keep funds collected, 

and this matter will be resolved by cabinet in an appropriate 

manner. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct a question 

to either the Premier or the minister in charge of the Legal Aid 

Commission, preferably the Premier. The minister just said a 

moment ago that it was the government and the politicians that 

were making the decisions, and not the bureaucrats. The 

memorandum to which the member from Saskatoon Fairview 

referred is a decision of the treasury board of this government, 

which is the government, agreeing to the imposition of fees on 

those who are needy in the legal aid system, in the fact of a bald 

assertion to the contrary by the Minister of Human Resources a 

few days ago. 

 

I want to ask, Mr. Speaker, the Premier or the minister in 

charge: if the government runs the Legal Aid Commission, why 

in the world does he not direct the Legal Aid Commission and 

the bureaucrats to stop this unfair penalty on those who can’t 

afford to pay for legal services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the initial question raised by the 

member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was: did the government 

instruct the Legal Aid Commission to charge any fees? And the 

answer at the time was, not to my knowledge. And not to our 

knowledge today did we instruct them to do it. 

 

Clearly they indicated it was something they were going to 

consider. It seems to me that the Legal Aid Commission has 

admitted that it was a submission to us that this is one of the 

things they would do if they had less money this year. We did 

not tell them exactly what to do. They have made their decision, 

and if treasury board has passed something saying that we can 

live with their decision, that is fine, because it is exactly what 

I’ve been saying all along. As long as it’s fair and reasonable, 

the government will not try to interfere even if we could. 

 

Prosecutions Regarding Non-Payment of Wages 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, My question is also 

directed to the Minister of Human Resources, Labour and 

Employment. It deals with the shocking document tabled 

yesterday by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview, a memorandum from your director to your deputy 

minister stating that there were about half as many  

prosecutions in the last calendar year because of the election. 

 

Simply put, Mr. Minister, it means that you have sacrificed the 

interests of workers, which this legislation was passed to 

protect, to the interest of your own friends. I ask you, Mr. 

Minister, now that you’ve had a chance to look at it, how do 

you justify for interfering with the administration of justice and 

sacrificing the interests of workers to those of your friends? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of the 

question yesterday and I will be giving a more detailed answer 

once we have done a full investigation of that. The government 

has nothing to hide with respect to that memorandum 

whatsoever. I indicated that elections have nothing to do with 

the prosecution or collection of wages for employees. I believe 

that is how my department had operated during the last election 

and during every election. However, it seems that the 

department — and we have never been an incumbent 

government before, so it seems that the department during 

elections operates differently, and I didn’t know that. 

 

And I have a memorandum dated before the 1978 election and 

it’s from the regional manager . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

The minister’s attempting to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, in the 1978 election, the 

regional manager sent a letter to the labour standards officer in 

Saskatoon and it’s got the name of the individual employee 

whited out on it. But it’s got one sentence; it says: request to 

prosecute — better hold off until after the election. This is in 

1978. And I believe that the member for Saskatoon Fairview 

was the deputy minister of the department at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, this election interference 

in the department seems to be a past practice I didn’t know 

about and have not . . . You know, he brought it to my attention, 

Mr. Speaker, and I am pleased, and it will not happen in the 

next election. We will make certain that they don’t follow the 

practices they did in 1978. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

the opposition is growing tired of your misinformation that 

you’re bringing to this Assembly. And you’ve just finished 

doing it in the question that you just gave us. Mr. Minister, it 

has long been a policy not to initiate prosecutions during the 

period in which an election writ is outstanding. That does not 

explain prosecutions dropping in half during the last calendar 

year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I ask you to stop spreading  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1471 

 

misinformation in this House and tell us how the prosecutions 

come to drop by 50 per cent in the last election year. What is 

your position with respect to this document? Is it a total 

fabrication? Did they just write it for the fun of it, or is, as I 

think is obvious to everyone else, that there’s been political 

interference in the administration of justice in your department? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, that is true. There has 

been political interference in the operation of the Department of 

Labour. It was . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! Order. Just let the 

minister answer the question. Order. Order. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — There was election interference in that 

department in 1978, Mr. Speaker, when the member for 

Saskatoon Fairview was the deputy minister of the department. 

That’s true. I didn’t know about it, and I didn’t know that that’s 

how they operate during elections. And now that he’s brought it 

to my attention, I can assure you they will not operate like that 

during the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want you to answer the 

question, and I want you to consider your answer carefully 

before you do. Is it your position that there was no interference 

in the prosecutions except during the period of time an election 

writ was outstanding? Because if your answer that in the 

negative, I think you’re going to have trouble explaining these 

statistics. So I ask you to answer that question: is that your 

position, that there was no interference and no political 

considerations except during the period of time the writ was 

outstanding — the 28 days the writ was outstanding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the only political 

interference that I know of was during the 1978 election. I knew 

nothing about this. I was innocent until he brought it to my 

attention, the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason that there are fewer prosecutions is for 

a simple reason. That we have had a policy of trying to settle 

cases out of court, of taking other matters to other procedures, 

third-party demands. He understands a garnishment; he’s a 

lawyer, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure he understands that. We have 

tried to have matters settled, especially the small matters, rather 

than a direct prosecution and a court case. And that is the 

reason, and I believe it is a very good reason. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that’s the answer you gave yesterday. 

It’s different than the answer you gave us today. But let’s deal 

with the answer you gave us yesterday, to attempt to settle 

them. Let me just remind you — let me just read the sentence in 

this memo . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Sorry. Did you say it was a new question? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, he did. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Okay. Okay, fine. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Your director says to your deputy: 

 

A direct result of the reduction in prosecutions has been an 

increase in the use of certificates and third-party demands. 

This has, on occasion, caused the department some 

embarrassment and delayed payments of employees’ 

wages for lengthy periods of time. That’s what your more 

accommodating attitude, during the period of an election, 

has meant. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you: do you not agree that you’ve sacrificed 

the interests of the workers to the interests of those of your 

friends? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I challenge the member 

opposite to read the next paragraph which says that the 

embarrassment and the problems caused to the government are 

because the employers are mad at us because we’re 

garnisheeing their wages on behalf of . . . or their money 

coming to them on behalf of the employees. So because we are 

taking stricter measures, rather than take prosecutions, we are 

doing third-party garnishment on employers. 

 

The next paragraph says that the employers are unhappy with 

us. Would I want to do that during an election? Not likely. We 

are doing our job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Governors’ and Premiers’ Trade Forum 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to 

make a brief statement with respect to the recent governors’ 

trade . . . premiers’ trade forum in the United States. I attended 

and co-chaired two sessions of the National Governors’ 

Association meeting in Traverse City, Michigan. 

 

On Monday I was pleased to address a governors’ committee 

meeting on agriculture, and there was widespread and 

practically universal agreement that agricultural subsidies in all 

areas of the world were the root cause of our depressed prices. 

 

I made the case, as I have on several occasions before, that 

income-based support for farmers, like Canada’s western grains 

stabilization fund, would be much less market distorting than 

current United States or European price subsidies. Governors, 

for the most part, support this theory and are encouraged by 

President Reagan’s initiatives in this direction. 

 

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1472 

 

The agriculture session was important for two reasons, Mr. 

Speaker. First, governors were able to hear firsthand what the 

Canadian perspective of the problem was, and how crucially 

needed the solution is now. Second, the line of face to face 

communication was strengthened between premiers and 

governors. I am convinced that without this constant exchange, 

initiatives such as President Reagan’s recent announcement to 

decouple supports would never have happened. 

 

On Tuesday I was honoured to have been the Canadian 

co-chairman of the first meeting of the premier/governors’ trade 

forum. Once again this initiative was undertaken to foster better 

understanding and communication between Canadian and 

American policy makers. Irrespective of whether a bilateral 

trade agreement is reached between our two nations, it is 

imperative that there is a mechanism to deal with ongoing trade 

irritants. 

 

In this regard, many issues of extreme importance to both 

countries were raised, debated, and thoroughly discussed. These 

included energy, agriculture, and opportunities for economic 

co-operation in attracting new business. There was a general 

agreement that much more sharing of factual information was 

imperative so that decision makers were operating on the same 

level of understanding. As well, there was, on behalf of the 

governors and premiers, a desire to ensure that both nations 

understand why certain actions have been taken to date. 

 

The forum also allowed various states and provinces the 

opportunity to share the success . . . the information on 

successes of bilateral dispute mechanisms such as the Great 

Lakes Charter, the Saskatchewan Boundary Commissions with 

Montana and North Dakota, the National Association of State 

Directors of Agriculture, and the Canadian Ministers of 

Agriculture Annual Conference. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, although critics may say that these 

types of forums are not useful, I would maintain that without 

this kind of face to face contact, trade irritants could very well 

be much worse than they are currently. As former premier of 

Alberta, Mr. Lougheed, said: 

 

It’s not that our two nations won’t have differences; it’s 

how we solve those differences that will be the true test of 

our ability to work as two sovereign, sophisticated, and 

mature nations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a brief reply. Mr. 

Speaker, I had the honour to attend a governor’s meeting some 

years ago when I was chairman of Canada’s premiers, and 

while I found it interesting and entertaining, I was not 

convinced, at that time, that the governors, as a group, exercised 

very much influence in Washington. And nothing that has 

happened since then has changed my view. 

 

This is not to suggest that we shouldn’t use all methods to 

exchange information, and I commend the Premier for using 

this method of exchanging information. Whether or  

not the whole process was useful, I think, will probably be a 

matter of opinion. I noted with some interest in the media that 

the Premier’s co-chairman, Governor Sinner, of North Dakota, 

seemed a good deal less convinced of the value of the exercise 

than did the Premier. 

 

However, be that as it may, we never are sure what will come 

out of an exercise of exchanging information with people with 

whom we carry on a good deal of business. I think the 

overwhelming message that came, at least through the media, 

was that we are a very long way from achieving any new 

understanding of what amount to, let us say agricultural 

subsidies on one side of the border or the other, based upon any 

common understanding of the facts. 

 

I would therefore suggest that a great deal of work needs to be 

done; that the exercise which the Premier has engaged in, while 

not likely to be overly productive, was none the less very 

possibly useful, and we have no quarrel with him holding up the 

banner of Saskatchewan in that regard. And we can only hope 

that our friends south of the border will be a little more 

appreciative of the concern that Canadians and people from 

Saskatchewan have with respect to a wide measure of trade 

problems, particularly those of agriculture on which the Premier 

was focusing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 

 

Tribute to First Woman Member 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, and 

with leave of the Assembly, I’d like to pay special tribute to a 

past member of this Assembly, if I might. 

 

On today’s date in 1919, in a by-election in Pelly constituency, 

the people of this province elected the first woman to ever sit in 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, a lady by the name 

of Sarah Katherine Ramsland. And today marks the 68th 

anniversary of that occasion. And I just wanted to make 

mention of it, Mr. Speaker. I thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS AND REPORTS 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to table the 

document that I referred to in question period. It is a copy of a 

memorandum from the deputy minister of Social Services to the 

acting chairman of the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission, 

dated July 16, 1987. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I should also like to 

take this opportunity to table the 18th annual report, 1986, of 

the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Saskatchewan 

branch. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 

table a document I referred to in question period, a department 

memo dated October 12, 1978. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1473 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $363,072,500 be 

granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 

ending March 31, 1988. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will be sending over to the Finance critic 

the breakdown — it’s a scheduled Bill — of those items where 

it is not one-twelfth. 

 

As I indicated, as a courtesy prior to that, I think the area of 

concern to the hon. member is the need for additional funds on 

wind-down dental drug . . . I can go through the list, but I will 

forward to the hon. member a copy. 

 

In addition to the matter of the changes to the drug plan and the 

transition to the new program, the dental plan, I think the main 

items are the revenue sharing, which is traditionally given at 

two-twelfths, August. 

 

The Social Services, one point one-twelfth, and that’s to cover 

the projected fall educational allowance to children in the 

August, Saskatchewan assistance plan cheque. 

 

Urban revenue sharing to maintain historic payment schedule is 

at two-twelfths. 

 

Grants to the parliamentary association and society of Clerks is 

at eight-twelfths. That’s required to cover expenses of the 

Canadian Parliamentary Association conference being held in 

Regina. 

 

A major change at eight-twelfths are forest fire operations — 

summer concentration, extraordinary fir expenditure, fire year. 

That includes forest fire operations, operating subsidy to the 

resource protection and development fund for fire suppression, 

payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation in Parks — that’s for SPMC payments, including 

$2.9 million for water bomber rentals associated with 

fire-fighting. 

 

In addition, in Parks, is the grants to the new careers 

corporation at eight-twelfths. Most of those, if not all of those, 

new career costs, are associated with summer construction 

projects. 

 

Seven-twelfths to the Public Service Commission summer 

student employment program. Again those expenditures are 

over the course of the summer. 

 

Rural Development has two-twelfths for ferry services. That’s a 

concentration of activity by ferry operators over the first six 

months of the year. 

 

Grants to community economic development at four-twelfths. 

There has been no provision in earlier special warrants. 

 

I indicated the prescription drug plan. Grants to hospitals, 

repayment of principal and interest on capital loans from 

property management Crown, again at four-twelfths. The same 

for special care facilities and seniors’ heritage grant 

administration. 

 

The Department of Education — I’m sure the minister will 

specifically want to comment on these grants to the institutes. 

Higher cash flow associated with winding down — these are at 

two-twelfths to meet student financial assistance commitments. 

The operating grants to schools at two-twelfths, and that’s 

according to normal schedule, according to the advice I have. 

Grants to school construction at two-twelfths again. That’s 

according to normal schedule, according to the advice I have. 

 

Environment and Public Safety, three-twelfths. Electric and gas 

inspection transferred to SPC; only six months funding 

provided, therefore one-twelfth inadequate, per monthly cost. 

 

And finally, payments under the operation recycle program at 

eight-twelfths. That program, as we’ve discussed, is terminated 

July 1, and that’s to pay out contract commitments. 

 

(1445) 

 

I might advise further that the Heritage Fund amount that we 

will be discussing is lower than one-twelfth, and the reason for 

that is that a full twelve-twelfths of the Science and Technology 

expenditure was provided by special warrant earlier this year. 

 

I believe that covers them. I have now . . . I believe the hon. 

member now has a list of the areas where it’s more than 

one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me begin, 

and I have a few remarks I want to make on this Bill which . . . 

or these resolutions which the minister has presented, and a Bill 

which will be presented later. 

 

I want to point out first of all and acknowledge that indeed the 

minister did indicate yesterday that there would be some 

exemptions to . . . or exceptions to the one-twelfth provisions of 

the Bill, and I acknowledge that and I appreciate it. 

 

But I want to make further comment on that process because of 

the new circumstances in which this legislature finds itself with 

regard to interim supply Bills which have never existed before. 

Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this interim supply Bill, 

obviously as it always does, asked the legislative approval for 

the expenditure of a very significant amount of money. But here 

it is asking this legislature to approval the expenditure of money 

for the fifth month of this fiscal year. That is unusual, and that 

is a first, and that has never happened before. 

 

Why is it happening now, Mr. Chairman? Is it happening now 

because the government has been unable to put its act together 

since the October 1986 election and do  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1474 

 

things in an orderly fashion. It continues to reinforce the kind of 

debacle of mismanagement that it began in 1982 and continued 

throughout that period of time, leading to the circumstances to 

which we find ourselves here today. 

 

Now time after time, ministers have been in this House under 

their estimates which deals with the budget and the 

expenditures that those ministers are going to make of 

taxpayers’ money. And time after time questions have been 

asked of those ministers which they have not been able to 

answer, even though the government has taken months to 

prepare its budget; even though the government delayed the 

presentation of the budget far beyond the beginning of the fiscal 

year, causing all kinds of problems for community 

organizations and for municipalities and for school boards and 

for hospital boards; even though this government had all that 

excess time, they still come to this House unprepared. 

 

And now the minister comes with this resolution and he asks for 

something in excess of $363 million. Well I say, Mr. Chairman, 

that it’s this kind of mismanagement that has led to the kind of 

massive cut-backs that we’re having in programs which are 

important to the very well-being of people in Saskatchewan. It’s 

this kind of mismanagement that has brought about the massive 

tax increases, the massive tax increases which people are being 

burdened with in this budget on top of the increases that have 

happened before. So the minister today again, having 

mentioned yesterday that this would be in the House today, 

requests a major amount of money. 

 

Now it’s normal to ask for one-twelfth. That has happened in 

this legislature as long as it’s no doubt probably existed. But the 

circumstances in which that request is being made are not 

normal. They’re unusual. And one would have thought, one 

would have thought, and we would certainly, I think, have a 

right to expect that because of the abnormal circumstances 

which have been created by this government, that some advance 

information might have been provided. And I think that that 

would have been quite useful and quite appropriate. 

 

We have been given here today a list, a long list of exceptions 

to the one-twelfth request. We’re asked by the Minister of 

Finance and by the government in a short period of time to 

consider that list of exceptions and deal with it here this 

afternoon, which we’re prepared to do. 

 

But I question the process. I question the process where there is, 

in this kind of an exceptional circumstance, a refusal by the 

government opposite to provide some advance information sot 

hat it could be dealt with appropriately. It’s typical of the style 

of this government, which is so incapable of managing the 

affairs of this province that it has to hide information from the 

very legislators who have to pass on it. 

 

Why do we face the circumstances we face today? Because, Mr. 

Chairman, there has been the kind of mismanagement in 

Saskatchewan in the hands of this government that we have 

never seen before. That’s why we face it today. 

 

Now the minister asks here, and the government asks, for  

over $363 million in interim supply. I say to you that if there 

had not been the kind of mismanagement in the last five 

budgets, that amount of money would be considerably less, 

considerably less. This government has had, and proposes with 

this budget to have, six deficit budgets. 

 

And it’s not as if they accurately predicted what they would be. 

I bring to your attention, Mr. Chairman, that in 1983-84 the 

former Minister of Finance of this government said that the 

deficit would be $316 million, and do you know that it was 

$331 million? Now that’s not good management. The former 

minister of Finance said in 1984-85 the deficit would be $267 

million. It turned out to be $379 million. As the Minister of 

Finance would say, what’s $100 million? 

 

In 1985-86 the Minister of Finance said the deficit would be 

$291 million; it in reality turned out to be $584 million. Almost 

100 per cent increase over the forecast. And in 1986-87, the 

year of the budget of betrayal, the Minister of Finance, who is 

the present minister, said the deficit would be $389 million. 

And do you know what it was? It’s going to be $1.2 billion. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, can there be any doubt in 

any one’s mind that the ability of this government to manage is 

almost non-existent. That’s why the minister is here today 

asking for $363 million in an interim supply Bill, because they 

managed so badly. That’s why the Minister of Finance is here 

asking for an interim supply Bill, for the first time in the history 

of the province, to cover the fifth month of this fiscal year. 

 

Normally the budget, by this time of year, would have been 

passed, and there would not be the need for an interim supply 

Bill. But because of the lack of political gamesmanship and the 

inability of this government to get its act together, we’re here at 

this time asking for an interim supply Bill. 

 

And to some extent, a very significant extent, let’s examine 

what this resolution and this request for this money is for. Well, 

Mr. Minister, to a large extent it’s to pay for the mortgage that 

this government has created through its gross mismanagement. 

 

They inherited in 1982 . . . this Conservative government 

inherited in 1982 a surplus of $140 million that was left there in 

the bank for this government to use for a rainy day, maybe, or 

whatever the purpose might be. In five short years that surplus 

of $140 billion . . . million has been squandered, squandered by 

this government opposite, which has created a deficit of $3.4 

billion . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — All because of mismanagement, Mr. 

Speaker, all because of mismanagement. 

 

The people of this province understand that this accumulated 

deficit has now provided for every single  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1475 

 

man, woman, and child a debt of $3,400. If a child is born in 

Saskatchewan this minute, without even knowing its mother 

yet, inherits a debt of $3,400, thanks to the Conservative 

government. 

 

The managers, they call themselves. This government that was 

going to use a business-like approach, a business-like approach 

to government, no self-respecting business man or business 

woman, Mr. Chairman, would use that kind of an approach to 

their business, because they know that they wouldn’t last two 

years. 

 

A family of four, because of the mismanagement, is now 

indebted to the Consolidated Fund alone — the debt that exists 

there — to the tune of $13,600. Now that’s a lot of money. 

That’s a lot of money which the people of Saskatchewan should 

not be burdened with, especially in light of the fact that in 1982, 

when this government took office, they had a surplus and they 

had cash in the bank. Now why then, one should ask, why then 

are we where we are? Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll tell you why. 

Because in this approach with mismanagement, the government 

has adopted certain practices. 

 

First of all, give-aways. This government has literally given 

away hundreds of millions of dollars in situations where it 

should not have. That’s bad management. You will recall, Mr. 

Chairman, very well, the give-away of the highways equipment 

at far less than it was worth to friends of this government in a 

so-called auction. And what has been the result? Well, Mr. 

Chairman, many of the members here drive home every 

weekend on the highways that have been allowed to deteriorate 

to the point where the people of this province are going to have 

to pay millions upon millions and hundreds of millions of 

dollars to get them back rebuilt because they have not been 

maintained adequately. Now that’s mismanagement. 

 

Now I now that there are some exceptions. I know that the 

member from Kindersley flies over those highways. And I 

know that the member from Wilkie, who used to be the 

Minister of Highways, thought that they were so bad that he 

wouldn’t even use those highways. And where is he? So it’s 

fine for those members opposite to think: well that’s okay, the 

ordinary people can take what we give them, but we’re going to 

live high on the hog. That’s mismanagement, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Another reason why there has been this mismanagement is 

because of the atrocious waste that this government has 

undertaken. Now there is a very recent example of this waste. 

Now I bring to your attention, and the attention of this House 

and the viewers of this proceedings of this Assembly, an 

editorial from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix which I think 

highlights the kind of waste that this government has 

undertaken. It deals with the advertisements run by the Minister 

of Finance who comes here pleading for money; advertisements 

run on the gasoline tax rebates in which he somehow has 

concluded that it’s going to be a great saving for the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan, so the misleading ad says. Well the editorial 

states, and I read it to you, Mr. Chairman: 

 

Considering the tax didn’t exist at all prior to the recent 

budget, it’s hard to understand how anyone  

could consider a rebate of the tax a saving in the first 

place. When the new red tape required to save and itemize 

gasoline receipts, fill out forms, and wait for repayment by 

the government are added on top, most motorists are more 

likely to consider the whole process an expensive waste of 

their . . . money. 

 

And it’s true. And it goes on to say: 

 

It’s kind of like suggesting people buy a product for $100 

dollars, return it for a refund of the same $100 dollars, 

(and) then tell their neighbors and friends (that) they 

“saved” a hundred bucks. 

 

And somehow, Mr. Chairman, those figures just don’t jibe. 

 

Now I raise that one editorial and the example of the 

advertisement run by the Minister of Finance because that’s not 

new in the approach, by this government, to waste. In 

1985-1986 the government spent $17 million in advertising, 

most of it political advertising, and the taxpayers of this 

province paid for it out of their pockets. In 1986-87, I suggest to 

you that the amount of money spent wastefully . . . wastefully 

for advertising purposes, will be about $30 million, double what 

it was the year before. 

 

(1500) 

 

An example is the estimates of the Department of Environment 

which we considered not too many days ago, in which the 

minister admitted that his advertising budget had increased 

again for this year, even on top of all that advertising they did 

last year. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, while the government is spending $30 

million in advertising for its own political side, do you know 

what they say to the children of Saskatchewan who used to have 

the best dental care program anywhere in the western world — 

maybe not New Zealand. They say to them, you’re no longer 

going to have the program because the Minister of Finance has 

told his Minister of Health: you’ve got to save $5.5 million. 

Now I ask you to consider: is $5.5 million such a large amount 

of money to find out of a $30 million advertising bill. What 

kind of priorities are those? 

 

Now I know Dome Advertising, the Conservative advertising 

organization that does all the advertising for this government — 

that Dome Advertising is getting rich on this kind of blatant 

government advertising which taxpayers are paying for, because 

of the wasteful approach of this government. It’s getting rich, 

but the dental health of the children of this province are getting 

poor. They’re getting poor because of the kind of poor and 

misplaced priorities that come with bad management. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the way this government operates is that 

there are winners and there are losers. The problem is that there 

are so many more losers than there are winners. And I will use 

the dental plan, the children’s dental plan, to illustrate how 

unfeeling, how insensitive the approach of this government has 

been when it comes to winners  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1476 

 

and losers. Who are the losers when the dental plan was cut . . . 

And so the minister has to provide in this resolution money to 

wind down the dental plan and the drug plan? Who are the 

losers? 

 

Well, first of all, they were dental therapists, not great wealthy 

earning people — earning modest incomes. They’re the losers. 

The children who used to have a dental care program and now 

no longer will be covered — they’re the losers. But the dental 

profession of whom I’m not critical of, but simply state 

something which I think is undeniable, who have had fairly 

good incomes — they’re not exactly at the bottom level of the 

income scale of Saskatchewan — they will be the big winners. 

Tens of thousands of children will lose because they will no 

longer have the plan to cover them, but people who are making 

very substantial incomes have been bonused by the decision of 

this government on the dental plan, and they will be the 

winners. 

 

Who else are the winners, Mr. Chairman? The minister asks for 

money to pay for some of this. Well he announced that there 

will be a gas tax once again in this province in spite of all the 

promises by the Tories that there wouldn’t be any. And then he 

says, we’re going to rebate it. 

 

Well I can tell you that in the boardrooms of every credit care 

company in North America, a great cheer went up when they 

heard this Minister of Finance make that announcement, 

because they’re going to be the winners. They’re going to be 

the winners. Those credit card companies that are charging 19 

per cent and 21 per cent and 24 per cent interest rates, they’re 

going to be the winners because of the kind of system that this 

government has imposed through this gasoline tax rebate. 

 

Filling station operators, the service station operators, the 

small-business filling station operators are going to be the 

losers, because when they have a large amount of money that’s 

being paid to them through the credit cards, it costs them 

money. Isn’t it amazing that a government that talks about 

being the friends of the business community, when it comes to 

their own political interests, casts them aside and no longer 

becomes interested in their concerns. 

 

Now this resolution, Mr. Chairman, also asks for money to pay 

for revenue sharing. That’s one of the exceptions — not the 

one-twelfth but the two-twelfths. While I know that that’s 

necessary, and we will not object to that, but I want to point out 

to you, Mr. Chairman, the process that has led to the reduction 

in the amount of money that municipalities are going to get this 

year over last year because the revenue sharing has been 

reduced by 1 per cent. 

 

I can remember in January — and it was very well written up in 

the press throughout Saskatchewan — where the Minister of 

Urban Affairs went to the convention of the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association. And he assured them — this 

is the Minister of Urban Affairs — he assured them that there 

would not be any reduction in revenue sharing. He said, you 

should plan with the very real possibility that there will be no 

increase in the revenue-sharing pool, suggesting the pool will 

stay at its 1986 level of $67 million. 

 

Not much later, when the delegates of the SUMA convention 

had left and gone home, we get the other announcements and 

the other foot drops. And the Minister of Finance announces 

that indeed there will be a cut of 1 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, not only does this government suffer from 

the disease of mismanagement, it suffers from the disease of 

being dishonest — it suffers from the disease of being 

dishonest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — When ministers of the Crown appear 

before the delegates of the SUMA convention they assure them 

there will be — they weren’t happy about it — that there will be 

a freeze on the amount. But I think the delegates of that 

convention went away feeling that they had no choice, and they 

would have to accept it. And they went back to their councils, 

and they said to them here is what we must be facing. And they 

said: at least we know. 

 

And very briefly and very soon after that, they get the brick that 

comes through their fiscal and budgetary walls. And the 

government who said on the one hand, when they were all 

gathered: you will not have a reduction, announce that there 

will be a 1 per cent cut. Now that’s unacceptable in any kind of 

governmental system, Mr. Chairman. 

 

What have the results been? Well I think that, for example, in 

the community of Humboldt they have had to struggle to find 

some money because the government at the last minute, having 

given no hints, cut off a huge sum of money for work that they 

had to do. This has happened in rural community after 

community after community. 

 

It has happened in big urban centres like the city of Regina. 

And I have here, Mr. Chairman, a report on what the impact has 

been on the city of Regina because of this government’s 

mismanagement, and because of its dishonesty. The impact of 

the 1987 budget has been a reduction in funding to the city of 

Regina of $8 million — $8 million — because of the cuts in the 

revenue sharing, because of the cuts in the urban assistance 

program, because of the cuts into provincial capital funding. 

 

Now that’s in itself bad enough, but it is much worse, Mr. 

Chairman, when one considers that this government stood at the 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

convention and promised the delegates there that there would 

not be a cut. That’s dishonest. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, because of the mismanagement we have 

seen here, there have been other kinds of provisions that the 

government has brought in which has hurt people. There has 

been a $73-a-month increase in fees to nursing home residents. 

There has been $20-a-month increase in home care fees for 

low-income seniors, and a $50-a-month increase in the home 

care fees for seniors who do not qualify for the government 

subsidy. A hundred and twenty-five dollar a year deductible on 

prescriptions under the drug plan, which will cost  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1477 

 

taxpayers $26 million — people who have to use a drug now 

will have to pay. 

 

And all over Saskatchewan people are going to the pharmacies 

and they are being shocked by the fact that they are being asked 

to take out of their pocket in advance, $60, $80, $100, at a time 

when many of them have incomes that are not far in excess of 

that, particularly if they’re living on the senior citizen’s pension 

and supplement. 

 

All because this government blew it away. All because this 

government, having taken a surplus of $140 million, decided to 

waste and to mismanage and to involve itself in a government 

of patronage, and created this deficit of $3.4 billion which now 

they use as an excuse to do away with those very basic 

programs which the people of this province collectively and 

together put together, so that everybody can have equal access 

to health care without having to fear getting ill because they 

know that that would bring about economic disaster and 

catastrophe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now could it be that the government had 

no choice? Could it be that this government had no choice but 

to do these things and make this kind . . . do this kind of an act? 

Well, not so, Mr. Chairman. The government did have a choice. 

And because of its unwillingness to manage, it made the wrong 

choices. 

 

I’ve heard the Minister of Finance and I’ve heard the Premier 

go around and telling everybody . . . and talking to everybody 

as if the world had collapsed around them. I submit, Mr. 

Chairman, that the only thing that’s collapsed around them are 

the figures that show where they’re standing in the polls these 

days. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Did the world really collapse around 

them, or are we where we are today because of the 

mismanagement that has been brought about here? 

 

Let me give you the facts. Let me give you the facts as they 

come from the government’s own documents. 

 

In 1980-81, it wasn’t this government that was in power; it was 

a different government. As a matter of fact, I had the honour of 

being part of that government. In 1981, on non-renewable 

resource revenues, there were revenues to the treasury of $787 

million. The government of the day had a surplus of $233 

million. In 1981-82, the revenues from non-renewable resource 

money were $760 million. The government of the day had $139 

million surplus, or $140 million surplus if you want to round it 

off. 

 

Then there was an election. Well, you know, resource revenues 

didn’t change. As a matter of fact, in ’82-83, under the first year 

of this government resource revenues were $770 million — 

higher than they were the year before — and this government 

ran a deficit of $227 million. 

 

Well what happened in 1983-84? Did the world collapse around 

the Premier and the Minister of Finance at that time? No, 

because at that time resource revenues in ’83-84 were $760 

million. But the government ran a deficit of $331 million. And 

the revenues kept going up. In 1984-1985 the government had 

non-renewable resource revenues of $865 million. And their 

deficit went up to $380 million. 

 

Now the only way, the only way that that can be explained, Mr. 

Chairman, is that the government mismanaged its fiscal affairs. 

You can’t have revenues from the non-renewable resource 

sector going up or remain the same and legitimately explain a 

growing deficit, year by year by year, until we face an 

accumulated deficit of $3.4 billion. 

 

And so where are we? Who’s paying for all this? Who’s paying 

for this $363 million for one month — $363 million for one 

month, which the Minister of Finance is here asking for? Well, 

I’ll tell you who’s paying more and more. Individual income 

taxpayers are paying more and more. 

 

In 1980 and 1981 the share, or the percentage of the total 

budgetary revenues, the percentage of the total budgetary 

revenues coming from corporate income was 5.3 per cent. The 

share coming from individual income tax was 16.3 per cent. In 

1986-87, the budget for which we are now considering a 

resolution to provide some interim money, the share of 

corporate income goes down to 4.8 per cent, and the share of 

individual income goes up to 20.8 per cent. 

 

(1515) 

 

That’s who’s paying for the mismanagement, Mr. Chairman — 

the taxpayers of this province — while others, like some of the 

corporate sector, like the oil sector, are getting tax holidays to 

pump out a non-renewable resource, which will never be here 

again and from which we will never be able to get any revenues 

from our people; pump it out for three years and never pay a 

cent of royalty on it, because they have been given the holiday 

because of this kind of mismanagement that has created the 

situation which we face today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s why, Mr., that’s why. That’s why, 

Mr. Chairman, we now hear the Minister of Social Services and 

whatever else . . . And I’m not sure he even remembers what 

he’s a minister of. He doesn’t seem to remember anything else. 

Well the Minister of Social Services will stand up in this House 

and says as if he almost believes it. “Schmidt . . .” And I read 

the article in the paper: “Schmidt says saving money more 

important than jobs.” Now what kind of a responsible 

government would use that approach? 

 

I ask the government opposite through you, Mr. Chairman, if 

that was such an important concept — the saving of money — 

where in the devil was that minister between 1982 and 1986 

when the government was throwing money away? Throwing 

money away and throwing revenues away to the oil companies, 

creating  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1478 

 

the situation which we find ourselves in so that today the 

minister has to come in and ask, for one month, for $363 

million. 

 

Now that’s why we don’t have money, at least in the view of 

this government, for students who need jobs, because their 

priorities are to provide $30 million to Dome Advertising so it 

could get rich, because they’re friends of the government, but 

the students who want to get an education and prepare for their 

future are given this lower class of consideration because 

somehow they are also to be the losers. Somehow they’re also 

to be the losers. 

 

And what has the result been? Well I want to just lead to my 

conclusion by giving you an example of the result of this 

mismanagement. In 1981 the number of young people 

employed in Saskatchewan was 110,000. You know what it is 

now, Mr. Chairman? It’s only 89,000. That’s a loss of 21,000 

jobs for young people. 

 

In 1981 the number of young people in the labour force was 

120,000. Do you know what it is now? It’s 104,000 — that’s 

16,000 fewer young people in the labour market. Is it any 

wonder that we get reports about net out-migration of people 

from Saskatchewan? 

 

And I remind you that those aren’t older people; those are 

young people. Those are young people looking for a future. But 

because there is none, because of the mismanagement that has 

been brought in and brought about by this government, because 

the future worries those young people, they’re leaving, so that 

Saskatchewan, in 1986, had a net out-migration of 8,422 

people. That’s shameful. That, from a government that said in 

1982 and 1983 how they were going to bring the children back 

home. 

 

Is this bringing the children back home? When they’re leaving 

by the thousands because they don’t know that they will be able 

to find a job in Saskatchewan — because the Minister of Social 

Services displays, on behalf of his colleagues, the view that 

saving money is more important than jobs. 

 

All those young people want to do is to be productive, to build a 

future, to raise their families like others before them have raised 

their families in what is one of the best provinces in Canada, 

beyond any doubt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — It has the potential here in this province 

to provide all of our needs. And instead the government has 

chosen to provide for the needs of a few — of a few who are 

privileged, who are wealthy — at the expense of the many who 

somehow don’t count in the eyes of this government. 

 

Three hundred and sixty-three million dollars is needed. There 

indeed are bills to be paid. But I say to you that one of the 

reasons why we need so much money is because some of those 

bills have been created by this government when it mortgaged 

people of Saskatchewan. So that today, part of the request is to 

pay for the $300 million a year in interest charges that we have 

to pay to the bankers and the bond dealers, which we didn’t 

have to pay in  

1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, want to enter 

into and make some comments, and to concur with the remarks 

of our Finance critic, and to indicate to the people of 

Saskatchewan what we are witnessing here today. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have seen the greatest degree of 

mismanagement of any government in this country. They have 

burdened the people of this province with $3.4 billion in the 

Consolidated Fund alone. They have placed on the backs of the 

people of Saskatchewan $296 million of interest payment alone 

— $296 million of interest — which means we have to raise, 

before we can finance any program in Saskatchewan, we have 

to finance $296 million to pay the interest first. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Chairman, it is an insult to this legislature that 

the Minister of Finance, who brought down his last budget, and 

who, I say, deceived the people of this province — deceived the 

people of this province — for one basic reason, Mr. Chairman 

— the Tory party’s priorities are higher and more important 

than the priorities and the serving of the people of this country, 

in this province. 

 

And you know what they did? They went into an election and 

they said: we’re building and we’re diversifying and everything 

is great. And I’ll tell you, they said there’d be a $389 million 

debt, and they came in with $1,235 billion. And that was not to 

serve the people of this province. That massive debt last year 

was to attempt to get the Tory party of this province elected 

again. And the consequences are now being borne by the people 

of this province. 

 

And I say it’s an insult to this legislature that a Minister of 

Finance, who couldn’t calculate a budget any closer than within 

8 or $900 million, and he’s maintained as the Minister of 

Finance — I ask you: would any business man, would any 

corporation, maintain a chief executive officer who brought in a 

deficit over the amount that he had calculated to the tune of $1 

billion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I ask you. I’ll tell you, any private sector would 

cast that person out of office. There would be no confidence 

left. And today, after the deceit during a Tory election 

campaign, we have the same Minister of Finance. 

 

And I want to lay before the people here the true facts. Now 

only do we have a massive, massive debt heaped upon the 

backs of the people of this province, but I’ll tell you what we 

have — we have seen a large amount of give-aways, and no 

longer do we have those assets. We’ve sold off Manalta Coal, 

over 100 million bucks — it’s been blown. We’ve sold off the 

highway equipments; that’s gone. We’ve sold off potash 

equipment; that money is gone. We’ve sold off Saskoil to the 

private sector, and that money is gone. Those assets are gone, 

over and above the massiveness of the debt. 

 

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1479 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — We never heard, during the last six, seven 

months ago in October, as we were heading into the election 

campaign, that we were going to have a complete rejection of 

the promises that this government made to the people of this 

province when they got elected in ‘82. 

 

You know what? One of the prime election promises — and 

everyone here that was re-elected had in their brochures — do 

you know what they promised the people of Saskatchewan? 

We’ll eliminate, in our first term of office, the 5 per cent E&H 

tax. That’s what you promised. And do you know what? They 

came in here, after this last election, they increased the E&H tax 

to 7 per cent. 

 

Do you know what else they did? They did away with the 

property improvement grants, 83 million bucks. They put on a 

flat tax of 100 million bucks for every point, and they double it 

this year for $200 million. 

 

I’ll tell you, we have the greatest mess in this province of 

anywhere in Canada. And you know, when we left office, Mr. 

Chairman, do you know what the financial community said 

about Saskatchewan under the premiership of Allan Blakeney? 

I’ll tell you what they said . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve cautioned members before 

not to use members’ names; to use their constituency or their 

position in the House. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — As I . . . I’ll accept that and I apologize for 

using a member’s name — the former premier of the province, 

under the New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Do you know what the financial community 

was saying about the former premier of the New Democratic 

Party? I’ll tell you what they said. They wrote and they said that 

Saskatchewan was one of the best financially run territories in 

North America. That is precisely what they said. And I’ll tell 

you, this contemptuous group come in here, letting on that they 

know how to run a province, that they’re business men, that 

they’re looking after the affairs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

What deceit. What misrepresentation of the truth. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we take a look at what 

is gone on in the priorities of this government: the waste — 

$20-25 million spent on self-serving advertising to elect the 

members opposite. We have seen priorities where we’ll go to 

the multinational corporations and the oil companies and give 

them financial breaks — in fact, grants — but to our own 

business community, they have deserted. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Chairman, how does this government set its 

priorities? How can a government, so soon after being 

re-elected, change so suddenly the story and change so 

suddenly the facts. 

 

Did any of the members opposite or the Finance minister 

indicate that 60,000 children were going to be cut out of dental 

services, going into that election? No. Did he say that we’re 

going to revoke the policy that helped them to get elected, the 5 

per cent sale tax? That we’re going to have to increase it? No. 

Did they say they were going to increase the flat tax again? Of 

course not. Did they say there was going to be massive cuts in 

Education? Of course not. Did they say there was going to be 

massive cuts throughout the social programs of this province? 

And they didn’t. 

 

I say this government has lost all of its credibility. The people 

of Saskatchewan no longer trust the Minister of Finance or the 

members opposite in the front benches. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A very clear message is illustrated in Canada. 

We have the Prime Minister of Canada that has completely lost 

the trust of the people of Canada. And he sits in a poll 

somewhere at 23 per cent. And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, 

history is repeating itself in Saskatchewan. You boys across the 

way were given a chance, but I’ll tell you, the people of 

Saskatchewan have seen the true agenda of the Tory party. 

 

(1530) 

 

And the true agenda of the Tory party in Saskatchewan is the 

same as it is in Ottawa, and that is to treat their friends with 

patronage; hand out to multinational corporations; hand out 

billions of dollars to the oil company, and sock it to ordinary 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — That’s the legacy of your party. And I say that 

it has been deceitful. You have misrepresented facts to the 

people of this province. And I’ll tell you, come an election, you 

boys won’t be around again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to say in respect to what we’re having 

take place here today, never before in the history of this 

legislature has there been such a contempt for this legislature, 

so much lack of respect for the democratic process as has been 

shown by the members opposite. I’ll tell you, the record shows 

that no time in the history of this province has the budget ever 

been brought down later than in — and I go right from 1945 — 

primarily either in March or February. The only time it was 

brought down, and in my records here, is April, by the 

government opposite. And last year, in ’86, March 26. This 

year, let it be known that in order to reconvene this legislature 

the New Democratic Party had to seek legal counsel in order to, 

in fact, prevent the government by governing by special 

warrants. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I say they have lost all credibility. The people 

of Saskatchewan — go out into your communities — are 

disgusted with them. The Minister of Finance, who brought in a 

deficit of 8 or $900 million over and above  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1480 

 

what he estimated, doesn’t deserve the confidence of this 

House, doesn’t deserve the confidence of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And what I say, Mr. Chairman, that the time is 

rapidly approaching that this government had better clear up its 

act, or the right to govern this province will in fact be taken 

away from them. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that this government, in summary, 

has deceived the public; has misrepresented the facts; has 

mismanaged to the extent of burdening this province; has in fact 

dissipated the economic base of this province and, as a 

consequence, we, the citizens of this province, and particularly 

the young people, are denied the opportunities which this 

province could have afforded them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the Minister of Finance, as I said, has 

lacked the confidence of members on our side of the House. I 

don’t know how the Premier could possibly leave someone who 

could mismanage during an election year to the extent that he 

did, who has denied the right of coming here when we should 

have been in this House. And I say, Mr. Chairman, the people 

of Saskatchewan are watching. And I’ll tell you, the people of 

Saskatchewan do know what is taking place, and the will of the 

people of Saskatchewan will be heard. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, in the last few days we in the 

opposition have raised questions with the Minister of Social 

Services respecting the Legal Aid Commission and the funding 

that has been accorded in this budget, which is under 

consideration to the commission, and some of the steps that the 

commission has taken in response to pressure put on it by the 

government. 

 

And I think that the story that’s unfolding with respect to the 

Legal Aid Commission is a prime example of the 

mismanagement and the consequences of the fiscal 

irresponsibility of this government. The government has ruined 

the legal aid program of this province, and they’ve done this 

simply because they don’t believe in it. 

 

When the government was elected in 1982, the legal aid plan 

that was in effect in the province at that time was considered far 

and wide to be the best plan of its kind in the country. There 

was nothing to compare with it. It provided legal service to a 

broader range of people at a more reasonable cost than 

anywhere else in the country, and was a model much admired 

by people who are interested in the subject of legal aid. 

 

Five years of drastic cuts has changed that situation completely. 

Five years of chipping away at that program, of reducing its 

funding, of requiring the commission to take steps to change the 

program and, in particular, to limit the people who were eligible 

under the program, has transformed it from the best program of 

its kind to one which is arguably the worst. 

 

Now the situation before the present budget was brought  

down was not at all like the Minister of Social Services told us 

in the House the other day. He painted a picture the other day of 

people working for the plant who worked four days a week, 

which is not correct; of people who quit work at 4:30 in the 

afternoon, which is not correct; of people who were sort of 

inefficient, which is most definitely not correct. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it is well-known throughout this province in all 

of the cities where the legal aid plans work that there are no 

lawyers who are busier than the legal aid lawyers. They rush 

from court room to court room, from trial to trial, back to their 

offices to take care of appointments there, and are literally 

busier than their counterparts in the private bar. They have 

work-loads that are perhaps as much as four times more than a 

lawyer ought to be expected to handle. 

 

And that’s the case not only in Saskatoon or in Regina, but it’s 

also the case in the other centres where the legal aid clinics 

operate, including the one which the minister of most familiar 

with, having practised law in Melville before his present 

incarnation. And the minister must know this to be true. 

 

In all of my years of being concerned with the public service, 

which goes back to 1970, I never recall a minister standing in 

the House of Commons in Ottawa, or in the legislature of one of 

the provinces, or specifically in this legislature, and in effect 

attack his own department; in effect attack his own civil 

servants; tell the Assembly that his civil servants don’t work 

hard enough; that you can’t get them on the telephone after 

4:30. And yet this man stood in this Assembly in the last seven 

days and said exactly that. 

 

Now that was the situation, Mr. Chairman, before the budget 

was brought down on June 17. What was clear when the budget 

was brought down on June 17 is that this program, which is 

underfunded and understaffed, and where the staff is 

overworked, is subject to a further cut of over half a million 

dollars — a cut of 8 per cent. 

 

And the tragic part about it is that it’s more than a cut of 8 per 

cent. When you consider that costs have increased on account 

of inflationary factors, when you consider that the collective 

agreements in effect have increment dates that have to be 

observed, salary increases that have to be paid in accordance 

with freely negotiated contracts, the cut that is being suffered by 

the Legal Aid Commission is in the order of 15 per cent. And 

this, as I said, from a program which is already underfunded, 

where the people involved are overworked, and where the 

clinics are understaffed. And this is not just me talking, Mr. 

Chairman, this is well-known to everyone in the legal system in 

the province. 

 

Now I want to specifically raise as a glaring, obvious example 

of mismanagement and poor administration by this government, 

the question of the contribution system that is to be introduced 

next week into this province. That contribution system, I remind 

you, will require the poorest people in our society to pay for 

their legal services. Now I realize that some exceptions have 

been made, and apparently they’ve been made since we started 

to ask questions in this House. But the effect of it  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1481 

 

still is that the poorer people, people who can’t afford to pay are 

going to be required to pay. Not only are they required to pay, 

but they’re required to pay in cash and up front. 

 

Now those of us who have practised law privately will now that 

you can make a better deal than that with a private law firm, 

with a law firm operating in the private sector. You can make 

credit arrangements. They’re made every day, but not 

apparently at the Legal Aid Commission, the poor people’s law 

firm in this province. There you have to have cash, you have to 

put it on the barrel head before a wheel will turn. Not that is not 

fair. That’s absurd. 

 

I can’t think of anything more inconsistent with the notion of a 

public legal aid plan than requiring the poorest people in our 

society to pay for the plan. Now it didn’t just happen, as the 

minister tried to lead us to believe, as the result of the Legal Aid 

Commission sort of coming up with this idea, and he knew 

nothing about it, but sits behind his desk reading his paper, 

waiting for the mail man to come along with a document that 

will inform him what are the plans of the Legal Aid 

Commission. Not so. Not at all. 

 

What we had here was a minister who took the trouble to visit 

the Legal Aid Commission and inform them, among other 

things, that there was some bad news, from a budgetary point of 

view, in their future. There was going to be some budget cuts, 

and that they should plan for those cuts. and they should present 

some options as to how they were going to accommodate 

themselves to this new budgetary reality; that they’d have less 

money to spend. So the commission goes to work, as the 

minister had instructed them to do, and they prepare options. 

And one of those options is the very system of contributions 

that we now see being imposed. 

 

And the minister is aware of those options. He admitted as 

much in the House today. He was aware that this was one of the 

options. And then . . . And I remind you that all the commission 

is doing at this point is responding to the minister’s instruction 

to prepare some options that will take into account the fact that 

there’s going to be budget cuts. So the commission operating in 

good faith comes up with an option which says that the people 

who receive service have to pay a fee. 

 

And when the commission did that — and here comes the 

deceptive part of it — when the commission did this they were 

operating under the honest belief that if they imposed a fee, that 

fee would go to the commission and would help to cover the 

loss of money that they were going to experience as a result of 

the budget cuts. In other words, they were going to recover 

some of their loss from the people who were using the service. 

That’s what the commission thought. 

 

Now the minister, who has been sitting in that government for 

the last five years and has been a minister for about the last two 

years, didn’t tell them that that’s not how it worked. And his 

department, who must have known of this option being 

considered by the commission, also didn’t tell the commission 

that that’s not how it worked. 

 

The commission didn’t find out until July 16 of this year that 

their plan to impose user fees on the poor people of this 

province wasn’t going to go to the commission at all. It was 

going to go into the black hole being run by the Minister of 

Finance. It was going to be sucked up into the Consolidated 

Fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — In effect, the poorest people of our society are 

being levied a tax on the service that they obtain from the legal 

aid clinic, and the proceeds from that tax are not going to go to 

the Legal Aid Commission. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now that came, I believe, as a thunderbolt to the Legal Aid 

Commission — a complete surprise. Because after the whole 

system is in place; after the legal Aid Commission had 

produced the option of contributions; after the minister had seen 

the plan, had seen the option of a contribution; after the 

contribution had been considered by the treasury board; after 

the treasury board had approved the plan in a treasury board 

minute; then and only then does the minister break the bad news 

to the commission, namely, that it’s not going to do you any 

good. 

 

Nice of you to have suggested this contribution option; nice of 

you to have put it down on paper and submitted it to the 

government; nice of you to decide to charge the poorest people 

for their legal services. But we’ve got this piece of bad news, 

and that is that it’s not going to do you any good at all. The 

Minister of Finance is going to take the money into that big 

black hole he’s maintaining and it’s going to disappear. Now 

that is absurd. And, Mr. Chairman, the minister is not going to 

get away with it. 

 

The Legal Aid Commission, I predict, is going to take him on 

on that because I think his position on the point is not legal. 

And he’s going to have some tough sweating, not only in this 

House, but with respect to the people that he refers to as 

bureaucrats. 

 

Now he characterized it, Mr. Chairman, as a dispute about 

money between bureaucrats, a petty dispute about money. Not 

so. Not so at all. What we had here was a minute of the treasury 

board — not the opinion of a petty bureaucrat, not the opinion 

of a deputy minister, but a minute of the treasury board. 

 

And the minister knows perfectly well that the treasury board is 

the most powerful committee of cabinet that exists in our 

government system. It is the committee that makes so many of 

the financial decisions on the basis of which a government runs. 

So this was not some kind of a dispute between petty 

bureaucrats. 

 

It also is a position that is based upon a provision of the 

financial administration Act, which must be well-known to a 

minister who’s been in government for two years, would 

certainly be well-known to his deputy minister. And yet, the 

minister allowed the Legal Aid Commission to believe during 

all those months that their plan for a contribution was going to 

be effective as regards their budgetary situation. They actually 

thought they were  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1482 

 

going to help solve their budgetary problem. And he allowed 

them to think that, and his department allowed them to think 

that. And I dare say that others in the government system 

allowed the commission to think that, and sprung the bad news 

on them only on July 16 of this year. Now that’s no way to run 

a government. 

 

In effect, what happened is the government changed the rule, 

changes the rules on the Legal Aid Commission when they had 

committed themselves to a most unfortunate course of action. 

This decision by the Legal Aid Commission, I believe was 

arrived at very painfully, so far as the members of that 

commission are concerned. I have no doubt that the members of 

the commission were most reluctant to damage the legal aid 

plan they were administering, by requiring the poorest people in 

our society to put cash on the barrel head before they get any 

legal services. 

 

And those members of the commission, acting in good faith, 

coming with considerable pain and anguish to this plan, must sit 

here today and wonder what kind of a minister this is and what 

kind of a government this is; that the notion that these 

contributions will not accrue to the benefit of the commission 

but will simply disappear into the black hole of the Minister of 

Finance, must come as a terrible shock. 

 

What is at stake here, of course, it not the funding of the Legal 

Aid Commission. What’s at stake here is not whether 

contributions should go to the Consolidated Fund or should be 

retained by the commission. What’s at stake here in this dispute 

is the right wing ideology of this minister and this government. 

What’s at stake here is the fact that this government just simply 

doesn’t believe in things like legal aid plans. The minister, I 

know, would like to contract this whole business right out of 

government. The minister would like to turn it all over to the 

law society, or turn it all over to the private bar in some way or 

another. 

 

Now the law society said no. The law society said, we’re not 

interested in doing that. The law society said, the plan works all 

right the way it is; and forget it, Mr. Minister, we’re not 

interested in your ideological solution to the Legal Aid 

Commission. 

 

And that’s what’s at stake here. And we see it happening right 

across the piece. We see moves by this government - cut-backs 

here, cut-backs there. John Howard Society practically wiped 

out in this province for a cut of a grant of $193,000. And 

example after example of the right wing ideology of this 

minister and this government in action. And that’s what’s at 

stake here. 

 

Now this is only one example, as I say. It is a long litany of 

mismanagement. It is becoming more and more every day, a 

story of the consequences of the fiscal irresponsibility of this 

government over the past five years, and it is something which 

we on this side of the House simply can never, ever support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to enter the debate and to speak in opposition to  

this interim supply Bill which essentially provides the PC 

government with the ability to continue their unprecedented 

attack on our health care programs, our education programs, 

and our social institutions. 

 

We see in this interim supply Bill, as we do in this whole 

budget, Mr. Chairman, a combination of incompetence and 

unfairness that Saskatchewan people haven’t witnessed since 

the last PC government in this province that governed in the 

1930s. 

 

And we see in this interim supply Bill, as we do in this budget, 

Mr. Chairman, a betrayal by this government to the two social 

programs that it promised would be the pillar of its operations 

in the remainder of the 1980s — mainly the commitment that it 

claimed prior to the 1986 election it was making to medicare 

and the commitment it claimed it was making to health care in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Health care and education were to be two of the four pillars of 

this government’s operation for the rest of the 1980s. And what 

we’ve seen instead, Mr. Chairman, in this interim supply Bill 

and in this budget, is an unprecedented attack on health care and 

education in Saskatchewan. And we on this side of the House 

are not only committed to opposing the education and health 

care cuts, but we are also committed to rebuilding education 

and health care when we next form government. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to say to members opposite and to 

all those listening, that this government was not obliged to cut 

education and to cut medicare in this interim supply Bill and in 

this budget. The moneys were available, Mr. Chairman, to fully 

fund education and health care, to fully fund programs like legal 

aid and the John Howard Society, if this government had had 

the political will to fund them instead of being committed to 

funnelling large amounts of money, large amounts taxpayers’ 

money, to its friends in the private sector. 

 

And there are some classic examples that I want to make 

reference to, that demonstrate this. First of all, Mr. Chairman, 

since the last interim supply Bill came down a month ago, 

we’ve seen clear evidence in this legislature that the PC 

government opposite have chosen to forfeit the collection of 

over $400 million in 1987 alone from the Saskatchewan oil 

industry that they could have gotten if they had applied 1982 

royalty rates to 1987 oil production — $400 million, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Instead . . . Let me put that in two contexts. First of all, instead 

of a deficit of over $500 million that is now resulting from the 

incompetence of this government, oil revenues alone could have 

reduced that to just over $100 million. Or put another way, Mr. 

Chairman, that $400 million that the PC government has chosen 

to forfeit could have readily funded all the medicare programs, 

all the education programs, and all the social service programs 

that have been cut back, with a good deal left over. And that’s 

just one example, Mr. Chairman, of how the PC government 

has chosen to attack education, health care, and social services 

at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer and to the benefit 

of its friends in the oil industry. 

 

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1483 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, there’s been a second example of gross 

incompetence and unfairness since the last interim supply Bill 

came down a month ago. And that, Mr. Chairman, was the 

decision by this government to add $810 million to the public 

debt of this province by saying to the people of Saskatchewan 

that the $800 million debt that the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan had run up under the five years of Devine 

government that we’ve seen — the five years of PC government 

that we’ve seen in this legislature. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, I 

retract my remark in terms of naming the government. I simply 

say the PC government. As a result of running up an $800 

million debt through bleeding the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan of all its major assets; through, Mr. Chairman, 

through choosing consciously, to pay out dividends in years 

when PC (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) had actually 

run a loss; this government has bled the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, has run it into massive debt, and then has turned 

around and said to the people of Saskatchewan that they must 

bear this debt, that this becomes part of the public debt, rather 

than the debt of PCS. And he’s added, Mr. Chairman, therefore, 

another $80 million a year in interest payments that the people 

of Saskatchewan must now make that they did not need to make 

before. Another example, Mr. Chairman, of how this 

government has simply demonstrated fiscal irresponsibility, in 

this case to make the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan more 

attractive to sell to its friends in the private sector. 

 

And we’ve seen, Mr. Chairman, a third classic example of 

incompetence and fiscal mismanagement that applies very 

much to the 1987 budget year. And that is that. Although the 

Prince Albert Pulp Company has been sold for a price 

supposedly of $248 million, not a penny has been put forward 

by the buyer, Weyerhaeuser Corporation of Tacoma, 

Washington. Not a penny has been put forward in the form of a 

down payment to help offset this year’s deficit, or to finance 

any health, education or other social program in this budget — 

not a penny. 

 

So this government has chosen to forfeit more than $400 

million in potential oil revenue this year. This government has, 

since the last interim supply Bill, added another $800 million to 

the public debt. And this government has chosen consciously, 

as a result of a sweetheart agreement between itself and 

Weyerhaeuser Corporation of Tacoma, Washington, to forfeit 

any funds being paid in 1987 by the buyer of the Prince Albert 

Pulp Company, either in the form of a down payment or in the 

form of an annual interest payment for 1987, to help offset the 

public debt and to help finance social, education, and health 

programs in this province. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Chairman, I used the examples of Weyerhaeuser and the 

failure of this government to collect a fair share of oil revenue, 

to demonstrate that the cuts to medicare and the cuts to 

education were unnecessary, in addition to being unfair. 

Because the revenue was there, if this government had the 

commitment to collect that revenue, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now in this interim supply Bill, as in this budget, we see a  

host of unfair cuts to services that the people of Saskatchewan 

have every right to receive, that we, on this side of the House, 

refuse to be part of and strongly oppose. We’ve seen, for 

instance, a $73 increase a month to nursing home monthly fees 

in this province, a $73 increase that the senior citizens of 

Saskatchewan can ill afford. 

 

And as some of my other colleagues who have participated in 

this debate earlier have pointed out, we have seen grossly unfair 

cuts to the prescription drug program which are putting 

prescription drugs out of the economic range of many families 

in this province — many families who are going to have to 

choose between paying the monthly rent bill and feeding their 

children or, on the other hand, paying the medical costs that 

they now face with the increased, up—front cost of prescription 

drugs. 

 

That’s one of the most immoral and unfair cuts that this 

government has brought down in this budget and this interim 

supply Bill. And we, on this side of the House, say that those 

cuts are thoroughly unjustified; that the public revenues exist to 

fully finance the prescription drug program, and that when we 

return to government, we will restore the prescription drug 

program to what Saskatchewan residents had prior to July 1 of 

this year. We see, Mr. Chairman, a budget and an interim 

supply Bill that has eliminated the school-based dental plan, 

and that has run completely contrary to a lot of the basic 

promises that this government made in 1986 and in 1982 to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This government, for instance, Mr. Chairman, in 1982 promised 

to eliminate, by way of a phase-out, the provincial sales tax in 

this province. The member for Kelsey-Tisdale ran 

advertisements in his local paper saying that the PC government 

would implement a 10 per cent across-the-board cut in personal 

income tax. And we’ve seen both the sales tax and the income 

tax promises violated by this budget, Mr. Chairman. 

 

We’ve seen a government, that said it would eliminate the sales 

tax, increase the provincial sales tax to 7 per cent in this interim 

supply Bill and in this budget. We’ve seen a government that 

said it would cut personal income tax by 10 per cent, instead 

turn around and in this budget follow its former actions in 1986 

and 1985 by further increasing the flat tax on personal income 

by another half per cent. 

 

We’ve seen a government, in this interim supply Bill, who has 

betrayed the young people of Saskatchewan, promising during 

the 1986 election that there would be more funds and more 

support made available for youth employment, and then 

bringing down a budget, Mr. Chairman, and an interim supply 

Bill today, Mr. Chairman, which dramatically cuts back on 

assistance to young people for seeking work, eliminates, Mr. 

Chairman, some youth employment programs entirely, and 

takes the summer youth employment program and cuts it by 

over 60 per cent. 

 

That cut, Mr. Chairman, has had a devastating impact on the 

young people in my constituency. It means that some students 

who were wanting to return to university and technical school 

in the fall will now be unable to do so  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1484 

 

because they were not able to get a summer job. It means that 

many other students will return facing much higher student 

loans because they were not able to earn the savings during the 

summer that would allow them to at least partially finance their 

post-secondary education in the fall out of summer earnings. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this interim supply Bill denies the young people 

of this province access to post-secondary education in an 

unprecedented manner. For the first time, as a result of the 

two-year budget freeze that this government is imposing on the 

University of Saskatchewan in this budget and in this interim 

supply Bill, for the first time in provincial history, the young 

people of this province who qualify to enter university are being 

told, as a result of the underfunding of this government, that a 

university education is no longer available to them. 

 

We on this side of the House, Mr. Chairman, say that it is a 

disgrace that young people who have grade 12 averages of 

between 65 and 70 per cent are not being allowed access to the 

University of Saskatchewan as a result of the underfunding of 

this government. 

 

And I say to the Minister of Education and the Minister of 

Finance today, we on this side of the House call on you, sir, in 

this interim supply Bill, to withdraw your two-year freeze on 

the University of Saskatchewan; to increase the funds to the 

University of Saskatchewan that are necessary to ensure that all 

students who have a 65 per cent average or more will be 

admitted to the University of Saskatchewan this fall. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — We on this side of the House, Mr. Chairman, 

say to the Minister of Finance, withdraw the provisions in this 

interim supply Bill that mean that 1,100 spaces in our technical 

institutes will be cancelled. Remove those provisions; reinstate 

those student spaces. 

 

We say, Mr. Chairman, that you have an obligation to the 

young people of this province to ensure that accessibility to 

technical schools will be retained. You have no business cutting 

1,100 spaces from Saskatchewan’s technical institutes, and you 

had no business firing 142 technical institute instructors. I say 

to the Minister of Finance, bring forward provisions in this 

interim supply Bill that will reinstate the 142 technical institute 

instructors that you fired, and maybe then we’ll give some 

consideration to supporting the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, this government has brought 

down a number of measures which have been unfair to young 

people. I’ve mentioned a number of them. I want to mention 

one more. Never before in the history of this province since the 

student aid programs were initiated by the New Democratic 

Party in the 1940s under the CCF, never before have we seen 

such an erosion of the student bursary plan in Saskatchewan. 

This government has in effect eliminated the bursary program 

for young people in Saskatchewan. I can remember, Mr. 

Chairman, that in 1981, under the former NDP  

government, a student only had to borrow $1,100 in Canada 

student loan before they became eligible for a Saskatchewan 

student bursary. 

 

Today, Mr. Chairman, we have a government that has brought 

down a budget in an interim supply Bill that translates into the 

young people of this province, if they want to pursue a 

post-secondary education, having to take out, in a single year, 

over $5,900 in student loans, both Canada student loan and 

Saskatchewan student loan, before they’re eligible for a student 

bursary. That’s a five-fold increase since 1981 in the amount of 

money that a Saskatchewan student has to borrow and go into 

debt for before being eligible for a student bursary. And we say, 

Mr. Chairman, on this side of the House, that that’s a disgrace. 

 

I call on the Minister of Finance to withdraw this interim supply 

Bill, to change the provisions in the student aid program, and to 

reinstate the bursary program that was operating in this 

province until a few months ago to ensure that students don’t 

have to borrow more than $2,000 in student loan before they’re 

eligible for a student bursary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make one other point 

about this interim supply Bill before closing, and that is that 

what we see in this government’s request today, for the 

legislature to approve $363 million in interim spending, is a 

provision that, in effect, will just barely cover the public debt on 

the operation of government departments in this province for a 

single year. 

 

The annual debt on the spending in the Consolidated Fund for 

regular government departments is $294 million, Mr. Chairman. 

And this provision, for the legislature to approve $363 million, 

in effect, Mr. Chairman, is almost . . . All that money for the 

month of July is just barely going to cover the annual interest 

payments on the provincial debt for regular government 

departments. 

 

For the government as a whole, including Crown corporations, 

Mr. Chairman . . . The annual interest payments on the total 

provincial debt, including both government departments and 

Crown corporations, is $687 million, Mr. Chairman. In other 

words, Mr. Chairman, the $363 million that we’re being asked 

to approve for spending in the current month is just going to 

cover barely half of the interest payments on the provincial debt 

for the entire year. 

 

And I make that point, Mr. Chairman, to underline the very 

serious fiscal situation that this government has got itself into 

through thorough mismanagement, complete incompetence. I 

say to the Minister of Finance, how can he possibly justify a 

situation in which he brings down an interim supply Bill for 

$363 million? 

 

And, in effect, five-sixths of that money — five-sixths of it — 

is simply going to go towards covering the interest payments on 

the 1987 provincial debt for government departments only, not 

counting any Crown corporations  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1485 

 

at all. And I say, Mr. Chairman, that that single fact alone 

justifies all members of this Assembly voting against this 

interim supply Bill. I will certainly be doing so. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wish to make a 

few remarks in regard to the resolution introduced by the 

Minister of Finance today. He’s brought in a resolution to 

provide interim supply of some $363 million to carry on the 

operations of government, since the budget is not passed. 

 

The budget was introduced very late this year, as you can 

appreciate, Mr. Chairman. The reasons that were given were 

that there was an election in the fall — October 20, to be exact 

— and they say they didn’t have time to get their House in 

order to bring the budget in at the normal time which would be 

prior to the expiry of the fiscal year. 

 

Now I had to do a little research, Mr. Chairman, to go back 

through some of the history of this legislature. And it seems that 

there is at least one example that comes very close to the late 

presentation of a budget in relationship to the date the election 

was called, and that was back during the Liberal years, and I’ll 

refer to that a little later. 

 

But we have to look at how we got into this mess in the first 

place, Mr. Chairman. The fiscal irresponsibility, the fiscal 

mismanagement of this government started with their election 

in the general election in 1982. And in the first budget that they 

brought down, they forecast a deficit of $219 million. They 

overshot and they actually had a deficit of $227 million. In the 

next fiscal year, ’83-84, they projected a $316 million deficit. 

 

(1615) 

 

They overshot that, and the deficit actually came in at $331 

million. In 1984-85 they projected a deficit of $267 million. 

They actually came in at $379 million. In ’85-86 fiscal year 

they projected a deficit of $291 million; they actually came in at 

$584 million. 1986-87 fiscal year they projected a deficit of 

$389 million, and they came in at $1,235 million deficit, or $1.2 

billion. 

 

This year, in the budget that we’ve been debating before this 

House, Mr. Chairman, they have projected a deficit of $577 

million. And who knows what the actual tally will be by the 

time this fiscal year has concluded on March 31, 1988. It could 

be a great deal of money. It will certainly add to the $3.4 billion 

in debt that we’re in right now; that we’re paying some $294 

million per year in interest, in which I predict that projection is 

a bit low. The interest payments will be much more than that. 

 

And as the member from Saskatoon Sutherland has pointed out, 

if you look at the interest that’s paid on the debt for general 

revenue of the government, and if you look at the debt from 

Crown corporations and the interest that’s paid on there — the 

interest that the people in the province of Saskatchewan are 

paying on this government’s mismanagement and fiscal 

irresponsibility — comes to some $687 million, Mr. Chairman. 

And I think that that’s a disgrace. The people of the province of  

Saskatchewan don’t want to be paying for the incompetence 

and mismanagement of this Progressive Conservative 

government. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the research that I did goes back to actually the 

election of June of 1944. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That was a great day for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — That was a very great day for Saskatchewan 

as the member from Quill Lakes points out, because that was 

the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation coming into 

government in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Chairman, that government, the CCF 

government in the province of Saskatchewan, led by two 

distinguished leaders, Tommy Douglas and later Woodrow 

Lloyd, held elections on June 15 of 1944, where they were 

elected. I shouldn’t say they held it. Actually the Patterson 

government, the Liberal government that had as bad a record 

almost as the fiscal mismanagement of this government, had 

called the election for that date, and the CCF were elected at 

that time. 

 

The CCF then were successful in elections on June 24 of 1948. 

They were successful on an election in June 11 of 1952. They 

were again successful on June 20 of 1956. They were again 

successful on June 8 of 1960. And unfortunately they broke 

their tradition from calling June elections, because the CCF up 

until that time had always called the election for the month of 

June. But they decided in their wisdom at that time — and we 

are not to question that in this House — on April 22, 1964 they 

were going to the polls; in fact were defeated by Ross 

Thatcher’s Liberals in that particular election. 

 

Now the point I make by this, Mr. Speaker, is that through all of 

those consecutive years, the latest that the CCF brought a 

budget into the Legislative Assembly in the province of 

Saskatchewan was March 15 of 1945 — well before the end of 

the fiscal year. And people that are listening here today will 

realize that the budget year, the fiscal year of the government, 

runs from April 1 until March 31 of the following year. 

 

So March 15, through all of those elections in all of those years, 

March 15 was the latest that the CCF ever brought a budget 

before this legislature. We find this government didn’t bring a 

budget in until months after the end of the fiscal year. In fact, 

the budget didn’t come before this legislature until June 17. 

That’s disgraceful. 

 

It makes it very hard for municipalities, individuals, businesses, 

transit companies, school boards, hospital boards to do their 

budgeting which is tied in so closely because of the assistance 

that they get from the provincial government or, in this case, the 

assistance they hoped to have gotten from the provincial 

government and certainly aren’t getting through this budget of 

the Devine Progressive Conservatives, Mr. Chairman. 

 

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1486 

 

But we all must also look at when the Liberals came in. The 

Liberals, of course, came into office, as I’ve already mentioned, 

on April 22, 1964, and they were there for seven long, lean 

years. The Liberals called their first election, Mr. Chairman, on 

October 11, 1967. They were successful in that election — 

unfortunately, as far as we’re concerned on this side of the 

House — but they were successful in gaining re-election. 

 

And they again went to the polls to renew their mandate by the 

people of Saskatchewan on June 23 of 1971. And at that time, I 

think, the people of Saskatchewan were fortunate in the fact that 

Ross Thatcher’s Liberals were defeated, and the New 

Democrats formed the first government in the province of 

Saskatchewan as an entity under the New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Now we must look, Mr. Chairman, at the 

latest that the Liberals, during those seven long, lean years, the 

latest they ever brought in a budget. The latest the Liberals ever 

brought in a budget, Mr. Chairman, was on March 2, 1970 — 

March the 2nd — well before the end of the fiscal year at 

March 31. 

 

And it’s always been an historical precedent, a tradition, that 

the budgets are tabled in this legislature that are brought 

forward for public scrutiny and debate in this forum, prior to the 

end of the fiscal year. And again I point out, Mr. Speaker, this 

doesn’t happen under this government. They waited well past 

the end of the fiscal year Now they’re saying that they’re 

concerned that they can’t get the budget through. 

 

People in Saskatchewan don’t see this government as having 

any credibility. They want us to closely examine the budget. 

They want us to closely examine the record of this Progressive 

Conservative government, and that record is not good, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why we’re here for a long term this summer, 

into the fall, into Christmas, and after Christmas if necessary, 

Mr. Speaker, until there’s some changes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Now as I mentioned, on June 23, 1971, New 

Democrats formed the government in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and they were successful in an election that they 

called on June 11, 1975. They were again successful in an 

election that they called on October 18, 1978. And 

unfortunately, very unfortunately, I’m sure my colleagues will 

agree, the New Democrats called an election on April 26 of 

1982, and this government on the other side of the House came 

into power with a massive majority in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The people had spoken on April 26, 1982, and we respect what 

the people of Saskatchewan were saying. But they were 

certainly deceived, because now if you look at the only 

indication that’s there, that’s in print, is the public opinion polls. 

And the public opinion polls show that the fate of this 

government opposite is going the same direction as when the 

Conservatives held the government from 1929 to 1934 in the 

province of Saskatchewan, where they went from holding 

government to being  

wiped out in every single seat in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Sorry for calling you Mr. Speaker all the time, Mr. Chairman, 

but if we weren’t caught in this situation, we would be 

addressing the Speaker and not the Chairman of Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, during the years that New Democrats held 

the government in Saskatchewan in trust for the people of the 

province, between 1971 and 1982, the latest that a budget was 

ever brought into the provincial legislature was March 7, and 

that was in the year 1978. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s 

disgraceful that this government — again I stress — waited 

until June 17, because they didn’t have their House in order; 

they didn’t know what they wanted to do; they flew by the seat 

of their pants for over four years, nearly five years, and didn’t 

have a plan together to bring a budget into this legislature, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Such contempt for the legislature. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Such contempt, as the member for Quill 

Lakes points out — such contempt for the legislative process 

and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, they said that one of 

the reasons it was so late coming in was that the election was 

held in October and there was a transition period. I don’t know 

what the transition was — don’t know what kind of transition 

was there, because they had formed the government again, to 

the dismay of many people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Many people wonder why an election could be bought, but it 

certainly could be bought, and that’s pointed out by the huge, 

huge deficit they incurred in the past fiscal year. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I looked at the October 18, 1978 election. 

The election was only two days earlier than the election that 

was held on October 20, 1986. And do you know when the 

budget was tabled in the legislature, Mr. Chairman? 

 

An Hon. Member: — When? 

 

Mr. Anguish: — The budget was tabled in the legislature 

before the end of the fiscal year. My colleagues want to know 

when that was. It was March 7 in the year . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — In March? 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I’m sorry, March, I’m sorry, I’m sorry, March 

8, 1979. So the election was basically the same time as the 

election we’ve just gone through. But the New Democrats were 

able to bring the budget in well before the end of the fiscal year, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

We experienced the same kinds of difficulties, but the 

difference between New Democrats and Conservatives is that 

we’ve always had a plan that we’ve developed in consultation 

with Saskatchewan people, that we develop in consultation with 

people who work in government departments and agencies and 

Crown corporations. Because, Mr. Chairman, we see those 

people as being valuable assets to the province of 

Saskatchewan. They  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1487 

 

deserve to be consulted, and provide valuable information in the 

budgetary process under which any responsible government 

would operate, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now let’s examine the Progressive Conservative government 

since they came into office in April 26, 1982. Of course, they 

went for an extremely long time — longer than most 

governments go — without seeking to renew their mandate 

because they were buying time to buy votes with Brian 

Mulroney’s money from Ottawa, and that’s what they did. They 

had to wait until they got the confirmation from Brian 

Mulroney as to when they can call the election. 

 

So the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the leader of 

the Progressive Conservative Party, went back and forth 

between Ottawa and Saskatchewan trying to get money to buy 

votes. And when they found they had enough money to try and 

buy people’s votes, they went to the polls and were re-elected 

on October 20, 1986. 

 

Now it’s not only this year that the budget was brought in past 

the end of the fiscal year. In 1985, the budget wasn’t brought in 

until after the end of the fiscal year, but not bad — only 10 days 

after the end of the fiscal year. Not the couple of months and a 

number of days and weeks, like we’re talking about in this 

situation. But since 1944, Mr. Chairman, only twice has this 

tradition been broken, and both times it’s been broken by 

Progressive Conservatives in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s 

fiscal mismanagement, it’s irresponsibility, and you’ve lost 

credibility with the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1630) 

 

But even worse, in terms of irresponsibility, Mr. Chairman, is 

the fact that the public accounts don’t come in on time. We’re 

still waiting, in this legislature, for the public accounts for the 

fiscal year ending March 31 — not 1987 — but for the fiscal 

year ending March 31, 1986, many, many months after the end 

of the fiscal year. This has never happened in the recent history 

of the province of Saskatchewan, and we think that that’s 

irresponsible. We think that the public and the opposition have 

the right to review the spending of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And those documents are especially important, 

Mr. Chairman, when we can’t get information that is public 

information from the members opposite. In questioning, they 

avoid the issues; they stonewall the issues; they avoid the topics 

that should be talked about; they are fiscally irresponsible, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

What about some mismanagement. Do any of you remember, 

over there, the Pioneer Trust deal in 1985? Does it come close 

to comparing to the Principal affair in 1987? Well people in the 

province of Saskatchewan think it does. 

 

Through your incompetence you’ve bungled the Pioneer Trust 

deal. You’ve also sold out investors in the province of 

Saskatchewan — those people that thought that they were being 

protected by the Department of Consumer and Commercial (or 

Corporate) Affairs, whatever it’s called now. They were being 

protected because they thought that the members opposite were 

doing their job  

in providing protection for Saskatchewan investors. And we 

find out, the people who invested in First Investors and 

Associated, part of the Principal Group, have virtually no 

protection at all. And this government sits back and does 

nothing about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those people feel like pouring money into those 

unprotected companies is just like pouring their tax dollars into 

the provincial government that we have today in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It’s a useless endeavour. People are tired of 

paying higher and higher rates of taxes and seeing more and 

more programs cut and cut and cut. Fewer services from the 

provincial government but increased taxation — increased 

taxation to the magnitude that people do not want to pay any 

more, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Do you realize, on the opposite side, on the government side of 

this House, that in order to pay off the debt that’s been incurred, 

you would have to double everyone’s income tax in the 

province of Saskatchewan over about the next 10-year period? 

People would not put up with that. People absolutely would not 

put up with that. 

 

And then there’s the Pocklington deal. Where are the contracts 

with Pocklington? We were thankful you gave us the 

documents on Weyerhaeuser because people could see in black 

and white how incompetent, inept, and irresponsible you were 

in handling the affairs of the people of this province. But where 

are the documents; where is the agreement? 

 

The member from Wascana, maybe you could glean that out; 

you’re a Legislative Secretary. Maybe you could get us the 

agreement between Peter Pocklington and the province of 

Saskatchewan. We’d like to see those documents. And when do 

you expect to table those here in this legislature . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I can’t hear what you’re saying there, Deputy 

Premier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m sorry. There’s too 

much noise on that side of the House. I can’t hear what you’re 

saying. 

 

You could maybe participate in the debate and we could get 

some dialogue going between us. But obviously, no members 

opposite . . . I’m the fifth member to stand on this side of the 

House and question what you’re doing. Not one person on the 

government side has stood up with the integrity to defend their 

actions on bringing in the interim supply that they’re asking us 

to pass here in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — And what about the Weyerhaeuser 

agreement? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 

opposite, the member from Souris-Cannington, the Deputy 

Premier, is asking, what does this have to do with the interim 

supply? It has a lot to do with the interim supply, because if you 

were fiscally responsible, we wouldn’t be in the situation we’re 

in here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — What about the Weyerhaeuser agreement? 

You gave away about a quarter billion dollars in assets of the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan.  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1488 

 

For what? What return? There’s very little, if any, return ever 

going to come to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You couldn’t run PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), so 

you got rid of it. How about Manalta Coal? Was that a good 

deal for the people in the province of Saskatchewan? Did they 

get good scales of economy for their buck that they had 

invested there? 

 

How about the Highways equipment? Was that a good auction 

sale? I ask the member from Melfort if that was a good auction 

sale. Yes, they admit opposite, it was a good auction sale. Sure, 

it was a fire sale. You should have at least taken a blowtorch 

and scorched some of the equipment first before you sold it off 

at fire sale prices. That would have given you credibility with 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan because they would 

have known there was really a fire sale. Now it puzzles them 

that you’ve sold off those assets. 

 

A billion and a half dollars to the oil companies in the province 

of Saskatchewan. Oh, you take away from those in 

Saskatchewan society that can least afford to pay. You give 

more and more to the oil companies. And the member from 

Saskatoon South, during estimates — and I’d invite people 

watching to read his interventions in this Committee of Finance 

when the Department of Energy was before this committee — 

made some very good points in terms of people in the province 

not getting value for the dollar that’s being paid to oil 

companies in the province of Saskatchewan. The only way 

we’re going to get out of this debt with any kind of dignity is to 

have the resources of the province that the people of 

Saskatchewan own, pay for a substantial share of the services 

and the debt now, since it’s been created by the members 

opposite. 

 

And what about the close to $20 million in government 

department advertising in the latest Public Accounts. I believe 

it’s somewhere around $17 million in advertising. 

 

And the patronage — the George Hill, bringing him in at over 

$100,000 a year. The fellow that you fired to have him cover 

over and take in the job, is rehired on contract, so now you’re 

paying two people to do the one person’s job. 

 

Paul Rousseau, nice plum — off to the old country. Gordon 

Dirks, Gordon Currie, Keith Parker, Paul Schoenhals, Tim 

Embury, Myles Morin, Bob Andrew. You know, the latest thing 

that this . . . You know what this resolution does here today? 

This resolution here today, if it passes — and it will, because 

the government of the province of Saskatchewan has to 

continue operating — but what this resolution does is it pays 

$2,500 for the Minister of Justice’s flight to Calgary to attend a 

wedding; and at the same time people who have to use air 

ambulance have to pay money up front, in some cases in excess 

of the $2,500. 

 

Is that any kind of fairness in the system? Is the Minister of 

Justice entitled to do that when people in the province of 

Saskatchewan suffer? They suffer . . . They see the suffering 

especially, especially in terms of the expenditures that are made 

that just don’t have any  

relationship to where we should be going in this province, 

especially in the area of health care. 

 

Let’s look at health care for a little while, Mr. Chairman. 

Guarantee . . . The individual who introduced this resolution 

here today is the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. The 

constituency was formerly called the constituency of 

Qu’Appelle. And the former leader of the Progressive 

Conservatives, one Dick Collver . . . everyone in this House 

will certainly remember him. He was the individual that was 

instrumental in convincing Colin Thatcher and Gary . . . pardon 

me, Colin Thatcher and the current Minister of Finance to leave 

the Liberal Party and join the Progressive Conservative Party — 

that old tie—in that’s always been there and is there again. 

 

I don’t know why some of you haven’t been in close 

consultation with the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 

but I think likely some of you have. Possibly, the member from 

Regina Wascana. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Could you get back to the 

item which is the interim supply, please. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that you 

called me to order. I’ll try and be more specific. But there is a 

direct tie-in. I’m relating money that’s being spent in terms of 

health care, and I had to point out . . . because this is a historical 

document by now. You see, it’s a guarantee. 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is 

committed to continue the medicare system in our 

province. 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 

rejects any form of deterrent fees or health insurance 

premiums. 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan will 

abolish the unfair deterrent fees for prescription drugs. 

 

And now that’s signed by a Gary Lane, MLA for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. Now I assume that that’s the same 

individual who is now the Minister of Finance in the province 

of Saskatchewan, but I can’t be absolutely sure because I 

believe the Minister of Finance, his constituency is the 

constituency of Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. But I do believe that 

Qu’Appelle and Qu’Appelle-Lumsden are basically the same 

constituency and that’s the same individual sitting over there. 

 

And it’s also signed by a leader of the Progressive Conservative 

Party, a guarantee that they placed before the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And do you wonder why they don’t 

have any credibility . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Is there 

another one there? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Here’s another one. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Is this another guarantee? Oh, here’s one. The 

Minister of Justice. Re-elect . . . I can’t read what it says there 

because it’s not proper to do that within the rules of the House. 

 

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1489 

 

An Hon. Member: — Read the ad. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well it says, re-elected Bob Andrew in 

Kindersley. And it says: 

 

Revitalize and improve health care. A new PC government 

will place great emphasis on improving the delivery of 

health services by providing more adequate financing to 

our hospitals; by avoiding waste and duplication between 

the Departments of Health and Social Services; by 

expanding the drug plan; by guaranteeing a first-rate 

ambulance system; by ensuring adequate special care 

facilities for senior citizens; by ensuring that all areas of 

the province have access to the best medical care. 

 

It was there . . . it was in The Eston Press on April 21 of 1982. 

 

And now let’s examine what they’re doing with the $363 

million they’re asking for in the interim supply resolution that 

was placed before us today — $18 million less this year in 

budgets for health care. Do an analysis; don’t look at the bottom 

line in the budget documents; do some research into it. An 

analysis will reveal that there’s $18 million less for health care 

this year in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The dental plan. Virtually the dental plan has been eliminated as 

we knew it previously in the province. Some children that were 

in the program are no longer eligible for the program. Over 300 

dental therapists were fired — a very brutal action. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Four hundred and eleven. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Is it 411? Our health critic says 411 people. 

So I stand corrected. I appreciate you bringing that to my 

information. Four hundred and eleven dental therapists that 

used to perform services to people right across this province, to 

young children who would go to school and have their dental 

work done in their home community or the community closest 

to the farm in which they would live. 

 

And now people will find they have to travel many miles, make 

appointments with overbooked dentists to have their children’s 

dental care taken care of. That’s shameful, shameful that people 

in this province have to experience the real Progressive 

Conservatives after the October 20 election. You wouldn’t 

recognize it as being the same organization, the same political 

party that was going into the October 20 election in 1986, 

because they were much a populist party at that time. 

 

(1645) 

 

But a populist party without a plan gets themselves into very 

serious economic problems, which I pointed out in my initial 

remarks. And they couldn’t continue at that, so they’ve had to 

make some tough decisions, and the tough decisions have been 

against people. The ordinary, the average Saskatchewan people 

are the ones that are suffering the brunt of the punishment laid 

on by this  

provincial government. 

 

So the dental plan was very important. The dental plan was the 

most major extension of our medicare program in the 25 years 

since it came in. The plan came in in 1962. This is the 25th 

anniversary, and the dental plan was the most major and most 

well-accepted extension of medicare since 1962. And this 

government opposite has virtually destroyed the dental program 

as we know it, to serve young children in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We should also look, Mr. Chairman, at the drug plan. The drug 

plan was likely the other important extension, outside of the 

dental plan, that was very important to the basics of medicare in 

the province. There was a small dispensing fee that people had 

to pay for the drugs that they required, the drugs that are 

prescribed by physicians in the province of Saskatchewan. Now 

that’s gone. Saskatchewan people have to pay up front for their 

drugs, the total cost of which they must absorb themselves. 

 

And granted, there’s a deductible, and after that deductible is 

reached, people can submit their bills. And they tell us on the 

government side that there’ll be a monthly payment coming 

back once people have reached their deductible level — it’s 

only 80 per cent of what they pay beyond the deductible, but 

it’ll be coming back monthly. 

 

And we predict it won’t be coming back on a regular monthly 

basis because there’s nothing to indicate that you’re geared up 

for such a massive change in the health care system in the 

province of Saskatchewan. In fact, if you look at the record of 

paying doctors through the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission, no one would believe you in the province of 

Saskatchewan that you’ll be bale to meet what you say, in terms 

of paying people back their rebate on drugs in the province of 

Saskatchewan for those prescriptions that they’ve had to pay up 

front. 

 

The Minister of Health in this House, or it may be outside of the 

House, has said that by paying doctors late, and underpaying 

doctors from what they’re entitled to for the schedule of fees 

that have been agreed to between the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission and physicians in this province, that they will save 

on the government side $300,000. Is that correct? 

 

That won’t even pay the interest on the debt for one day. And 

you’re jeopardizing the medical care program in the province of 

Saskatchewan for some $300,000? Insanity. It’s uncaring, it’s 

irresponsible, and people will not have credibility in a 

government that misleads them to the extent that this 

government has misled them. 

 

There’s the hearing-aid plan. That was cut, Mr. Chairman. 

Well, it’s virtually wiped out as far as we’re concerned, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

In the area of mental health — and I talked about mental health, 

Mr. Chairman, in my budget address, so I won’t get on at length 

in that — but around 100 positions cut in mental health and a 

policy to have people in the province of Saskatchewan have 

good mental health care so that they live and work in a caring, 

sharing society in the  

  



 

July 29, 1987 

1490 

 

communities in which other people live. We have to live 

together, but the support services in the communities are no 

longer there. Support services are being wiped out at the fastest 

rate of anything under health care, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Community health services, in addition to the mental health, 

had a cut of some 20 staff positions. The patient care fund no 

longer exists. It just doesn’t exist any more. The health capital 

fund no longer exists. 

 

So we believe, Mr. Chairman, that there are many, many 

examples of fiscal mismanagement, and I’ve tried to outline 

some of those here today. There have been unfair and uncaring 

cut-backs, cut-backs that have affected virtually every family in 

the province of Saskatchewan with the possible exception of 

those that don’t have a patronage contract with the Tory 

Progressive Conservative government opposite. 

 

Misleading information about taxation, not releasing 

information that’s public documented information that should 

be released, should be accessible to the province of 

Saskatchewan and the people, through this legislature. You’ve 

lost your credibility. The irresponsibility, we hope, will not go 

on for a long period of time. 

 

We hope that instead of putting us in the position where we’re 

fairly obligated to support the interim supply resolution because 

we are caring and sharing and we realize that you have to have 

money to keep the reduced levels of services going, that we’re 

very reluctant, Mr. Chairman, but we will have to vote for the 

supply motion. And I would say that the members, in a 

responsible and caring way on this side of the House, are now 

ready to vote on this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Be it resolved that towards making good the supply 

granted to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

1988, the sum of $363,072,500 be granted out of the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $41,063,800 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. Excuse me, I still have 

one to catch up. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $41,063,800 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 

March 31, 1988. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the sum 

of $41,063,800 be granted out of the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that the 

resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the resolutions 

read a first and second time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 

 

That Bill No. 25, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year Ending on March 31, 1988, be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, and under rule 

48(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 


