













































September 11, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 11, 1987 

 

 

2457 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, today I rise pursuant to the 

rules of this Assembly to present a petition signed by more than 

1,400 residents of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these petitioners 

are deeply concerned by the government’s wrecking of the 

prescription drug plan and are deeply opposed to the 

government changes. I would now like to enter these petitions 

into the public record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might add that this brings to more than 36,000 

names that have been entered into the public record opposing 

changes to our health care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I too, rise under rule 11 to 

present a petition. It, too, includes some 1,400 signatures of 

Saskatchewan people, particularly protesting the dismantling of 

the prescription drug plan in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the names on this petition were sought and 

collected around the province of Saskatchewan by the 

organization known as the Voice of the Handicapped and they 

have added their voices to thousands of others protesting the 

dismantling of the prescription drug plan in the province of 

Saskatchewan and calling for that plan to be reinstated. I now 

file that petition. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Private Members’ Bills 

 

Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Petersen . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Question period hasn’t started 

yet. 

 

Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Petersen from the Standing Committee 

on Private Members’ Bills presents the first report of the 

committee which is as follows: 

 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 

petitions for private Bills and finds the provisions of rules 

56, 57 and 60 have been fully complied with: 

 

of The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities; 

 

of Briercrest Bible College of Caronport, in the province 

of Saskatchewan; 

 

of Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon South: 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce through you, and to the members of this 

Assembly, a couple who is visiting here from West Germany. 

Their names are Oswald and Hertha Zurowski and they are 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery. These people do not speak 

English, and with your permission I would like to say a few 

words in German. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, would you help me welcome these people to 

Saskatchewan and to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I would also, colleagues, like to 

acknowledge the guests in the gallery. They are the Zurowski 

family, and many of you may even know some of them. They 

are originally from Southey – Rudy, who is now in the United 

States, and Ted, who works in Regina, but is from Southey. 

And in chatting with the guests from West Germany this 

morning, I was pleased to find out that Mr. Zurowski originally 

grew up in a town in Austria only nine miles from my parents’ 

home town. So I’m very, very pleased to have them with us this 

morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Collapse of First Investors Corporation 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

Minister of Consumer Affairs, I direct my question to the 

Minister of Finance; it deals with the collapse of the First 

Investors Corporation. Yesterday, sir, I asked you why the 

Government of Saskatchewan renewed the licence of this firm 

to do business in our province in January of this year, even 

though financial statements filed with the Superintendent of 

Insurance early in 1986 showed that the company was 

insolvent. You declined to answer the question, saying you 

wanted to review the facts. 

 

You’ve now had an opportunity to review the facts, so I ask you 

again, sir: do you deny that your government received a 

financial statement from First Investors Corporation early in 

1986 which showed that the company was insolvent; and do 

you deny that in spite of that financial statement you licensed 

the company to continue to do business in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I indicated to the hon. member 

yesterday, the practice in Canada has been that the prime 

jurisdiction, that is the jurisdiction in which the financial 

institution is headquartered, is basically the governing  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2458 

 

jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, and all provinces rely on the advice 

that we get from that so-called prime jurisdiction. 

 

The department has advised me that they received no indication 

from the province of Alberta until two days prior to the 

announcement that the companies were being pulled off the 

market in Alberta and, Mr. Speaker, we of course, like other 

provinces, rely on the advice that we get from that prime 

jurisdiction. And I’m sure that any such allegations as to 

whether the province of Alberta should have notified the 

province of Saskatchewan will be very much subject to the 

inquiry in the province of Alberta. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, you say that the province of Alberta didn’t advise the 

Department of Consumer Affairs that this company was 

insolvent. I take it you admit that Deloitte Haskins & Sells, the 

national chartered accountants firm, did advise you by signing 

an audited statement which was filed with your department: did 

advise you that this company was insolvent; and did advise you 

in early 1986, and in spite of that you issued a licence. Is that 

not true? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think that the hon. member is taking some 

legal licence with his interpretation of what the financial 

statement may or may not mean, and I suggest to the hon. 

member that auditors, having some dispute, I gather, with the 

province of Alberta as to the valuation of the real estate assets, 

would not necessarily mean insolvency, and one should not 

directly interpret it that way. 

 

Secondly, I think it fair to say that a company having a loss in a 

year is not necessarily insolvent. And I notice you very 

carefully didn’t use that phrase outside the legislature. So I 

suggest to the hon. member that notwithstanding the 

information you’ve given, that in fact the practice that has 

historically been followed of relying on the governing 

jurisdiction to advise is one that has worked historically. Again 

if, in fact, Mr. Speaker, the province of Alberta should have 

notified Saskatchewan – and I assume other provinces – or did 

not supply information that it had to other provinces and other 

regulatory bodies in the other jurisdictions, that will be very 

much a matter of concern to the province of Saskatchewan in 

the inquiry going on in the province of Alberta. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I advise 

the minister, by way of clarification, that outside this House on 

many news media I have said this financial statement shows the 

company was insolvent. I say to you, Mr. Minister . . . I ask 

you, Mr. Minister: do you have any other interpretation of a 

balance sheet which shows a deficit of over $4 million – a 

balance sheet, Mr. Minister – then that company is insolvent? 

And do you not admit that to issue a licence to First Investors 

after having received a balance sheet of this nature showing the 

company to be insolvent, is an indication of gross negligence 

and incompetence on the part of your government; and 

shouldn’t all the First Investor’s persons believe that you have 

been negligent and incompetent in  

looking after their interests? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I will apologize to the hon. 

member if he did use the word insolvent. The news report I had 

was that the phrase used outside this Assembly was: losing 

money. And the hon. member knows, probably the only one on 

that side, that they are not necessarily the same position. I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that the supplementary of the hon. member gets to 

the nub of the opposition’s questioning in this particular item. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. The 

minister is trying to answer the question but is having difficulty 

due to interruptions. Therefore I’d ask the co-operation of the 

members to allow him to continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I know that the practice within Canada, for 

some considerable number of years, has been that the prime 

jurisdiction is the one that other provinces rely on. To argue 

otherwise means a massive bureaucracy in each and every 

province, and I only hear of one party that argues for that 

position. 

 

Secondly, and I think it’s key, that for the last two days, for the 

first time, the NDP has bared its soul and admitted that what it’s 

really asking for in this questioning is a bail out. And I find it 

very, very interesting that the New Democratic Party opposed 

the Government of Saskatchewan bailing out investors in a 

Saskatchewan trust company, but are jumping with alacrity to 

demand a bail-out to people investing in a trust company in 

another province. And I find that somewhat shocking, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Just so 

the facts are on the record: do you, Mr. Minister, acknowledge 

that in early 1986 a financial statement was filed by First 

Investors, an audited financial statement showing that they were 

insolvent; or is it your position that they didn’t file such a 

statement but that you issued the operating licence anyway? 

Which is your position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I take the position – I have made it 

abundantly clear – that the financial and the annual report given 

by a company gives certain information. Now whether or not 

the qualified annual . . . or the audited statement is as a result of 

a dispute on the valuation of assets, which I gather was one of 

the factors involving the province of Alberta – and cause for 

some concern, I might add, later in the province of Alberta – so 

I think one should interpret that for what it’s worth, and I 

question the value of it. I think that the real information that the 

province of Saskatchewan had to rely on is the information 

given by the so-called prime jurisdiction, the governing 

jurisdiction, and that’s what all provinces have historically 

relied on. 

 

And I do put into the record, and I think that the hon. member 

has attempted to avoid it, that it is abundantly clear that the 

New Democratic Party is demanding a bail out of those 

investing in an Alberta company when they oppose a 

government bailing out those investing in a  



 

September 11, 1987 

2459 

 

Saskatchewan trust company. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, do you deny that The Investment Contracts Act of this 

province – not of Alberta, but this province – requires that 

section 26, that financial statements be filed. Do you deny that a 

financial statement was filed in early 1986 for the year 1985? 

Do you deny that that statement showed the company is 

insolvent? And do you deny that following that, you issued an 

operating licence which allowed this company to take tens of 

thousands of dollars from other innocent Saskatchewan citizens, 

who were relying upon your supervision of that company? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I indicate again, Mr. Speaker, that the 

historical practices have been and were followed. And does the 

hon. member want me to make an admission? No I will not, for 

a very simple fact: that if any investor – to take the hon. 

member’s interpretation – received that annual report and did 

not take their moneys out, they themselves, on his argument of 

course, would be negligent and lose the right to any 

“compensense” before the court. 

 

So I suggest to the hon. member that it would be very unwise 

for any spokesman to take that position, and he may be well 

prejudicing the position of several investors if that’s the 

argument he’s making. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. That is 

an interesting observation by the minister. Mr. Minister, I put it 

to you that there is no obligation under The Investment Contract 

Act operated by your government to supply financial 

information to the certificate holders, and it was not supplied. 

 

And I further say this, Mr. Minister: do you deny that your 

Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs has been 

refusing to supply the public with copies of the financial 

statements filed with the Department of Consumer and 

Corporate Affairs under the terms of the Act? Do you deny that 

your department has refused to supply the public, who have 

asked for it, with financial statements filed under that Act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll take notice of that, Mr. Speaker, but I 

find it very, very interesting . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Next question. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Finance. The Minister of Consumer Affairs and her 

officials had only three companies to administer under The 

Investment Contracts Act – only three. They have been grossly 

negligent and incompetent in doing this, and they failed badly 

to protect the Saskatchewan consumers. 

 

I have a constituent in my constituency who’s worked for 30 

years as a cleaning person, cleaning buildings, and she’s lost 

her life savings in this collapse which you failed to regulate in 

this province of Saskatchewan. And I want  

to know why the Government of Saskatchewan is not both 

legally and morally responsible to these people to cover their 

losses and to help them when they were told that the 

government guaranteed their loans 100 per cent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suspect, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

hon. member, that if anyone told them that the Government of 

Saskatchewan guaranteed their loans 100 per cent, that it was 

probably the member opposite who was telling the people 

because I can’t believe that that, in fact, happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, and this is the second time today, and the 

third time in the last two days that the New Democratic Party 

has gone on record on demanding a bail-out for the investors in 

an Alberta trust company that has gone into receivership. This 

is the third time, and it is the same party, the New Democratic 

Party that opposed this government helping Saskatchewan 

investors in a Saskatchewan trust company, Mr. Speaker. I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we are seeing the height of hypocrisy 

from the New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prescription Drug Plan 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Premier. A few minutes 

ago we tabled in this legislature yet another petition organized 

by the Regina chapter of the Voice of the Handicapped calling 

on your government to reverse its decision to dismantle the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. This brings to more than 

36,000 the number of people who have signed petitions calling 

on you to come to your senses with respect to health care. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you now listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan? Will you heed the views of tens of thousands of 

Saskatchewan people that health care should be our number one 

priority in this province and that the Saskatchewan government 

should rescind its changes to the prescription drug plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have and will continue 

to review . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think that the 

Premier should be given the opportunity to answer the question 

without being immediately interrupted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think that the member for The 

Battlefords should take heed of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health and 

myself and others have said that we will review all cases, all 

individual cases in the province of Saskatchewan that want to 

be reviewed as a result of their special or unique circumstances, 

and we will respond to each and every inquiry. 

 

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2460 

 

I can say today, Mr. Speaker, that we have examined several, 

and to date I believe about 85 respondents have been reviewed 

carefully, and the applications have been received from 

individuals that have special requirements, those that aren’t on 

compensation, or those that aren’t on welfare, or those that 

aren’t seniors, or those that aren’t in institutions, and they’re 

examined very carefully, and we will continue to do that. 

 

So if the members of the public think they have a special or 

unique circumstance because they have a relatively good 

income but it’s not . . . it’s above welfare, or it’s not covered by 

compensation or other things, we would be glad to examine 

them, and we will continue to do that to make sure that each 

and every individual or family has appropriate care in response. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Premier, people in this 

province don’t want to have to go to your government begging 

for coverage. They don’t want to have to do that. For months 

we have presented cases in this legislature where families have 

had to choose between groceries and medication, thanks to your 

changes to the prescription drug plan. 

 

Today the Voice of the Handicapped has come to this 

legislature with petitions and a plea that you restore this 

important health service. More than 36,000 Saskatchewan 

people have signed formal petitions opposing changes to our 

health care system. What will it take to get you people to listen? 

How many thousands more will have to sign petitions and 

march on this legislature in order to restore our health care 

system and get you folks to listen to what the people in this 

province are saying? How many more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member talks about 

thousands and thousands. I can say that we have received 85 

completed applications, and they have been dealt with very 

fairly by the commission that examines individual 

circumstances. 

 

The hon. member knows that it is indeed the very best drug 

program in all of Canada. It covers every single solitary 

individual. And, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that if you are 

concerned about people that are on low income, they fall into 

the category of welfare and they are covered. If you’re 

concerned about those on compensation, they are covered, Mr. 

Speaker. If you’re concerned about senior citizens, people in 

hospitals and institutions, we’ve covered all those except for 

very unique circumstances. 

 

And the hon. member, to be fair, has talked about thousands 

and tens of thousands. I mean I can go through a list of 85 

individuals that have returned and have completed applications, 

and we’ve dealt with every one of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I might add, the hon. member mentioned the other day that 

it was $1,700 in one case. Well when we pick up 80 per cent of 

it and return it quickly, it amounted to less than $30 a week, Mr. 

Speaker, less than $1 a day . . . $30 a month, less than $1 a day, 

Mr. Speaker. So I don’t think  

it’s fair to exaggerate, and I don’t think it’s fair to use scare 

tactics, and I hope the hon. member is not running all over 

Saskatchewan saying nobody is covered. I don’t think it would 

be fair at all. 

 

Free Trade Talks 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Premier. There is less than a month to go now in the 

Canada-U.S. free trade talks, Mr. Premier, and yesterday 

Canada received a very stern message from the U.S. Secretary 

of State, Mr. Shultz, in Washington. He said that any dispute 

settlement mechanism in a free trade deal would have to be 

consistent with existing American laws on dumping and 

countervail and so forth. 

 

In other words, the United States is not prepared to give up any 

of their trade harassment practices such as they’re presently 

using in relation to our potash. 

 

Now my question, Mr. Premier, is this: on Monday when you 

meet with the other first ministers in Ottawa on this subject, 

will you be taking the position that an acceptable treaty from 

the Saskatchewan perspective must include a clear, definite, and 

binding dispute settlement mechanism to override U.S. trade 

harassment practices? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I would largely concur with the hon. 

member that for us in the province of Saskatchewan . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I can just say that the resources that we have here, and 

the amount of trade that we do with the United States, 

particularly when it comes to commodities, it’s extremely 

important that we play by rules that we set together, as opposed 

to just having the United States set the rules as they are now, 

and particularly when it comes to potash. We can’t live under 

those circumstances very easily. We end up the losers. 

 

That’s obviously why I would like to have an arrangement 

where we can both sit down at the table and cut out the deal and 

arrange circumstances that we can both understand with respect 

to trade and play by those rules. Right now we’re doing it just 

with the United States’ rules, and they’re getting more 

miserable, frankly, passing legislation in Congress that is very 

restrictive and would hurt Canadians. 

 

So I would say we need a mechanism, and I will fight extremely 

hard for a mechanism, and, put another way, I wouldn’t accept a 

mechanism that wouldn’t allow us to be involved in an 

arrangement where we set the rules together and not just the 

United States by itself. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s critically important 

to be very clear on this point. The U.S. trade negotiators are 

talking about a voluntary dispute settlement mechanism and the 

federal government has recently used the language, an adequate 

dispute settlement mechanism. Those words seem to me to be 

rather mushy. Is it the Premier’s clear position that any 

mechanism must be definite, it must be binding, and it must 

override U.S. powers of trade harassment which they have used 

so recently against Canada, and particularly against 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, what you see  



 

September 11, 1987 

2461 

 

from the United States’ point of view is that they are obviously 

very sensitive with respect to changing the rules with respect to 

trade. Secondly, they’re in a bargaining position, and what you 

heard last night, I’m sure, is some pretty hard bargaining by 

Secretary Shultz who just said: look, we’re not about to change 

this either at all or very easily. 

 

Now the negotiations as they get to the final hour, it’s like 

anything else that you negotiate, you’re going to see probably 

some movement. Now obviously they’ve said that they’re not 

interested at the outset. The Congress is in a very miserable 

mood. We’ll have to see how that plays out to the end, but 

they’re taking a very hard line, and their actions – how 

irrational they are. I mean, in fact when you look at the potash 

case, it hurts the entire agriculture market in the United States. 

Despite that, they’re still taking a hard line because they’re in a 

very partisan battle. 

 

Effect of Gasoline Tax on School Boards 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Finance. When you introduced the seven cents 

per litre gasoline tax, Mr. Minister of Finance, you 

double-crossed the school boards. Actually that was your 

second double-cross, the first one was the breaking of a promise 

of the EDF (educational development fund) fund. 

 

But right now you double-crossed them because the tax came in 

long time after the school boards already set their budgets and 

the mill rates were set. And what happened is the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) tells us that there 

is $1.5 million that school boards are going to have to cough up. 

In fact, the Prince Albert school board has sent you a letter 

saying it will cost them $45,000 in addition. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, my question is: in view of the fact that this 

is an unfair gas tax and it will result in either higher property 

taxes or in cut-backs in student programs, will you agree to 

exempt school boards from this unfair tax? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this is typical of the 

opposition – repetitive question. It’s come up several times. It’s 

been answered several times in the Assembly. The question of 

exemptions for next year of course goes in the normal 

budgetary process, but I’ll ask the Minister of Education to 

respond. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Next question. Sorry. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — A new question. Mr. Speaker, we will keep 

asking the question until we get an answer to this . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — . . . because what is happening is you’re 

trying to snooker the people on this by reducing the licences. 

One answer we’ve got is you’re trying to reduce the licences to 

compensate for the increase. And I say that’s an insult, Mr. 

Speaker. The people, the property taxpayers are still going to 

have to make this particular payment. Why don’t you admit that 

it was an  

incompetent move on your part – you forgot about the school 

boards when you set your budget – and rescind it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. I don’t 

think it’s fair to interrupt the minister as soon as they’re on their 

feet. They haven’t even said a word in response and they’re 

being interrupted. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, relative to the question 

of gas tax and how it affects rural school boards, I would 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker and to the people of Saskatchewan, 

who is snookering who here? is that the NDP are trying to 

snooker the people of Saskatchewan, because they know full 

well when this question was asked before this following 

response was given, and it clearly shows that we anticipated the 

effect of a gas tax on rural school boards. 

 

The cost of a 7 cent a litre gas tax to school boards for the 

remainder of the 1987 year, Mr. Speaker, by our calculation, is 

665 thousands of dollars. Because we did not want this to be a 

hardship for school boards and because they did not have any 

way of anticipating a gas tax increase, we changed the grants 

for rural transportations, the formula for grants for rural 

transportation in rural Saskatchewan. We increased the per 

pupil rate by $3 or 2.7 per cent increase and the rural 

transportation kilometre rate by 3.2 per cent. 

 

Or to put that more simply, Mr. Speaker, the rural transportation 

grant was increased by nearly 900 thousands of dollars for 1987 

when, in fact, the cost to school boards only goes up by 

665,000. So I, in fact, Mr. Speaker, would lay the fact out for 

the people of Saskatchewan and for that hon. member so that he 

will not continue to go around and mislead the people of 

Saskatchewan and say that, in fact, school boards are 250,000 

richer, notwithstanding the gas tax, to cover-off the cost of the 

gas tax and other increased transportation costs in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have the 

leave of the House to revert to introduction of guests on our 

agenda for the purposes of making an introduction. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I would like to draw the attention of the 

members of the House to four people who are seated with us on 

the floor of the Assembly. They are: Mr. Mitch Griffin, Ms. 

Elsie Peters, Mr. Bob Bill, and Mr. Joe Reinhart, and they are 

representatives of the organization known as The Voice of the 

Handicapped and together they played a very large role in 

soliciting the names on the petitions which were filed with the 

Assembly earlier this afternoon, and they are obviously very 

dedicated members of that important organization in  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2462 

 

Saskatchewan, The Voice of the Handicapped. And I would ask 

all hon. members to welcome them to our Chamber this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join 

with the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in welcoming 

the Regina members of The Voice of the Handicapped. I’d also 

like to draw the Assembly’s attention to Mr. Garth Garver, who 

is seated in the gallery. He is the president of the Regina chapter 

of The Voice of the Handicapped. 

 

As you know, The Voice of the Handicapped has done a 

tremendous job of advocating on behalf of disabled people in 

this province. They have lobbied for accessibility standards to 

be implemented by the provincial government. As well they 

have lobbied about other issues that are of importance to 

disabled persons. I thank The Voice of the Handicapped for the 

tremendous work that you’ve done in gathering signatures 

hoping to convince the provincial government to change the 

prescription drug plan. And I congratulate you on your work 

that you’re doing on behalf of disabled persons. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 38 – A Bill to amend The Prairie And Forest Fires 

Act, 1982 

 

Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 1982. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 39 – A Bill to amend The Law Reform Commission 

Act 

 

Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Law Reform Commission Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 40 – A Bill to facilitate Economic and Social 

Development in Rural Areas 

 

Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 

facilitate Economic and Social Development in Rural Areas. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Smith that Bill No. 36 – An Act 

respecting the Potash Resources of Saskatchewan be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a 

couple of points to finish off my portion of the potash debate. 

Let me, however, before I get into that last couple of points to 

express my disappointment and frankly, Mr. Speaker, my 

surprise that the members opposite, the NDP, have remained 

curiously silent on this debate when the issue of sovereignty is 

so important and the right to own our own resources is so 

important to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we required the rights to our resources in the 

resource Bill of 1931. Then in 1982 the Canadian constitution 

provided for the provinces to develop and manage their 

resources. In fact the constitution specifically stated that the 

provinces have the right to set their primary rate of production, 

and that, Mr. Speaker, is what this Bill is all about, in addition 

to the sovereignty issue. We have the power under the 

constitution, and this Bill is a mechanism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the three and one-half million member 

American farm bureau expressed serious concern about the 

anti-dumping preliminary charges, saying that the move by the 

United States Department of Commerce came as a surprise to 

them and not a very pleasant one at that. Their spokesman was 

quoted as saying: let’s not get the Saskatchewan government 

mad at us, or words to that effect. The message, Mr. Speaker, 

was quite clear. 

 

You can be sure that that organization, the largest farm 

organization in the world, will lean heavily on the United States 

Department of Commerce, various senators and congressmen 

throughout the wheat and corn growing areas of the United 

States. Perhaps even Mr. Shultz will listen on this occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Premier, who has spoken on numerous 

occasions to farm groups in the United States as well as to their 

legislators, is highly respected for his knowledge and leadership 

in national and international farm policy initiatives. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Energy, the member 

from Swift Current, has brought forth a Bill that has not only 

caught the attention of our neighbours to the South but is timely 

and necessary to protect our potash and to protect our workers. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join in 

this debate for a few moments to review a little bit of the history 

of the situation that we face today, realizing that what we are 

debating is very historic for the province of Saskatchewan but 

as well, Mr. Speaker, for the country as a whole. 

 

I want to point out that the Government of Saskatchewan has 

continued to fight international unfairness wherever we found 

it. Particularly we’ve worked extremely hard to  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2463 

 

fight protectionism as we found it in the United States, and 

European markets, and in other Pacific Rim areas. And we have 

looked hard and we have lobbied hard to reduce the unfair 

subsidies that we find in markets throughout the world. 

Specifically I could point out, for example, when we look at the 

agricultural market that we are involved in here in the province 

of Saskatchewan, the huge subsidies that are in place in the 

United States have caused undue damage right across the 

province of Saskatchewan and indeed across western Canada. 

And we’ve taken those subsidies head-on, Mr. Speaker, because 

people want the government to respond. 

 

When American farmers receive an awful lot more money than 

we do and we have to take on the U.S. Treasury, then in fact we 

have to bow our neck here and defend farmers and not let that 

go unnoticed. With respect to the various kinds of industries 

that we have had to battle for, whether it’s softwood lumber, it’s 

potash, uranium, steel, agriculture, pork, various kinds of items 

that we face unfair trading practices, the province of 

Saskatchewan and this administration has taken a strong stand 

to support two things: one, to remove that unfairness; and 

secondly, to expand our markets whether they’re in United 

States or various other places around the world. 

 

Specifically in agriculture we have through hard lobby and a 

great deal of work, allowed farmers here to receive some 

compensation for the unfair subsidies that take place in the 

United States. This last year farmers in Saskatchewan have 

received about $675 million in cash as a result of direct 

lobbying, not entirely by this administration but certainly led by 

this administration. So the average farmer received something 

like $10,000 apiece in the province of Saskatchewan in 1987, 

and because, Mr. Speaker, of unfair subsidies. 

 

Let me point out – as I did, I believe, in Halifax a couple of 

years ago – as we get into the scheme of things where subsidies 

and protectionism continue, it gets worse and worse and worse. 

As a result, we found farm income throughout the United States 

and throughout Canada is reduced. The demand for potash 

continues to decline and prices decline, and then you have 

problems in subsequent industries, not only in agriculture but 

obviously in potash. 

 

As the minister has pointed out here, we have a huge excess 

supply of potash in the world, not only in Saskatchewan but in 

other places, because farmers haven’t had the income. And you 

can take that loss of income right back to the subsidies and the 

protectionism that started the whole thing in the beginning. 

 

No industry lives in isolation these days, Mr. Speaker. They are 

linked one to the other. Agriculture has an impact on the 

chemical industry, has an impact on the input industry, has on 

machinery, and indeed on potash and fertilizer. 

 

As a result of the moves internationally with respect to 

subsidies and protectionism, it finally sorted itself out into 

where now it hits the potash mines here in Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to respond because we have no 

choice. 

 

If you look at the results recently in the province of 

Saskatchewan – and we could forecast this. And as many as 

five years ago, we were saying in western Canada: watch out 

for the American protectionism; watch what it will do for 

Saskatchewan; and watch what it will even do to the potash 

industries and the other industries that sell into agriculture. And 

we were forecasting that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess we can say today that those forecasts 

came true. Unfortunately we predicted that the United States 

would get deeper and deeper into this mire of protectionism and 

subsidy, and it would have an impact not only on Americans 

but, indeed, on people right across the world. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, responded earlier by dramatic changes 

in the potash industry, and we were making changes. And I 

want to just point out that Saskatchewan sales to the United 

States, our largest market, have declined by almost 20 per cent 

since 1980, and in good part because of problems in the United 

States where the U.S. farm income has dropped because of the 

huge protectionism measures that they have taken place there. 

 

Industry measures have been cut in half since 1981. As a result, 

many companies have suffered substantial losses in our 

province, Mr. Speaker, as a result of these unfair practices. 

Closer to home, we’ve seen production cut-backs, frequent 

shut-downs and lay-offs. Saskatchewan capacity utilization has 

fallen from a high of 100 per cent in 1982 to a low of 67 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1045) 

 

We have been responding. We have been cutting back. We have 

been trying to react to a market that is irrational because of the 

unfair economic conditions imposed by politicians abroad. 

 

Saskatchewan communities have lost almost 1,000 jobs in the 

potash industry, with many of the remaining workers obviously 

uncertain about their futures. Government revenues, Mr. 

Speaker, have dropped from $280 million in 1980 to just $37 

million in 1986. 

 

Well we can’t live under those conditions, Mr. Speaker. We 

can’t live under the conditions that have been set in motion by 

people that were here before us and people in other 

jurisdictions. We can’t live by the whim of some international 

political action that will jeopardize either our agriculture 

industry, our oil industry as a result of OPEC (Organization of 

Petroleum Exporting Countries), or our potash industry as a 

result of moves that are taking place now because of the 

anti-dumping case. 

 

I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to point out that 

much of this problem, much of this problem today directed at 

the province of Saskatchewan, had its seeds planted in this 

province in the 1970s. In the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, the 

administration of the day was NDP. And they have a very 

unique view of their trading relationships around the world – a 

very unique view. The NDP view is that nobody matters except 

them. 

 

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2464 

 

We have a huge agricultural industry in North America that 

needs potash. And we have a huge potash industry in the 

province of Saskatchewan that needs that agriculture industry. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to read something to you that I think 

is quite appropriate when we start to look at why we’re in the 

position that we’re in today. 

 

And it’s a senator from New Mexico in the United States, 

Senator Pete Domenici, and he says this, and I quote: 

 

From the beginning, the Saskatchewan government made 

clear that its control of the industry was necessary to 

ensure the implementation of its vision of socialism. 

 

And he was talking about the NDP administration in the 1970s. 

Mr. Speaker, can you imagine a United States politician 

walking through the halls of Congress and through the Senate, 

through the House of Representatives, talking about the 

nationalization of an industry that’s going to supply goods and 

services into the United States. Do you think that would provide 

him with any ammunition at all to take a rip at Canadians? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take much imagination to realize, 

in fact, Mr. Speaker, that’s the very reason today that we’re 

faced with these kinds of anti-dumping conditions. The man 

who led the charge, Mr. Speaker, is looking up across the 

border and saying, well for Heaven’s sake, the socialists are 

going to nationalize the entire industry; therefore, they’re not 

playing by the rules, and we’ll show those people in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite stand up – from Quill 

Lakes, the member from Quill Lakes is sitting here and he 

doesn’t believe that the senator would use this. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I don’t think that 

those kind of remarks here in the legislature are called for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill 

Lakes was part of the cabinet, was part of the cabinet that 

nationalized the potash industry, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to 

read the quote as often as I have to so, in fact, his constituents 

and others can remember what caused this. This is United States 

senator, Mr. Speaker, that says about the NDP: 

 

From the beginning the Government of Saskatchewan 

made clear that its control of the industry was necessary 

to ensure the implementation of its vision of socialism in 

Canada. 

 

Now the American senator and American politician looked at 

Canada, and they looked at the NDP and they said, for 

Heaven’s sake, they’re going to nationalize the industry here in 

Canada and try to service the North American market by 

nationalizing the industry. Well, you can imagine, you can 

imagine, and the politicians – they’re all politicians sitting 

across the row here – can imagine how a politician in the 

United States would use this against Canadians. 

 

All they’d have to do is point up there and say, look at what 

they did. They nationalized this industry. Look at what they’ve 

done to oil. They’ve got a national energy program. Look at 

what they’ve taken over here; they got the back-in provisions 

on all kinds of mining. Every single solitary thing that you’re 

trying to do for a North American economic development 

package, the NDP are pointing out, no, we’re going to 

nationalize it. Well that comes at some cost, Mr. Speaker – it 

comes at some cost. The cost is your customers no longer trust. 

They say, you were going to provide us with the goods and 

services, with potash, with uranium, with all kinds of goods, 

and services, and then you change your mind and say, no, we’re 

going to nationalize those industries. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what happens? The politicians down there 

have good, solid ammunition to go from constituency to 

constituency, and district to district, and say, you can’t trust 

Canadians. How can you trust Canadians? We just get a deal 

going and then, by George, they’re going to nationalize the 

industry. And a dark cloud settles over Canada in the minds of 

Americans. They say, I would like to do business with you, but 

you’re taking over the industry; you’re on this socialist bent. 

 

And it isn’t just that one move, Mr. Speaker, not that they just 

nationalize the industry. But when the U.S. embassy moves its 

Consul General from Winnipeg to Calgary, there’s a reason. 

The NDP stand and burn the American flag, Mr. Speaker, and 

yet they want to have customers in United States. NDP radicals, 

including NDP cabinet ministers, involved in this on the steps 

of a building in Winnipeg, burning the American flag, and say, 

oh, wouldn’t this be great for relations with the United States. 

 

That comes at a cost, Mr. Speaker, the cost of tens of thousands 

and tens of thousands of jobs in Canada, because we’re trying 

to develop a good working relationship with our closest 

neighbour, a fair relationship. And the NDP, the black arm 

people from the socialist side, nationalize an industry, burn the 

American flag, will not even stand with their allies in the free 

world and even defend this part of a country in this part of the 

world when it comes to NATO (North Atlantic Treaty 

Organization). And Americans are looking up here and say, 

what kind of people are this that burn the American flag in 

Winnipeg, that will nationalize the industries? 

 

And they laugh, Mr. Speaker, they laugh. The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana sitting there laughing, as if this was some 

kind of joke when you threatened all the jobs and all the 

economic activity and all the mines and all the markets and all 

the reasons that we can make a good solid living here in North 

America. And the member from Saskatoon Nutana sits there 

and laughs. That it’s something funny to threaten the lives of 

Saskatchewan people, either by protectionism or by subsidies or 

by these vindictive moves by Americans, because people here 

in political parties were so narrow-minded and so closed and so 

focused on socialism to take over all the industries. I should 

have brought the Regina Manifesto here because I’m sure now 

they read it in Washington. 

 

They know, Mr. Speaker, the consequences of what the actions 

would be as a result of the NDP . . . 

 

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2465 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the Premier 

referred to the member of Saskatoon Nutana as laughing at his 

remarks. I want to assure the Assembly I was not laughing at 

his remarks, and in fact I’ve just come into the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is noted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the member. 

It was the member from Saskatoon South who was sitting in his 

seat with his back to the Assembly, laughing, and he’s still here. 

I apologize to the member from Saskatoon Nutana; I got the 

seats mixed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will point out, it was the Energy critic for 

the NDP, who is still in the legislature, from Saskatoon South, 

who is laughing at the fact that they could nationalize the 

industries and burn the American flag and not stand up and 

even be part of NATO and thought it was . . . and still thinks, 

that it’s a very good idea and would have a positive impact on 

American-Canadian relations. 

 

I just point out, Mr. Speaker, that in Congress senators can walk 

around and repeat this kind of thing, saying: in Canada there are 

politicians like this that would nationalize the industries; that 

would not defend North America, even in terms of normal 

defence mechanisms, and in fact are now criticized 

internationally for their moves and their policy statements that 

have been presented recently. 

 

I point this out, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that the people 

of Canada and the people of Saskatchewan will begin to see the 

fallacy of the kinds of policies that we’ve experienced under the 

NDP in this province, and indeed if they were ever government 

of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Can you imagine the relationship between other countries and 

this nation if in fact the NDP could do what they did in 

Saskatchewan across the country; to nationalize the forestry 

industry; to nationalize the steel industry; to renationalize the 

potash industry, and then go cap in hand to Americans or others 

in Europe and say, oh, but wouldn’t you trade with us? So they 

could stand up and they could burn the flags of their best 

customers – burn the flags of their best customers and laugh 

about it, and still continue to laugh in this legislature about the 

kinds of things that they would do, and then expect to be treated 

fairly or responsibly all over the world. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are taking action today to mend and 

improve and correct the wrong-headed, unfair, selfish, narrow 

policies of the NDP administration in the 1970s. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to do that because to protect Canadians 

you don’t have to nationalize them. You can stand in the 

legislature . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — You can stand in the legislature and you 

can provide good, solid legislation which will provide the kind 

of protection that we need so that we can  

trade fairly and have a good, solid reputation all over the world. 

And we have, and we’re working hard at it. 

 

This administration, and administrations like this, Mr. Speaker, 

respect international commerce. We know we get our living in 

trading wheat, barley and hogs and steel and potash and coal 

and forestry products, and the opposition doesn’t understand 

that. The NDP didn’t build in this province; they either 

nationalized or bought or take over. That’s all they did. 

 

The last election in 1986 was fought on that very principle – do 

you want to nationalize industries or do you want to build 

something new. Look at all the potash mines in Saskatchewan – 

all those mines, Mr. Speaker. The NDP didn’t build one of them 

– not one single mine. They didn’t build. They bought half of 

them, nationalized them, alienated our customers, borrowed the 

money, put the company in big debt – didn’t build one. 

 

And I ask Canadians, and I ask Saskatchewan people to 

remember who built them. It was the private sector, Mr. 

Speaker, that built those mines and put those people to work. 

And it was the NDP that borrowed a whole bunch of money 

from Americans – borrowed the money, then nationalized the 

private sector, and then go wave the burnt flag in front of their 

face and say, how do you like us so far? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they didn’t build one pulp company – not one did 

they build. They didn’t build one single packing plant – not one. 

Not for jobs, they didn’t create it. They didn’t create one single 

economic opportunity in the potash industry, in the packing 

industry, in the pulp industry. They bought them – bought out, 

chased out – packing plants out of Prince Albert; kicked them 

right out of town, Mr. Speaker. They took over half of another 

packing plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 

Company) and you look at the $91,000 a day that this province 

got into because of that administration, the NDP saying that 

they would nationalize it, and the public lost and lost and lost. 

And today, Mr. Speaker, look at what’s happening; look at the 

difference. And I want Saskatchewan people to recognize this, 

and Americans to recognize this, and people all over the world, 

that PAPCO, that company, P.A. Pulp Company, will make 

more money this year in the history of that company – in the 

entire history of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in addition to that, a brand-new paper mill is going up right 

beside it that is magnificent. I had the chance to tour it the other 

day. Fantastic development, Mr. Speaker, to provide paper and 

paper products and pulp products all across the world and 

including North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they didn’t build. They nationalized and hurt our 

reputation all over North America. And that’s coming back to 

haunt us today in potash. 

 

When a senator can stand up and look at the member from 

Prince Albert or look at the member from Saskatoon South or 

the member from Saskatoon West and say: you are against 

industry; you nationalize industry; you don’t understand what 

commerce means, and you don’t  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2466 

 

understand what commerce means, and you don’t understand 

what economic development really means, because you didn’t 

build a thing, do you know what? It builds the case in the 

United States. And those Americans love to see that. They like 

to see, aha, now we have an excuse to go hit Saskatchewan. 

And they hit it. 

 

The member from P.A. can smile, because he thinks it’s funny. 

Well it isn’t funny. There are tens of thousands of jobs at stake 

as a result of that wrong-headed policy. And if we ever got into 

the position internationally where this country was known as a 

country that nationalizes industry and ties up families in 

government, we would lose much more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not standing for it. We didn’t in ’82, 

and we didn’t in ’86, and we’re not in the future, and we’re not 

today. The legislation that we have today . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The legislation that we have today is 

designed to protect Saskatchewan families and to protect that 

industry – not nationalize it, not borrow money from the United 

States and try to buy it back. It’s here. And to see it build, Mr. 

Speaker, we are going to have legislation in this province that 

says, we will protect the resource; we will protect the families; 

we’ll protect the towns and the villages, and we’ll protect that 

industry because it’s our responsibility. 

 

(1100) 

 

And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, something 

that the NDP doesn’t understand, we will protect our reputation 

internationally as good, solid customers and competitors and in 

a trading relationship that can be recognized world-wide. 

 

And they can’t do that, Mr. Speaker. They never did, and they 

can’t do it in the future. And even then their policies today are 

the same old rhetoric – find somebody to hate; tear it down. I 

mean, their whole campaign all across Saskatchewan for years 

has been, find a witch; go on a witch hunt. That’s all they 

understand. 

 

Our legislation, Mr. Speaker, will provide for the strongest 

possible power in the province of Saskatchewan to protect this 

resource. We are not going to let their action, and then the 

corresponding United States action, put our people out of work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we just left it as it was, the NDP have set the 

stage and the Americans have responded, and that’s very clear. I 

mean, I’ve read and I’ll read it again as long as I have to, to get 

the link. The link is the result of the NDP nationalizing the 

industry. The American politician down there has had a perfect 

excuse to say it’s unfair, and they’ve imposed an anti-dumping 

on us. We are not going to let that link be successful. We are 

going to defend the industry. 

 

We can’t sit and do nothing, because up to an 85 per cent tariff, 

it’s impossible to survive. Every time you market into the 

United States, the United States government would pick up 85 

cents on every dollar and you’d get 15  

cents. We can’t leave it alone. We can’t leave it the way it is 

because we’ve been locked in as a result of these two moves, 

one by the NDP and one by Americans. 

 

We are going to pass this legislation, Mr. Speaker – I really 

believe we will – which will provide us with the power to make 

sure: one, that we don’t lose that market; and two, we don’t 

give away the resource. We’ve not going to do that. We are 

going to make sure that we maintain our market share, that we 

will be good producers and solid suppliers of that resource to 

Americans and to people all over the world, and you know that 

the sales have increased world-wide. 

 

And we will not be intimidated, either by the opposition or by 

Americans or by anybody else. The U.S. Congress isn’t going 

to run the potash industry of Saskatchewan and, thank 

goodness, the NDP aren’t running it any more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will make sure that people of Saskatchewan 

and those in those industries, the people in the industries, have a 

chance to build and expand and in fact have a long-run security 

with respect to the kinds of things that we know we can do in a 

trading relationship with the United States. 

 

I want to take a moment to point out two or three things about 

the U.S. system that I believe are relevant today, and why the 

United States is doing some of the, I believe, irrational things 

that it’s into right now. And one of them is obviously potash, 

and three or four that are linked. 

 

I want to point out that when I was visiting with the governors 

in the United States – and I spoke often in the U.S. about the 

good, solid trading relationship that we have with Americans in 

terms of being good customers of ours, and we have a large 

trading relationship. And the governors said, in their report at 

the national governors’ convention, they wanted to be 

productive and they wanted to be competitive world-wide. They 

said they finally realized they’re living in a global village these 

days and they’ve really got to respond. Well I say to Americans, 

I say very carefully, if you want to be productive and 

competitive in a world-class sense, don’t deny your people 

access to the most competitively priced goods and services that 

you can find anywhere in the world, and that’s from Canada. 

 

While the governors were down there saying, yes, we are going 

to be competitive, at the same time they said, but we’re not sure 

we want electricity from Canada. They said, I’m not sure I want 

the potash from Canada; I’m not sure that I want the uranium 

from Canada; I’m not sure that I want the steel from Canada or 

the pork or the softwood lumber, and others. 

 

And I say to Americans, if this is the most competitively priced, 

closest, solidest source of supply of these major commodities to 

build America, why would you deny yourself the very right of 

access to keep you competitive? It doesn’t fly; it doesn’t follow, 

Mr. Speaker. And I just ask Americans: if you want to be 

competitive, then don’t rule out the best source of supply that 

you’ve seen any place in the world, and that’s your neighbour 

Canada. 

 

Secondly, I want to point out with respect to their  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2467 

 

argument, that really the problem between the United States and 

Canada is the exchange rate. The Canadian dollar is too low, 

and we have too big an advantage, and some would argue that 

in the United States. But we have done everything we can to 

improve our budget nationally. We’ve improved the value of 

the dollar. We have protected that interest rate, and we’ve had 

the Bank of Canada involved to make sure that we do maintain 

that currency. But notwithstanding that, if the United States 

wants to see a strong Canadian dollar, does it make any sense to 

weaken Canadian industry by not buying timber or uranium or 

potash or pork or steel or the kinds of things like electricity that 

we can provide them very competitively? 

 

If they deny us those markets, the Canadian economy weakens, 

the dollar goes down, and the exchange rate problem is 

exacerbated. It’s worse. So I say to Americans, with respect to 

productivity and being competitive, you can’t have it both 

ways. If you want to be competitive, then get the competitive 

supply. If you want to have comparable exchange rates, don’t 

hurt your best trading partner. The best thing you could do is 

have a good solid working relationship with Canadians, and 

you’d see those dollars even out, and in fact we could have a 

good, solid North American market. 

 

But the key one, Mr. Speaker, and it comes back to the very 

recent one, is potash. Imagine one single senator from New 

Mexico is going to provide this little bit of benefit to two worn 

out old potash mines in New Mexico that the whole world 

knows can’t even supply a fraction of that U.S. market, that are 

very inefficient, that have a poor ore grade, are not profitable. 

And that senator got this legislation far enough so the small 

little benefit could go to two old worn out mines in New 

Mexico. And that is completely overshadowed by hundreds of 

millions of dollars of extra cost to the entire U.S. agricultural 

economy. 

 

All the farmers in the United States are going to pay hundreds 

of millions of dollars more for potash, for what? The U.S. 

economy, the U.S. consumer, the U.S. industry, the U.S. farm 

belt, which is the most massive in the entire world, has been 

held to ransom by one senator and two worn out old mines in 

New Mexico, that even if you raised the price a hundred bucks 

a tonne wouldn’t live very long. A minor, small little share of 

the market – tiny – and he has thrown a monkey wrench into the 

entire U.S. agricultural economy, which affects the food 

business, which is the largest industry in North America, which 

is the largest industry in the world. 

 

I say to Americans: do you really want to do this? You want to 

be competitive, but you deny yourself the access to 

competitively priced goods. You want a comparable exchange 

rate, but you want to hurt your best trading partner that has the 

exchange rate problem. And you want to have strong 

agriculture. You’ve got a U.S. farm bill with $50 billion in it, 

and at the same time you’re going to charge yourself hundreds 

of millions of dollars more for two worn out old mines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what you see in the United States is the 

consequence of some unthoughtful, in some cases irrational, 

economic activity, and more specifically,  

political economic activity. Protectionism in the United States 

has been running rampant, and it’s the same arguments that the 

NDP use here. They run through the United States, or they’ll 

run through here, and they’ll go up to people and say: I’ll 

protect you from those awful Canadians. And the NDP run 

around and say, oh, we should be protected from Americans 

and from Japanese and others. 

 

Protectionism has never worked, Mr. Speaker, in the history of 

the world. You have to be strong enough and brave enough to 

say, I will trade with you and you trade with me; not just be 

confined to the Davidson market, or the North Battleford 

market, but indeed, to the Canadian market and the North 

American market and the world market. It only makes sense, 

and for Saskatchewan people and indeed Canadians and, of 

course, Americans, it makes more sense; you are stronger, you 

are more viable; you can withstand other economic fluctuations 

if you have a good commercial relationship with people around 

the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to trade with others. We want to trade 

fairly with others throughout the world. We trade with the 

Soviet Union and with China, with the Pacific Rim, Japan, 

South American, people all throughout Europe, India, Australia; 

we have a good reputation as traders. We do in most cases, 

notwithstanding some of the fallacies of the NDP. We want to 

build that relationship and see it grow stronger and stronger and 

stronger throughout the world as people who can be relied 

upon, who are consistent, and who are fair. 

 

As you know, and other Canadians know, I am a strong believer 

of a free-trading relationship, world-wide, multilaterally and 

bilaterally. I would work hard for a bilateral deal between 

Canada and Japan. I would work hard for a bilateral free-trade 

deal with respect to Canada and any other country, because I 

believe it’s good for our children and good for our economy, 

and it allows people to grow and to build. 

 

But I will not stand by and see unfair trading practices put 

farmers out of business. And I will fight with every inch of me 

to make sure farmers survive these unfair subsidies. And I will 

not stand by and let our oil people go down because of unfair 

policies by OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting 

Countries). I won’t; I didn’t; I haven’t in the past, and I won’t in 

the future. 

 

And I will not stand by and let unfair policies, either from the 

past in Saskatchewan or in the United States today, defeat our 

potash industry. We will put the resources that we have on the 

nose, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we can respond fairly and 

squarely – known first of all as fair traders and want to trade. 

There’s nothing I’d like to see better than a termination of this 

anti-dumping fiasco that we’re in. It’s unfair, and it’s wrong. 

The problem is over-supply; it’s not something that’s been 

anything else. 

 

I want to see trade, and I want see more of it, but it has to be 

fair. And we will take whatever action is necessary in this 

province to defend those industries and defend those people and 

those families. 

 

It is the most powerful legislation, I believe, that this  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2468 

 

province has seen in that regard, or in fact that the country has 

seen. We know that it’s powerful. We will use it carefully, and 

we will use it with precision. But we are prepared to use it, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have gone this far to let the rest of the world 

know that we’re not going to stand pat and just let something 

else run our industry, or run our families, or run our province. 

 

So I just say in closing, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we tell 

the rest of the world, including Americans, where we stand. It’s 

important that the people of Saskatchewan know that we have 

no choice – there’s no choice at all. We can’t let this happen. 

We have to move. If we did nothing, we could lose thousands 

of jobs. So we will not do nothing; we’re going to respond. 

 

We have now – and the legislation I believe will pass – and this 

province and this generation will know that this historic piece 

of legislation was in place for two reasons – two very important 

reasons. Neither one of them work. One, a political party and, 

unfortunately, a government in Canada that would go about 

nationalizing industries and think it’s good for trade. It never 

has been in the past; it never worked in France; it never worked 

in Great Britain; it hasn’t worked any place – any place. That’s 

the first that we are going to correct. 

 

And secondly, that protectionism – protectionism – closing your 

door to your neighbour has never worked either. Those two 

things are wrong-headed. They don’t think about the future of 

the family or the resources or about economic activity. They 

just think about political expediency at that moment, and it’s the 

easy side of the argument. 

 

And the thing that bothers me most is that respectable, 

honourable people that could be elected would take that easy 

road, Mr. Speaker, and say: oh, the people wouldn’t understand, 

so I’ll just play with them; and I’ll just tell them, oh, you 

wouldn’t understand this, but I’ll just protect you, and this is the 

best thing to do. And they know that it’s wrong, Mr. Speaker, 

but they still do it. They still do it and will suffer the 

consequences of that for years and years and years. Well we’re 

not going to back down. Their policies are wrong, U.S. policies 

of protectionism are wrong. We’re going to take them on with 

all we got, Mr. Speaker, and I fully intend to win, and I’ll be 

supporting this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

add a few remarks to the second reading debate on Bill 36 

today. This is a subject obviously of critical importance to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our potash resources which were initially fostered 

and developed in a significant way to the advantage of 

Saskatchewan, mostly by a previous Liberal administration in 

Saskatchewan, are in serious jeopardy today, and that jeopardy 

results from at least three causes. The most recent and the most 

obvious cause is the anti-dumping trade action that’s now being 

pursued by the American potash industry in the negative 

atmosphere of U.S. protectionism. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that is not the only cause of the current crisis. 

Also to blame, I believe, is the naïve and the weak management 

of our natural resources which has characterized, unfortunately, 

the conduct of the Saskatchewan government in so many ways 

since 1982. 

 

(1115) 

 

In potash and in almost any other field that you might care to 

mention, this government has demonstrated a level of sheer 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker, that is an acute embarrassment to 

its own free enterprise constituency. A $3.4 billion provincial 

deficit and several hundreds of millions of dollars in deficits at 

PCS, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, speak volumes 

about this government’s glaring lack of managerial expertise. 

 

But the roots of this crisis, Mr. Speaker, are also deeper than 

just that. The previous NDP government must indeed shoulder 

some responsibility too. It was that administration that put 

hundreds of millions of Saskatchewan tax dollars at risk to 

create PCS – one of the flagships of their so-called family of 

Crown corporations. It soaked up much of what otherwise could 

have been a real heritage fund for Saskatchewan’s future. It 

soured Saskatchewan’s enterprise atmosphere. It made us more 

vulnerable to the type of U.S. trade action that we’re battling 

today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is blatant hypocrisy dripping from the 

current stance that the NDP is taking today. They apparently 

decry production limitations, just as they did back in 1969. But 

it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that when they came to 

office in 1971, they did not – repeat, did not – dismantle the 

Ross Thatcher prorationing plan. Indeed, in 1976 by legislation 

they ratified and confirmed Mr. Thatcher’s 1969 and 1970 

regulations. 

 

And just a few days ago in this House, Mr. Speaker, I heard the 

Leader of the NDP speak in very positive terms about how Mr. 

Thatcher tackled the potash issue in the 1960s. That’s not the 

position that he took – that is the Leader of the NDP – in 1969, 

but it does seem to be his position today. 

 

When you examine the record, I would submit, Mr. Speaker, 

that indeed you have to go back to the 1960s and to the Liberal 

government of that day to find a clear illustration of some 

vision and some efficacy in potash resources management. 

There was genuine growth. There was economic expansion. 

There was job creation in the industry. There was some measure 

of public sector/private sector co-operation. There was 

sufficient competence, Mr. Speaker, and foresight to see a 

problem coming on the horizon, and there was the political 

courage and the economic intelligence to find a way to head it 

off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is different today? Some say that there are 

only two basic differences between what was done in 1969 and 

what is now being proposed in 1987. First, that this Bill No. 36 

doesn’t deal with floor pricing, and therefore is less subject to a 

constitutional challenge; and second, that the constitution itself 

has been changed to strengthen the provincial role in resource 

ownership and management, and therefore, again, there is a 

lesser  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2469 

 

possibility of legal difficulties. 

 

These two points, Mr. Speaker, are valid and well taken, but 

there are two other differences between 1987 and 1969 – two 

very practical and telling differences, Mr. Speaker, that speak 

well of the 1969 initiative and illustrate the flaws in 1987. 

 

First it should be noted and underscored that in 1969 the 

government action came before, not after; it came before the 

crisis had flooded over us. That Thatcher government at the 

time could read the signals. They saw the dangers in advance, 

and they summoned the political will to take charge and to head 

off the crisis before Saskatchewan was entirely backed into a 

corner, Mr. Speaker, it might be useful for hon. members to 

review the Hansard of the day in 1969 and 1970, to examine 

those debates and to see how that fundamental difference is 

illustrated in the reports of this Assembly. 

 

The premier at that time shouldered his responsibilities. And 

with a good deal of political savvy and acumen, he persuaded 

his New Mexico counterparts to join in a solution to the 

problem. The premier then, in 1969, was proactive. He took the 

initiative, and he did it, Mr. Speaker, in advance, before the 

fact, and not after. 

 

Secondly, the second major difference between 1969 and the 

present time. The solution arrived at in 1969 was a shared 

solution, with both major potash jurisdictions, Saskatchewan 

and New Mexico, participating jointly and mutually. Each 

shouldered a portion of the burden. In 1987, the present 

government in Saskatchewan did not have the vision or the 

foresight to anticipate the problem, and they’re now forced to 

play a desperate game of catch-up. 

 

And because of their inability to identify the problem in time, in 

advance, potash jobs, and potash families, and potash towns, 

and potash companies are now under a much greater threat. 

Compared to 1969 the government today has been slow and 

reactive, not quick and proactive. And as a consequence, again 

compared to 1969, the government today is proposing a 

unilateral, one-sided solution where the potential pain is to be 

shouldered only in Saskatchewan. No one else is participating – 

just us. And the burden falls here. 

 

In practical terms, those differences now, compared to 20 years 

ago, are perhaps even more significant, Mr. Speaker, than the 

legal or constitutional differences that I mentioned earlier. The 

Premier of today has said in the present circumstances that he 

has no choice but to advance this legislation. He has said on 

many occasions that he is now “boxed in,” to use his own 

words, and Bill 36 is his response. Well, Mr. Speaker, one 

could well ask how he allowed that box to form, to close off all 

of his options. How was it that he allowed the situation to 

deteriorate so that this Bill is now the only alternative? And the 

Premier will have to have some answers for the people of 

Saskatchewan to those questions. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, for the purposes of this debate this afternoon, 

I have some other more immediate questions that I want to 

address to the Minister of Energy and Mines, who is directly 

responsible for this Bill in the House. I have recited my 

questions, Mr. Speaker, publicly over the last few days. I have 

specifically written to the Minister of Energy and Mines to put 

my questions to her directly in writing, and I believe some 

direct and specific answers are necessary before any MLA can 

make an intelligent judgement about this Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, may I say most sincerely before this debate 

is over and we’re called upon to vote, I would urge the minister, 

in whatever form she may choose, to provide the answers to 

these questions. 

 

To date, I would submit to you that her generalizations have 

simply not been sufficient. It is not sufficient, Mr. Speaker, to 

talk in slogans about our leadership role in the potash markets 

of the world. It is not sufficient to talk in glib language about 

how we’re not prepared to give up our place in world markets. 

It is not sufficient, Mr. Speaker, to say in general terms that 

we’re going to move to protect livelihoods and investments. 

Those are lovely statements of good intentions, but they aren’t 

specific answers and specific plans for action. The minister, I 

believe, has a duty in this House and to the people of 

Saskatchewan to provide some very definite information. 

 

And I would like to review the questions, Mr. Speaker, that I 

think are vital at this time. 

 

First of all, what other alternatives were considered by the 

government to protect the Saskatchewan potash industry? What 

were their options? Why was Bill 36 selected as the best of 

those options? Is this Bill the government’s only single idea, or 

were there others, Mr. Speaker? What were the pros and the 

cons of each, and what are the arguments to say that Bill 36 is 

the best way to go? 

 

And further, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for the minister 

to say in definite terms what is new in this Bill, compared to 

previous or existing legislation. Clearly, the Premier wanted 

this Bill, as he has just demonstrated in the House in his speech, 

to create the impression of his government being active and 

aggressive, and he wanted this Bill to provide himself with an 

opportunity for a debate to embarrass the NDP, and particularly 

the member for Riversdale. 

 

But in reality, I would ask the government to tell us what 

genuine new powers they will have by virtue of Bill 36, apart 

from prohibiting certain court actions by potash companies, and 

apart from providing higher penalties for offences. What new 

legal powers are provided by Bill 36 that the government didn’t 

already have under The Mineral Resources Act of 1985? 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, what political or diplomatic efforts are 

being made by the Government of Saskatchewan or the 

Government of Canada to urge the United States, at the political 

level or the diplomatic level, away from the stand that the 

United States has taken on potash duties? Neither the Premier 

nor the Minister of Trade nor the Minister of Energy and Mines 

have given us decent information on that topic. 

 

Certainly the Premier makes trade-related speeches all over the 

place, and certainly some lawyers have been representing 

Canadian companies before American  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2470 

 

tribunals. But I would ask, Mr. Speaker, is that it? Is there no 

other complementary strategy to fight this U.S. trade action 

against our potash? Is there no direct effort to rally the U.S. 

farm lobby to our cause? Is Pat Carney in Ottawa, for example, 

doing nothing but saying that the Saskatchewan Bill is within 

the constitution? Is Brian Mulroney doing nothing to raise this 

subject with President Reagan or the U.S. administration? Is 

Bill 36 all there is, or is it, Mr. Speaker, all that could have 

been? 

 

Thirdly, what is the specific position in this matter of the 

Government of Canada? Is the Mulroney government 

supportive, or not? Are they going to help, and if so, how? To 

date, all that the federal government has said is that 

Saskatchewan has the constitutional authority to move forward 

with Bill 36, and that’s it. The federal government has offered 

us their legal opinion on the constitution. Well that’s wonderful, 

Mr. Speaker, but it doesn’t help very much. Is Ottawa going to 

do absolutely nothing else to deal with a critical trade issue 

which is within federal jurisdiction and could cripple the 

Saskatchewan economy? 

 

Where do they stand, Mr. Speaker, and what is their specific 

plan? For example, is the Government of Canada working now 

at the political or the diplomatic level to get a reciprocal 

undertaking from the United States that these new tariffs against 

our potash will be withdrawn in response to Bill 36? Is there 

any hope of that, Mr. Speaker? Is the federal government 

working to find out? And in relation to the so-called free trade 

talks between Ottawa and Washington currently under way and 

nearing the crunch, will the Government of Saskatchewan be 

raising this trade harassment of Saskatchewan potash in that 

context? Will Mr. Mulroney instruct his negotiator, Mr. 

Reisman, to put this issue into the free trade talks and to try and 

get a firm U.S. commitment to back away from their 

anti-dumping action as a part of that bargaining? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the federal position, and what are they 

prepared to do? Apart from simply offering their legal advice 

on the constitution, they appear to be doing nothing at the 

present time. 

 

Number four, what are the direct job consequences that will 

flow from Bill 36? The minister says to do nothing would cost 

jobs in the long term, and the point of Bill 36 is to head that off. 

But in the short term, Mr. Speaker, if Bill 36 is more than just 

sabre-rattling, if it’s more than just some high level monkey 

business, if it’s really going to be used, then it could well cost 

Saskatchewan jobs, at least temporarily. 

 

Surely the minister must have analysed that risk. She must 

know what’s at stake, and the House needs to know, Mr. 

Speaker, the magnitude of that threat. How many jobs are at 

risk under Bill 36, and for how long? If the minister has done 

her homework in this regard, and I certainly hope she has, she 

should tell us what that arithmetic is. 

 

And number five, Mr. Speaker, bearing the threat of lost jobs in 

mind, either temporary losses under Bill 36 or longer-term 

losses because of industrial or trade adjustments, what is this 

government’s specific plan to provide displaced potash workers 

with alternate employment or income compensation, should that  

become necessary? Are those workers to be left essentially on 

their own? Are they alone to bear the burden and to pay the 

price for this trade war in potash? Surely not, Mr. Speaker. 

Surely the Government of Saskatchewan cannot take the 

position that the burden is to fall upon those workers. 

 

(1130) 

 

So I ask then, Mr. Speaker, what is the government’s game plan 

to cope with that situation? And what representations have been 

made to Ottawa for support and assistance in relation to these 

job matters? 

 

Number six, Mr. Speaker, with respect to non-Saskatchewan 

potash production in New Brunswick or offshore in Israel or 

Jordan or Germany or elsewhere, does this government have 

any assurance, or even a strategy, to try to pursue an assurance 

that other sources of potash supply will not simply replace 

Saskatchewan’s supply in U.S. markets. 

 

Bill 36 is a one-sided, unilateral initiative. What do we gain, 

Mr. Speaker, if we tackle the inventory problem here costing 

jobs and other painful economic consequences in Saskatchewan 

and at the same time supply from elsewhere just moves in to 

take our place in the market? 

 

The minister says that she won’t allow that to happen. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I ask: what is her plan to stop it or to prevent it 

from happening? It won’t be achieved by sloganeering; it won’t 

be achieved by wishful thinking. Specifically, how will she 

maintain our market share under Bill 36? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, where is the federal government in all of 

this? Are they working to ensure, for example, that New 

Brunswick is fully onside? It sure doesn’t sound like it from 

recent news reports. And where is the diplomatic effort 

vis-à-vis our offshore competition? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I would refer to the 1969 precedent. In that 

case when action was taken on the part of the Government of 

Saskatchewan 20 years ago, assurances were indeed sought and 

received from our international competitors and that was all in 

hand before action was taken by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Again I invite hon. members to review the record on that 

matter, by reading some sections from Hansard from 1969 and 

1970, to see that that commitment to co-operate had already 

been obtained in advance by the Saskatchewan government 

from our competitors around the world before action was taken 

by the government in the form of regulations. 

 

This replacement of supply issue, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely 

critical and I simply ask: has the government turned its mind to 

that matter of concern at all? 

 

Number seven, Mr. Speaker: is there a strategy to find new 

market alternatives for Saskatchewan potash beyond the United 

States? It seems to me that this potash case points up a serious 

flaw in much of the Saskatchewan government and Canadian 

government policy in relation  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2471 

 

to trade. The Saskatchewan and Ottawa Conservatives say 

constantly, over and over again, that the Americans are our 

biggest and closest and best trading partner; they are our friends 

and allies; we have so much in common together sharing this 

North American continent. And, Mr. Speaker, much of that is 

true, but we already have 75 or 80 per cent of our international 

trade with the United States, and we want more. How much 

more – 90 per cent, 95 per cent. 110 per cent, Mr. Speaker? 

 

If you’re dealing with a close friend that is periodically pretty 

hostile and frequently forgets what friendship ought to mean, 

wouldn’t you be well-advised to try to broaden and diversify 

your list of friends and allies and trading partners? Wouldn’t 

you be wise to try to find as many other possible partners to do 

business with? Why put all your eggs in one basket, Mr. 

Speaker, where the bottom sometimes falls out of that basket, 

friendship notwithstanding? 

 

I think the answer to that particular proposition is obvious, Mr. 

Speaker – yes, we should diversify our portfolio of potential 

trading partners in potash. 

 

What then is the government’s plan to move more of our potash 

elsewhere? Surely we don’t propose to leave ourselves so 

vulnerable in one big, close, attractive but obviously unreliable 

market. Even if that U.S. tariff against our potash were removed 

tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, and our access to that market was 

restored with no limitations, as good as that would sound, 

would it not be sensible and practical and advisable for 

Saskatchewan, and for Canada to pursue every other potash 

market elsewhere too? And so my question, Mr. Speaker, is: 

what is the government’s plan, both in the short term and in the 

long term, in that direction? 

 

We received news at the end of last week about the new potash 

trade deal with China, and certainly that is welcome news. But, 

Mr. Speaker, one new story or one deal like that does not 

constitute a strategy; one sale does not constitute a solution, and 

I believe the government needs to have a much broader strategy 

for diversifying our potash trade alternatives elsewhere in the 

world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are some of the questions which stand out 

today, essentially unanswered, as this debate has gone on for 

several days in this legislature. They are not, Mr. Speaker, 

merely rhetorical debating points; they go to the heart of what 

this legislation is supposed to accomplish, and whether it will 

work, and who will bear the burden, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I ask the government to respond to these questions 

seriously and carefully and in detail. It is only with this kind of 

information that all of us in this House can make an intelligent 

decision about Bill 36. If the government has a good case, a 

solid case, then there should be no difficulty, Mr. Speaker, in 

answering the questions that I have asked today and those 

answers would just serve to bolster what would be the 

government’s case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to put those issues on the record in this 

legislature today. I have mentioned them publicly in the past. 

I’ve written to the minister to mention those concerns to her in 

written form, but I wanted to put them  

on the public record in this legislature. 

 

I ask the government to take these issues seriously because I 

think they are important to the potash industry, and to the 

workers, and to the people of Saskatchewan, and I will await 

with keen anticipation what the minister and the government 

may reply. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This morning 

I want to add a few remarks to the Bill – this very urgent Bill 

which the government laid before this Assembly, a Bill which 

they laid before the Assembly a week ago and they said it’s 

highly important, and they have stood in this House and 

filibustered their own Bill. 

 

Day after day when this Bill was given notice to this Assembly, 

our House Leader stood up and said, if it’s vital to the orderly 

marketing of potash in Saskatchewan, we give leave to proceed 

with that Bill. And I say we waited to see what the Premier 

would say, and he came in here today with a disoriented, a 

scrambled version, hardly ever talked about the Bill or an 

analysis of direction which he’s taking. 

 

And I can understand, I guess. The Premier probably had a bad 

night last night, and well he should have if you look in Ontario. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to say that the Bill which the 

government claims is its response not only to the recent U.S. 

anti-dumping action against the potash industry in our province, 

but it says it’s also the government’s response to the larger, 

world-wide problems affecting Saskatchewan potash industry 

and potash jobs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill is essentially about the 

management of Saskatchewan resources, specifically our potash 

resources. And unfortunately it seems to be a Bill prepared in 

haste, in the government’s confused panic about how to respond 

to a situation that caught the government flat-footed, asleep at 

the switch, and embarrassed. 

 

As such this Bill must be examined in the light of this 

government’s overall management of Saskatchewan resources 

or, rather, the government’s incompetent mismanagement of 

our resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — We can look at the mismanagement of our coal 

resources, the give-aways to the Alberta firm. We can look at 

the mismanagement in respect to the forest industry to a 

multinational corporation. We can look at the mismanagement 

of our oil reserves. And unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

PC government’s potash policy is all too consistent with their 

resource policy generally, a resource policy that is incoherent, a 

resource management that is incompetent. 

 

I want to say at this stage of the debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that . . . and simply restate and reiterate our  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2472 

 

concerns about the PC resource policy and the concerns about 

this Bill that have already been cited by my colleague, the 

member from Saskatoon South. 

 

I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government’s incompetence is 

still further revealed by their delay in introducing and passing 

this Bill. For several years now, since 1982, they have watched 

the world supply/demand imbalance build up, and, by their own 

actions, they have contributed to it. For several months, at least, 

they have known about the U.S. anti-dumping action launched 

by the inefficient U.S. producers in Carlsbad, and yet they did 

nothing. 

 

And then after the U.S. preliminary decision was announced, 

what was the government’s response? It was panic confusion, 

flat-footed embarrassment, brave foolish talk, and more delay. 

Then, Mr. Speaker, even after the government announced its 

intention to introduce this so-called urgent Bill, there’s still 

more delay – speech after speech. And they say it’s urgent and 

they want to pass it. 

 

I want to say, as I said in my initial remarks, that we were 

prepared to deal with this Bill, put it into Committee of the 

Whole as rapidly as possible, two weeks ago. But they were not 

ready. And at every step of the way since then, it has been the 

PC government opposite that has delayed the passage of this 

Bill. In fact, as I said, there has been virtually a filibuster by the 

members in respect to their own Bill. And I say, and I predict, 

that they will try yet again perhaps to delay the passage of this 

Bill still further. 

 

Now why is that? Is it more PC government incompetence, or 

are they really interested in playing politics with Saskatchewan 

workers and Saskatchewan jobs? Well I say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the Bill before us cannot be judged in isolation. It must 

be examined and judged within the overall context of the potash 

industry of Saskatchewan and the situation faced by the 

industry today. And for that reason it is particularly 

disappointing that the PC government opposite has failed in this 

debate to address the real and fundamental issues facing the 

issues. 

 

And I want to outline and repeat, as the member from 

Saskatoon South indicated when he responded to the 

introduction of this Bill, what have they failed to do? They 

failed to explain how their Bill will address and resolve the 

anti-dumping action launched by the New Mexico producers. 

They failed to explain why they are prepared to cut back 

Saskatchewan industry, but allow the New Brunswick industry 

to produce full out. They failed to address the need for a truly 

rational Canadian solution to this duty imposed on all Canadian 

potash mines by the U.S. And they have failed to explain why 

they did not even try to achieve a fair accommodation with New 

Mexico and the potash industry in New Brunswick. 

 

(1145) 

 

It is failures like that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that make it clear 

that this government opposite is far more interested in looking 

backward, far more interested in playing politics of the past, 

and not really interested in protecting the future of 

Saskatchewan potash industry, the future of  

Saskatchewan jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to turn just a 

moment to the wide-sweeping powers the government is 

seeking in this Bill, and make just a brief comment on the PC 

government’s approach to deregulation. Their ideology, their 

ideological position for deregulation in the market-place is 

evident here in Saskatchewan with the collapse of the Principal 

Trust, and the incompetent negligence of the PC government 

opposite in dealing with it. And if that is the PC government 

deregulation in the consumer market-place, I’ll tell you this: 

Saskatchewan people don’t need it, and Saskatchewan people 

don’t want it. But now we have here a reversal. We have the PC 

government opposite that preaches deregulation; the free 

market-place is now imposing the most sweeping and 

heavy-handed and suffocating regulation on an industry in the 

history of this province. That’s not simply incompetence, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s not deregulation; it’s a government’s 

desperation. 

 

Let me turn for a moment to another cause for grave concern. 

Yet another problem with the PC government’s potash policy 

which they claimed is embodied in this Bill before us today. We 

can understand that there may have to be some prorationing to 

be considered. But any such scheme must be fair, it must be 

objective, and it must be non-discriminatory. Unfortunately, 

this Bill does not satisfy that test. I invite all members to 

consider very carefully the regulatory powers being granted to 

the government in this Bill, and being granted to itself in its 

new, secret, politically appointed resource board. For in this 

Bill the government is clearly and deliberately setting out a 

scheme that it wants not to be objective and not to be fair. It 

seeks in this Bill the power to discriminate between companies 

and even between mines. 

 

And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not good enough. If we 

look at this Bill, there is no appeal by any of the affected potash 

producing mines to any of the courts, if they happen to be 

discriminated against. And I think that’s missing. If you take a 

look at the resource board that they set up as appointed by 

cabinet and there’s 3,800 – 3,800 workers in the potash industry 

and not one worker is going to be allowed to be represented on 

the board. And they say they’re concerned about the workers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while my colleagues and I have expressed 

some grave concerns and some criticisms of the PC resource 

policy and of this Bill, I want to say that it’s really too soon to 

judge this Bill now before us. The ultimate judge, of course, 

will be the people of Saskatchewan. Ultimately, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this Bill will be judged on three grounds. First, will 

this legislation provide effective relief against the unwarranted 

U.S. anti-dumping action now threatening the Saskatchewan 

potash industry. That is the test, one of the tests. 

 

I say here today, and I am confident in predicting, that there 

will be mitigating circumstances despite this Bill. I say that this 

Bill is not the solution to the anti-dumping as has been 

indicated. 

 

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2473 

 

So I say that the real test here: will the Bill provide relief from 

the U.S. duty? If not, the PC policy will be judged a failure. 

Second, will this legislation protect Saskatchewan’s share in the 

world potash market and will it provide relative fairness within 

the Saskatchewan potash industry? And I say that is the second 

test, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For if the ultimate effect of this Bill is 

to somehow reduce Saskatchewan’s share of the world potash 

market, or to discriminate for or against any company within 

the Saskatchewan potash industry, then this PC policy will be 

judged to be a failure. 

 

And last, the third test, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the third is 

absolutely crucial, and that is the test of jobs for Saskatchewan 

people. On behalf of the potash workers of Saskatchewan, on 

behalf of their families in the scores of Saskatchewan 

communities in which they live, today, we want to serve notice 

today on the PC government opposite that if this potash policy 

results in any loss of jobs it will be judged a failure, and judged 

severely by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Again, Mr. Speaker, and I want to indicate that 

the workers in the potash industry are not very confident of 

fairness from this government. I live in a potash community. 

Part of it is in my constituency. And the potash workers in 

Lanigan had some treatment with this government, with over a 

10-month, no negotiations for a settlement until after the 

election. And so they’re worried about their future. The record 

of this government in dealing with labour has not been one that 

they should be proud of. 

 

So I say those are the three basic tests that we will be looking 

at. As I said, I do not propose to prejudge in a premature way 

this sort of tardy and panic-driven Bill which is before us today. 

The political dissertation that the Premier gave, instead of a 

statesman coming into this House and very methodically 

dealing with the situation, he talked about burning flags and just 

ranting disoriented dissertation that was a disgrace to this 

House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And I thought we were dealing here with a 

serious problem, and we, as an opposition, said we’ll deal with 

it in a serious manner, and today the Premier came in and tried 

to play politics. He doesn’t even want the Bill passed, because 

his own members are filibustering the Bill. And I say to you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we do not propose to give it our blind 

faith that this is the solution – unqualified support, because, as I 

say, it has to be judged by its results. 

 

And we say that . . . We say this to the PC government opposite 

that: you’re the government; it’s your Bill; you say it’s going to 

do the job, and I say we’re prepared to put you to the test. But 

I’ll tell you, those three criteria better be there. I’ll tell you, we 

better be addressing the anti-dumping. I’ll tell you, we better be 

addressing, not losing, world markets as a result of it, and the 

curtailment of production. And I’ll tell you, you better not 

destroy and place on the backs of the working people of this 

province your mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Accordingly, we urge the government that if 

they say this is an important Bill, to get on with it, to get it 

passed, and quite playing politics with the workers of this 

province and with the industry. 

 

I want to say that the Premier became very political today. He 

started ranting about what happened in 1970. And you know 

what? The very action that they had headlines with last week 

about increasing the price of potash by 35 per cent, I believe, 

the very action that they took in the potash industry to confront 

the anti-dumping tariffs that’s been levied, was done by the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

In other words, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

allowed this government, and gave it an instrument, in order to 

set a price on the potash industry. The very instrument that they 

used to protect the potash industry, the Premier stood in this 

House and decried it and said: we’ve got to get rid of it. That’s 

what he said. 

 

I’ll tell the Minister of Justice that it’s your Bill. You say it’s 

going to work. We have indicated to you and we have been 

prepared to proceed with it. And I’ll tell you, on the basis of 

those three tests, we will in fact be supporting you. That’s right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think it rather an interesting statement by 

the member from Quill Lakes, that all during the week was 

highly critical of the legislation, says he has doubts. Every other 

time they’ve had doubts, Mr. Speaker, they’ve gone up on some 

diatribe and said they’d never support it. 

 

Based on their record of their activities on other pieces of 

legislation, what we’re seeing is a rather bizarre contradiction in 

the New Democratic Party. As the comment made earlier, the 

New Democratic Party has more positions on this Bill than the 

Liberals have on the Meech Lake accord. And I think that was 

fairly well stated. 

 

There’s another aspect to this Bill which I find somewhat 

bizarre. You know, Mr. Speaker, and I say this to the members 

of the press, that for many, many years protected the then leader 

the opposition, the leadership candidates of the New 

Democratic Party are going to be held to account. And they ran 

from this House and they ran from the Assembly on store hours 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. Ben Johnson couldn’t have caught 

them running down the halls, Mr. Speaker, when they were 

trying to escape accountability on Sunday store hours, refusing 

to take a stand. 

 

And I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, although he was there for 

question period that we have not heard from the declared 

candidate of the New Democratic Party. And I expect to hear 

from the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, in this debate. I expect to 

hear from the hon. member from Riversdale – after all, he is the 

trade critic. And after all,  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2474 

 

he was the legislator, the member of cabinet that took the 

nationalization Bill through the House. And Mr. Speaker, like I 

say, a fair warning to the press gallery that they must be held to 

account. They must be held to account in their positions 

because it is not fair journalism, Mr. Speaker, to let them avoid 

accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I found it interesting and I wish that the member 

from Assiniboia was listening to the debate. Obviously he came 

in for his few comments with some conditions and didn’t 

seemingly understand what’s happening in the potash industry, 

and didn’t, Mr. Speaker, know some of the recent events, and 

perhaps like I say, was not paying attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s little doubt that the legislation is absolutely 

necessary. 

 

(1200) 

 

Again, we find the interesting situation that a week ago, a week 

ago the New Democratic party were calling for an immediate 

response to the preliminary anti-dumping decision against 

Canadian potash producers. Now that there is a strong response, 

the members don’t like it. What have they offered as a solution, 

Mr. Speaker? The Leader of the Opposition has demanded that 

the government impose a prorationing scheme similar to that 

that was judged to be illegal, and yet he tells the public that the 

government should repeat that illegal action. 

 

Well you called for a prorationing. The former Energy minister 

called for prorationing, and that prorationing scheme similar to 

that brought in the late 1960s was found unconstitutional. I 

think that’s a fair comment. I think . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Constitutional changes since then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. Well that’s precisely why the 

legislation had to change, Mr. Speaker, and to the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

If, of course, the government had have brought in a prorationing 

scheme once found unconstitutional by the courts, the courts 

would make rather quick work of that legislation, and the 

province’s position would be seriously impaired with that type 

of approach. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I do find it interesting that we now have 

the support of the New Democratic opposition, and to the 

government’s position – and they can’t avoid this, that the 

decisions on how our natural resources are to be managed must 

be made here in Saskatchewan and not in Washington. 

 

The declared leadership candidate has no solution. They 

attacked the production controls, saying controls would cause 

our potash producers to lose the entire U.S. market, and that 

was the concern. Again, surprising: if they really believed that, 

why would they say that they’re supporting the Bill? They 

know that it’s not accurate. They know that 20 years has gone 

by and that the U.S. mines are no longer able to supply the 

levels of the U.S. market that they did 20 years ago. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m surprised at that  

statement from the NDP leadership candidate. 

 

The U.S. American fertilizer association frankly admits that 

they cannot supply the U.S. market, the U.S. producers, and that 

overseas suppliers can only supply 5 or 10 per cent of the 

American demand. American farmers will have to obtain potash 

from Saskatchewan. And today a news report and a news 

interview indicated the president of the American farm bureau, 

the largest farm organization in the United States said, in no 

uncertain terms, that we, the U.S. farmers, need your potash. 

There’s little doubt that the preliminary dumping duties 

announced by the U.S. Commerce department will cost the 

American farmer a great deal. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the opinion and concern expressed by 

the president of the American Corn Growers Association and 

the National Association of Wheat Growers in the United States 

freely admit that the actions of the United States government 

are going to impact on the U.S. farmer, and I think that 

reiterates what the Premier today said: that the actions of the 

United States Department of Commerce indicate the falling of 

the U.S. protectionist position. 

 

If the leader, the proposed leader of the New Democratic Party 

from Riversdale, were listening to the concerns being raised by 

U.S. farm leaders, he would know that production management 

is not only workable, but this government believes it essential to 

protect jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

I know that the member from Riversdale has not been too 

accurate in predicting suitable production levels and market 

prospects. I recall back in 1971, the then member issued a 

three-page news release laying to rest rumours that there might 

be lay-offs in the potash corporation because of weakening 

demand for potash – wouldn’t have any lay-offs, he said as 

chairman of the board. We believe that the market will improve 

significantly in the spring of 1982 and that in fact the higher 

inventory levels will be of benefit to us in helping meet the 

demand in the long term. Obviously a completely inaccurate – 

and I frankly think that at that time given the fact that it was an 

election coming up in 1982, probably coloured the comments 

rather than any sound business decision or any sound utilization 

of the Saskatchewan resource. 

 

In fact by 1981 the strong demand and record high prices of 

1979 were levelling off, as the recession began to affect 

agriculture around the world and substantive new productive 

capacity came on stream. In 1981 the potash producers of the 

world could supply 27 million tonnes of potash, the surplus was 

1.1 million tonnes, or just 4 per cent of capacity. By 1986 world 

productive capability had grown to 31.4 million tonnes, but 

demand had not grown at the same rate and surplus capacity last 

year was 4.1 million tonnes, or 13 per cent of capacity. 

 

Saskatchewan potash mines produced at virtually 100 per cent 

in 1980 and last year averaged 67 per cent of productive 

capacity. Government revenues had dropped from 280 million 

in 1980 to 37 million in 1986 and industry revenues have been 

cut in half, and many companies have suffered substantial 

losses. Production management is essential to protect our 

industry and the  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2475 

 

jobs created for this province. 

 

NDP says that the government has no game plan, but what does 

he suggest? Nothing. One can only draw the logical conclusion 

that the NDP are still in the time warp of the 1960s and early 

1970s where the sole solution of the over capacity is 

nationalization. And, Mr. Speaker, times they are a changin’. 

That person that used to be the rallying call of the far left 

perhaps his tune these days would be more applicable to the 

NDP, perhaps they should now listen. The times they are a 

changing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately the NDP, as I say, in their time warp have no 

solution but to throw up their hands and say nationalization is 

the answer. Nationalizing the industry however would do not 

one thing to address the problem of American anti-dumping 

action. All it would do is increase our debt by borrowing more 

money, probably from the Americans, like the NDP did the first 

time around. It wouldn’t create one new job and not one new 

mine, but it would increase the debt. And certainly not one bit 

of help with the problems of over-supply. 

 

Or perhaps the member from Riversdale’s plan is to hope that 

over-supply goes away. December of ’81, his last prediction, he 

predicted better markets were just around the corner. And we 

know what happened to that prediction. 

 

But there’s more, I think, Mr. Speaker. In February of 1984, the 

member for Quill Lakes attacked this government for not 

rushing to complete the expansion of the Lanigan potash mine 

because, said the member from Quill Lakes who proudly talked 

about the potash industry in his riding, he said, and I quote: 

“The original completion date would have brought the project 

on stream just as world potash markets were beginning to 

improve.” That’s the member from Quill Lakes. 

 

That’s the so-called expert on potash who proudly says that he 

has the industry in his riding and he knows all about it. He was, 

oh, so wrong in 1984, Mr. Speaker. The NDP predictions on 

potash have been wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong; and I suggest 

their interpretation of this Bill is just as wrong as their 

predictions. With North American demand almost flat and new 

production in other parts of the world coming on stream, only – 

only – the New Democratic member from the Quill Lakes 

would see improving markets in 1984. 

 

I think it appropriate, because it was raised by the member from 

Quill Lakes about the Lanigan expansion, and how the NDP 

have hoped to re-write history with regard to their efforts of 

involvement in the potash industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have the minutes of meetings of the potash 

corporation – and I might advise that actively involved during 

the course of this was the now member from Riversdale, the 

next leader of the New Democratic Party. And in 1978 when 

the decision was made to expand the Lanigan division, and the 

minutes go on, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve distributed them to the 

Progressive Conservative members, and only the Progressive 

Conservative members because I believe they’re the only ones 

who are  

going to read them. And rather than have them wasted on the 

members opposite who, as I say, are trying to re-write history, 

the decision was made not only to expand Lanigan, but the 

board also approved of fast-tracking the project, Mr. Speaker. 

And the minutes at page three make that quite clear. Raising 

commitments beyond the amount recommended in that year of 

$25.9 million. Also approved an expenditure of 15.28 million, 

plus or minus 20 per cent, for engineering-related studies. 

 

The same year in the rush to get this new project on, in 1980, 

they approved a further $110 million. The increase from only 

25.9 million was necessary to implement the decision, and I’m 

quoting, “to fast-track the project.” 

 

And in 1980 again, the board further approved, and I think it 

clear that the member from Riversdale was the chairman of the 

board, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think that history can be 

re-written that falsely, agreed that the sum of $475 million — 

$475,163,000 to be precise – plus or minus 8.8 per cent, be 

approved to complete the engineering design and construction 

of phase 2 at Lanigan. And further, in those minutes: that the 

upper limit of funds expended will be $517 millions. 

 

All of those decisions made in 1980 and 1981, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That was the belief, and those were the predictions of the New 

Democratic Party in 1981. They made some other rather strange 

decisions and I know, to the Leader of the Opposition, that I 

still have a reply to make to him to a letter that he forwarded to 

me. I can assure him that the preparation is being done. But I 

was surprised one of the questions asked by the Leader of the 

Opposition at the time was: how did these currency losses take 

place? Because in the annual report of the potash corporation it 

showed currency losses of some 30-some millions of dollars. 

 

I’ll tell the public; I’ll tell the opposition how the currency 

losses took place. Because in 1980, August 28, the executive 

committee of the board of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan agreed to extend hedging contracts of up to 25 

per cent of expected U.S. dollar receipts to a maximum period 

of $5, and that the hedging program continue with U.S. dollar 

receipts up to a maximum of 75 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that decision, that decision led by the member 

from Riversdale, and now seemingly forgotten by the Leader of 

the Opposition, or perhaps he wasn’t informed, the following 

losses from that hedging decision total $50 million – 194,353 

thousands of dollars. That was the losses because of a desire to 

be financiers, Mr. Speaker, to play in the big leagues and spend 

money – an unwise decision. And, Mr. Speaker, the evidence is 

through the minutes – I won’t go into them in detail – where 

one of the positions given to that board was the uncertainty of 

the Canadian dollar, that it didn’t look strong and that it could 

fall. 

 

(1215) 

 

So notwithstanding the caution raised, it was desired to, by the 

member from Riversdale, to be a financier, roll the  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2476 

 

dice, play banker, play investor, and the losses amount to 50 

million, 194,353 thousand dollars, Mr. Speaker. I think that, 

Mr. Speaker, a rather shocking damnation of the actions of the 

board of the potash corporation prior to the 1982 election. 

 

So I’ve detailed, Mr. Speaker, the spending decisions with 

regard to the Lanigan expansion, and I’ve dated them for this 

Assembly and for the public. 

 

And I’ve also talked about the practice of hedging. And I also 

found it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that upon the nationalization 

of the industry, the New Democratic government of the day 

arranged that the potash corporation would not have to pay any 

interest on the 418 million taken from the Heritage Fund to buy 

the potash corporation in the first place; a move carefully 

designed, Mr. Speaker – I think raised by the opposition at the 

time is a rather strange, to be polite, activity, one certainly not 

picked up by the media at the time – but very carefully designed 

to give the people of Saskatchewan an unrealistic, optimistic 

picture of the corporation’s financial picture, again going into 

the 1982 election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a situation where the government of the 

day not only presented a false picture of the corporation, spent 

public moneys to create a corporation that took over existing 

mines and existing jobs, it created a corporation that could not 

shoulder its real costs, or it would shatter the picture of 

profitability that the government wanted to portray. As I say, 

and I’ve detailed again, the hedging,. Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t 

until 1986 that the signed five-year contracts fell due, and that 

the full cost of the hedging was able to be given to the people of 

this province. 

 

The New Democratic Party seems oblivious, Mr. Speaker, to 

the real world of supply and demand. The New Democratic 

Party in Manitoba wants to spend hundreds of millions of 

dollars to build a potash mine in that province. Is it any wonder 

that the Winnipeg Free Press warned the NDP government in 

Manitoba to be extremely cautious. If they knew what the 

people of Saskatchewan know, and will know, Mr. Speaker, 

they would be urging a lot more than extreme caution. The 

Winnipeg Free Press has recognized what the NDP refused to 

understand – that the world potash industry is suffering from a 

serious over-supply problem, and this Bill will begin to deal 

with that problem. It’s not a trade Bill, but it does provide for a 

management of the resource. 

 

A great deal of over-supply is due to the financial problems of 

farmers, particularly in the United States, where fertilizer use 

has been cut back and land has been taken out of production. 

But it should not be forgotten that over-supply also comes about 

because of decisions of the previous administration. 

 

We had the expansion of Lanigan decision and expenditure of 

moneys and the commitment of moneys and the need to 

increase inventories, even though demand was falling prior to 

the ’82 election. Even as recently as ’84 we get the predictions 

from the NDP of an upswing in demand. The market was 

believed that it would expand for ever, as it took more and more 

of the taxpayers’ money. And yet they seemed to not be able to  

see the need to manage our potash supplies today to support our 

industry and maintain our jobs and communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the actions that have been detailed as well by the 

Premier, of the previous administration, helped lead to the 

problem that we’re trying to deal with today and no rewriting of 

history will avoid that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it surprising now that the leader of the 

Liberal party is here, that he tends not to recognize, in his 

criticism of the Bill, the activities of the potash industry of 

Saskatchewan to expand its markets and seems to minimize the 

recent sale of potash to China. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although that announcement was last week, of 

another significant sale, that was not the result of actions of one 

day, Mr. Speaker. Those decisions were made some time ago to 

try and do what was necessary to encourage the Chinese people 

to use potash fertilizer. It’s taken the form of advertising, 

limited though it may be allowed, to try and encourage and 

make aware, the Chinese farmer, of the advantages of using 

Saskatchewan potash. Mr. Speaker, that’s been a long-term 

strategy to increase our markets. 

 

I find it interesting without getting into details, when he talks 

about what assurances does the government have that other 

producers would not step in. We have the recognition of major 

farm leaders in the United States that even if they did, they 

could do, perhaps, 5 per cent to a maximum 10 per cent of the 

United States market. But I find it interesting, that the worry 

that other countries would not go along, reflected, Mr. Speaker, 

not in reality, because we have recent announcements of Israel 

raising its price $35 a tonne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other countries can’t supply, to a large extent, 

the United States market like Saskatchewan can. As I say, there 

is a difference from 20 years ago, to the member of the Liberal 

party, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, that in those 

days there was an ability in the U.S. producers to supply nearly 

30 per cent of the market. And today, if they went full bore, Mr. 

Speaker, they would be lucky to do 13 per cent, and that giving 

up the ability to maintain a potash industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s a different world; new rules apply; the problems are 

different; the solutions will be different; the activities, the 

constitutional changes require different types of legislation. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I give the assurance to the people of this province 

that this government has: one, done everything possible to 

protect its markets, and we’ve delivered that message in no 

uncertain terms that we intend to protect our markets. 

 

Secondly, this government and the potash producers of 

Saskatchewan have taken the actions necessary to try and 

increase the demand for potash around the world, and we have 

had some success. And we know it will be cyclical, but still the 

efforts have been made. And, Mr. Speaker, the government is 

doing its part in taking and bringing in legislation to try and 

deal with the problem. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the assurance can be given to the  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2477 

 

opposition, to the people of this province. That the government, 

over several months, has tried in different forum to take the 

message to the American farmer that the action by U.S. potash 

producers was going to hurt the U.S. farmer. They didn’t listen. 

As the Minister of Energy and Mines says, we were met with 

apathy. But all we can try and do is deliver the message, Mr. 

Speaker; we can’t make them listen. And deliver the message 

this government has tried to do, over the last seven, eight 

months, Mr. Speaker, as the threat was given. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation is necessary; the legislation 

requires a response. And I suggest I’m not unfair, Mr. Speaker, 

when I say that any leadership candidate has an obligation, Mr. 

Speaker, on matters of major importance to the people of the 

province, to take a stand. May agree, we may disagree, Mr. 

Speaker, as to what the member from Riversdale will say about 

this Bill. He may be, in his silence, disagreeing with the New 

Democratic support of this legislation. His silence may well be 

interpreted, and I think quite properly, that he has no solutions, 

no proposals, except the one that he so well articulated 10 years 

ago, and that was nationalization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, leadership is not avoiding issues. Leadership, Mr. 

Speaker – and I think every political party demands this of its 

leaders – means making decisions and being prepared to be 

accountable for the decisions. As the member from Quill Lakes 

said, this government will be accountable for its legislation. We 

take that responsibility. We know the ramifications of that 

decision, Mr. Speaker, and we take that responsibility with a 

degree of pride, Mr. Speaker, because we believe we’re doing 

what is best not only for the industry in this province but for all 

of the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, leadership being 

shown by the government and, unfortunately, not being shown 

by the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a strange 

and cruel irony that I speak in this Assembly today on an issue 

as important as potash, but it is not a new debate for me. I recall 

being in this debate at an NDP convention in 1975. I recall 

debating the question with the would-be leader of the NDP. I 

recall that the member from Riversdale had all the answers. The 

member from Riversdale knew everything about potash. The 

member from Riversdale could foresee the future until the year 

1990, and I assume that he is again looking at the year 1990 as 

being an important year. But it was a strange irony. The 

members opposite were also there, and most of them were with 

the Waffle at the time and have since gone underground. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is it necessary to bring in this Bill? That is 

the question, and that goes back to the very time that I am 

speaking of – 1975. As you know, in potash we have at times 

had a very good history in this industry. I do acknowledge that 

premier Thatcher introduced the potash industry to 

Saskatchewan. With the assistance of foreign technology from 

Germany, our mines were able to sink down through layers and 

layers of water and whatever else might be down there and 

finally reach the  

potash level. Now had the NDP been government, no foreign 

technology would have been allowed in Saskatchewan because 

we are not allowed to have trade. They’re against trade, and 

therefore the foreign technology wouldn’t have been here. 

They’re against foreign companies coming in and developing in 

Saskatchewan, so we never would have had a potash industry. 

And I give credit to the Liberals and premier Thatcher who got 

things going. 

 

And then, when we had a lesson in 1969, we had a lesson in 

what happens when there’s an over-supply in potash. And 

Premier Thatcher acted responsibly and introduced 

prorationing, made a deal with the Americans for the supply 

management of potash. Now there is a difference between this 

Bill and that Bill, and in this Bill there’s no floor price. The 

only criticism I can make of premier Thatcher at the time is that 

he was involved in price fixing. We do not intend to get 

involved in price fixing. 

 

In this Bill we were looking at resource management. Now the 

NDP for years and years have talked about resource 

management, but it was a disguise that they used for the 

nationalization, the socialism that they wanted to introduce in 

the potash industry. 
 

(1230) 

 

Now with prorationing, the potash industry did reasonably well, 

and the NDP government kept prorationing as a useful tool. 

What happened, though, was that the NDP government got 

greedy. And when they got greedy, they tried to push the price 

too high, which got other producers in the world – our new 

competitors now that are causing problems for us in the 

competition in the supply of potash – they allowed them to get 

into the market while the NDP were pushing potash to its limits 

that could not be sustained. So therefore the NDP got greedy, 

and in their greed they decided it was time also to nationalize 

the potash mines, which led directly to why we have to bring 

that Bill in today. 

 

Not only did the NDP get greedy, but then they got into folly. 

And I recall that the NDP had no mandate to buy up the potash 

industry. There was an election in 1975, and the purchase, or 

expropriation – as the NDP suggested at the time – of the 

potash industry was not part of the mandate. I have a copy of 

The Commonwealth, the NDP propaganda arm, of November 

14, 1975 that says: 

 

Saskatchewan acquires potash industry. 

 

A bold new plan to allow the province of Saskatchewan 

to acquire ownership of the potash industry was 

announced in the throne speech of November 12. 

 

And then it goes on to say at that time . . . and I remember, I 

was at that NDP convention and, wham, this hit me like a brick. 

All of a sudden the party that I was a member of had not talked 

to the grass roots, and I was a part of the grass roots in those 

times. I was certainly that low. I wasn’t one of those high 

cabinet ministers in the NDP government; I was part of the 

grass roots.  

 

We’re not consulted. It dropped down, wham, from the  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2478 

 

top – here’s the socialized plan for the potash industry. And 

when you arrived at that convention you had this 

Commonwealth to tell you how wonderful it was, and it said: 

“The speech specified that though the decision will involve a 

sizeable investment by the province, it will be fully 

self-liquidating, paid for by the potash mined in the future.” 

Well we are now paying the price of that folly. 

 

Then they had a youthful premier of Saskatchewan; he was an 

NDP premier, and a picture of him, and he says, the premier 

says: “Only alternatives,” says premier, and it says: “Premier 

Allan Blakeney agrees to answer questions in Saskatchewan, on 

Saskatchewan’s new potash policy. What follows is his analysis 

of the situation.” Questioned from his own newspaper. How 

much will it cost Mr. – and I say NDP premier because I want 

there to be no confusion about which premier we’re talking 

about here – how much will it cost, Mr. NDP premier? 

 

That question obviously is a matter for negotiation. We do not 

however know what the . . . we do know that the company’s at a 

total capital expenditure of somewhere in the order of $700 

million, so he knew that it was going to cost a lot of money. 

And it goes on to say: “But, however, whatever that price is, it 

will not result in tax increases to the people of Saskatchewan 

any more than money spent on the power corporation has. In 

fact, in the long run it will mean tax savings.” Well today we 

are standing in the long run with a potash corporation loss of 

$100 million based on poor planning by the NDP and money 

borrowed from New York bankers. 

 

Then it goes on in a campaign to convince the socialist masses 

that this is the right thing to do. “Potash – we can do it better.” 

So what happens is that in 1975 the womb-to-tomb socialists go 

underground and they go into the mining business. 

 

So here’s what they base their predictions on. “A leading 

British authority on the potash industry is predicting demand for 

potash will double in the next 15 years. Saskatchewan is a 

logical supplier of that increase.” And then the NDP base their 

predictions that in the next 15 years world demand for potash 

will double, according to the NDP. And if you add 1975 plus 15 

years you get 1990 – by 1990, we were told by the NDP, the 

world demand for potash will double. Well we’re not quite at 

1990 yet. I certainly hope that they are accurate. But the first ten 

years of their prediction has certainly not been any where near 

accuracy. 

 

In addition, the article goes on to indicate a further interview 

with the NDP premier at the time. And the questions go on: 

 

Is the government capable of operating the potash mines? 

 

Well they thought they were, but clearly – clearly we have seen 

that 10 years later the question is, no, they were not. But the 

premier’s answer was: 

 

I think it is important to remember that the people who 

operate the mines are miners, and they will still be here. 

 

That is why we’re introducing the Bill, so these miners will be 

here. There are over 3,500 miners in this province. And now we 

have to try to clean up the mess started by the NDP to 

manoeuvre world trade to interfere with the ordinary course of 

business. And it says: 

 

Is the government capable of operating the mines? 

 

Our government would be capable of operating the mines, but 

we are not of the view that governments should be in the 

mining business. Governments should be serving the people. 

The next question is: 

 

You appear to be investing hundreds of millions of 

dollars and creating very few jobs. Is that a fair 

statement? 

 

Well, that’s exactly what I said at that convention: we are 

buying holes in the ground. And the NDP premier at the time 

said, the miners will still be here. So why buy holes in the 

ground; we’ll have miners as long as the holes in the ground are 

productive. Why spend government money doing that? Well, 

the premier at the time, the NDP premier said: 

 

I don’t think that’s fair or true. We’ll be expanding as 

soon as possible, and that will create jobs. 

 

So he said, we’re going to expand. And of course now we have 

massive over-production because the NDP believed that it 

would never end. 

 

But what’s important is the cost to the taxpayers. Here’s the 

prediction by the NDP premier in 1975. He said: “Also I said 

before, this is a very good investment.” I want people to think 

about that. And I continue with the quote: 

 

We will borrow the money that we need, and we will pay 

it back out of the cash generated by the industry. It won’t 

be a burden to the taxpayers. It will be a normal business 

investment, the kind that private corporations make every 

day without public comment. 

 

That is the situation we’re in now. I debated with the member 

from Riversdale at that time the wisdom of following that 

course of action. And clearly, we see what has happened. 

 

The premier at the time, the NDP premier, also said: “What 

happened to the old doctrinaire socialists?” And then he goes on 

to explain that they no longer exist. However, they were buying 

potash mines at the time. And there is a picture of a youthful 

premier of Saskatchewan, the NDP premier, and just under his 

picture it says: 

 

I think there is no question that our move will benefit the 

people of Saskatchewan. It’s common sense. It’s a good 

business decision. It’s a good investment. It’s almost a 

case of having no choice. 

 

This is the misguided nature of the NDP at the time. 

 

In addition, what happened to our Heritage Fund? The NDP 

told us there was $1 billion in the Heritage Fund.  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2479 

 

And there might have been $1 billion in the Heritage Fund, but 

it was invested in potash mines that are producing very little for 

us right now – very, very little. 

 

I quote from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of February 3, 1976. 

We have the member for Riversdale, as he then was, and now is 

again. He says: 

 

With reference to the cost of nationalizing the industry, 

(Mr. Romanow said) it would cost the province slightly 

more than one billion to take effective control. 

 

There was $1 billion spent in potash, some of it out of the 

Heritage Fund, other money borrowed money. The logical thing 

to do at the time would have been to lend that money to farmers 

and home owners in Saskatchewan at fixed and stable interest 

rates. Instead, farmers borrowed money at 22 per cent interest, 

and the NDP stood here in these very front benches and said: 

there’s nothing we can do. 

 

And they had a billion dollars tied up in potash mines, holes in 

the ground that would not have gone anywhere. Instead they 

had to follow their socialist philosophy, and it has cost this 

province millions and millions of dollars. 

 

And again, the P.A. Herald of March 13, 1976, the attorney 

general – that’s the NDP attorney general – explains potash 

stand: Government participation in the industry was no more 

risky than the medicare issue, or the establishment of STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) a number of years 

ago. The industry would witness its ups and downs, but 

basically it was very viable, Mr. Romanow said. 

 

These are the kind of rationalizations that the NDP made so that 

they could follow their socialist agenda. So that kind of folly 

has gotten us to where we are, and that leaves this government 

with few choices but to try to manage the resource. 

 

Ordinarily, had there not have been a socialist government in 

this province, the potash corporations would have managed 

their business nicely, but the intervention of the NDP 

government has brought the wrath of the United States down 

upon us, and that is a considerable wrath, I suggest to you. 

 

I’m not saying that the United States is justified in interfering 

with trade any more than the NDP were, or any more than we 

are. But what I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that this government 

has to operate by the rules, the rules that were first set by the 

NDP, that were then set by the United States in attacking what 

the NDP had done. And we now have to follow by the rules of a 

game that the NDP started – a game that we do not like to play. 

But we will protect those miners that the Leader of the 

Opposition said will always be there. The object here is to be 

certain that they are there and that they are working. 

 

With respect to the debt, the main reason that we are now being 

charged with anti-dumping is because of the losses of the 

potash corporation. And the main reasons for the losses is 

because of the death of the potash corporation, and had the 

NDP not gone out and bought the potash  

corporation with borrowed money, then there would be no 

potash corporation to be losing money, to be subsidized by the 

taxpayers, contrary to what the NDP had guaranteed would not 

happen, and there would be no possibility of any dumping. 

 

When corporations in the free market lose money, it is not 

dumping, but when government subsidize an industry, it is 

dumping. And I am not admitting that this government is doing 

anything towards dumping, but what I am saying is that the 

NDP caused the problem that gave the Americans the evidence 

to hang their hat on and say: Aha! There they are, they are 

dumping. 

 

The American tariffs are a particular nuisance to us in this case, 

and in particular, Mr. Speaker, the NDP still do not change their 

platform on the value of trade and whether this government, this 

country, needs freer trade. The Economist magazine out of 

London, England – hopefully it’s a little more knowledgeable 

than those British economists who predicted a 15 year doubling 

in potash that the NDP listened to – probably they were people 

like Michael Foote and Neil Kinnock and their friends over in 

Britain who don’t understand the British economy, advising 

them on what would happen in the world economy. But The 

Economist magazine out of London, England has done a 

calculation, and in their opinion, if world trade were to stop, 

everyone in the world would be 20 per cent poorer instantly. 

Now that 20 per cent of misery from the lack of world trade 

would not be spread evenly; it would be spread hardest on the 

poorest countries because they have a very fine margin to 

operate on. 

 

(1245) 

 

When a country is near subsistence, it cannot afford to lose 5 

per cent of its wealth, not yet 20 per cent, and it would be 

spread very, very heavy on Saskatchewan and Canada, but in 

particular Saskatchewan, for 50 per cent of our income is 

earned from trading with the world, so it wouldn’t be a 20 per 

cent loss in Saskatchewan. And the examples of the American 

tariffs bring home very clearly what happens when there is no 

trade. When you have tariffs of 52 per cent and 80 per cent, that 

gives you an example of the kind of misery a world without 

trade would bring us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re now in the situation where we have to 

protect our miners, where we have to manage our supply. And 

I’m very pleased that two NDP members have seen fit to speak 

on this topic. It is disappointing that the others know so little 

about this topic that they will not speak, but they still have a 

policy. And the policy is as it always was, as the member for 

Riversdale said in 1977. On November 8, 1977, the member for 

Riversdale is quoted as saying: 

 

If a Liberal government managed to sell potash mines 

back to the former owners, an NDP government, if 

elected, would move to take over the industry once again, 

(Romanow said). 

 

Their current policy still is to expropriate any potash mine that 

might be sold to the public or to corporations for $1. They know 

so little about potash that only two of them  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2480 

 

have chosen to speak, and I would hope that we are never again 

burdened with an NDP government and their great wisdoms on 

potash. 

 

Therefore this Bill is essential, and I will be supporting the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will try and 

make my comments very brief. My colleagues have done a very 

good job in covering all aspects of the potash problem, from the 

technical aspect to the historical part of it including the political 

part of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been interesting to sit here and listen today. 

The Liberal leader, the member from Quill Lakes – and they 

talk about being confused and this side of the House in a panic 

and asleep at the switch when it comes to this legislation on 

potash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take a look at the course of events over the last 

three weeks, and I will refresh the member from P.A.-Duck 

Lake’s memory – confused. Let’s take a look at the events over 

the last two weeks. 

 

You know, the first thing I saw was a press release put out by 

the Leader of the Opposition that really did, in fact, call for 

prorationing. He was an advocate of it. Confused, I looked at 

the next, to be anointed, leader of the New Democratic Party. 

One day he says: do this all in one day, Mr. Speaker. The next 

day he says: adjourn it, we need some time. Confusion, Mr. 

Speaker – panic. 

 

I look at the member from Saskatoon South, the Energy critic. 

He didn’t have too much to say. I frankly believe he does not 

understand the issue before. Instead he takes the road of 

personal criticisms, and it really didn’t go much further than 

that. The Energy critic says in his speech: I will allude to the 

solutions. And that’s precisely what he did. In fact, the allusion 

was so great that they are not in there even today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I take a look at some of the panic within the NDP caucus, and I 

think: now how must they address this in the room? How are 

they going to vote? And I can see: who’s going to speak; who’s 

going to speak? They obviously came up with very few until 

today. And I can imagine the discussion around the table: which 

way do we vote? Which way do we vote? And until today there 

was absolutely no indication of what they were going to do with 

this Bill. 

 

And who’s asleep, Mr. Speaker? Who’s asleep at the switch? 

Not a peep, not a peep out of a member that had a potash mine 

within his constituency, until today – until today. And all of a 

sudden he said: wow, I’ve got a potash mine in my 

constituency; I better talk about it. The only good thing I can 

say about it, Mr. Speaker, is he had the wisdom to say: I will be 

supporting the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the questions that have been put to me, 

some of the criticisms – I want to address a major one. Why 

Bill No. 36? It has been asked by the Energy critic, the member 

from Saskatoon South, and it has been asked by the member 

from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

Mr. Speaker, we looked at our options over a period of time. 

We looked at The Mineral Resource Act. That’s been suggested 

by the Energy critic. We don’t need this Bill, he said, all you 

had to do was exercise your authority through The Mineral 

Resources Act. I would ask him to go back and read The 

Mineral Resource Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the options before us were to do nothing, let the 

industry try and cope with this themselves. That was an option. 

The other option was to look at The Mineral Resources Act and 

bring it in for many amendments. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

amendments would have been very substantial and then they 

would have applied to all resources. That was not our intent, 

Mr. Speaker. We felt that any time a government is going to 

control or put limitations on production within its resources, it 

is important enough that it be brought forward by itself within 

this Assembly, and that all members have their say on it. 

 

Someone suggested, Mr. Speaker, fix the anti-dumping. In fact, 

I think, that perhaps came from a lawyer, and I’m amazed, 

because the anti-dumping action in the United States in fact is a 

legal process within that country. How do you fix it, Mr. 

Speaker? There’s only one person or group that can fix it, and 

that is the petitioner that brought it forward to begin with. That 

is the law in the United States. Only the petitioner that brought 

it forth, in this case the producers in New Mexico, have the 

power to fix it. They can withdraw it, but they haven’t. So the 

preliminaries came in and, Mr. Speaker, we have to deal with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other severe criticism and suggestion, and 

again, it comes from the NDP, and I am absolutely astounded 

today to hear the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, a 

lawyer – a lawyer – tell this Assembly that this government 

should have been working with New Mexico to strike a deal – 

to strike a deal. 

 

That may have been possible back in 1969. But there was one 

thing that changed in the course that prevented this government 

from doing that, and that was in fact, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Government of Saskatchewan became an owner of a potash 

mine in the mid ‘70s and that prevented us, under the anti-trust 

laws in the United States, in seeking a solution in that manner. 

And I suggest that the Liberal leader should have known that. 

 

It’s one reason, Mr. Speaker, why New Mexico has not been 

one of the participants in this solution, and I would suggest a 

very good reason. We would have preferred that perhaps we 

didn’t own the potash mine. It wasn’t necessary to begin with. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have to work with the realities, and the 

realities are that the Government of Saskatchewan owns a 

potash mine. 

 

Mr. Chairman, many efforts have been made over the course of 

several months – and I can go back to 1986 when this 

government, with the protectionist attitudes going on right 

around the world when it comes to trade, under the leadership 

of our Premier, started to discuss trade issues with the United 

States. And I look at our Premier in taking that leadership role 

into the United  

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2481 

 

States and the impact that a trade agreement, or lack of, might 

have on this province, and that’s when the consultations began 

– as far back as early 1986, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On this particular issue with the Department of Commerce in 

the United States, we have met several times with the 

Department of Commerce. We have legal counsel that we use; 

we have the secretariat out of Ottawa that also consults with 

Washington, and those have been utilized to the fullest extent 

possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also have our own producers in this province, through their 

customers in the United States, that have in fact made contact 

throughout the past months with associations like the Corn 

Growers Association, one of the largest users of potash within 

the United States; the Central Farmer’s Industry, a co-operative, 

Mr. Speaker, down there that distributes approximately 25 per 

cent of the potash. 

 

So the contacts have been many, but they have been to no avail. 

And as stated earlier, we met with a great deal of apathy. 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that will change. 

 

It has also been suggested, Mr. Speaker, why are we doing this 

by ourselves? Where’s New Brunswick in all this? In fact, the 

Energy critic even said, where’s Canada? How come Mulroney 

isn’t fixing this? And then he wanted to know why we didn’t 

get Canpotex. Well, Mr. Speaker, Canpotex is merely a 

marketing arm for offshore. I’m not sure what that has to do in 

dealing with anti-dumping actions for producers in the United 

States. Certainly Canada has been kept up to date on the events, 

and we have asked for their assistance where we think it’s 

appropriate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is us in Saskatchewan, the people in this 

legislature, that have the authority on the resources. The 

responsibility for managing those resources falls with this group 

in here, not down east in Ottawa, but with this group right here, 

Mr. Speaker, New Brunswick . . . the reality is New Brunswick 

only supplies 8 per cent of the potash into the United States. 

However, they are going to be affected by the anti-dumping. 

They’ve had levies put on their companies. One of their 

companies is the same as in Saskatchewan. The levy is 77 per 

cent. So they, in fact, will have to take a look and see if their 

producers are going to be able to manage without assistance, or 

perhaps with some assistance. 

 

Those are the essence of the criticisms that I have heard, and 

my colleagues have addressed some of them along the way, Mr. 

Speaker. When it comes to our world market share . . . and that 

is a concern, and we have recognized that and it’s been raised 

by several people here today. Mr. Speaker, 60 per cent of this 

potash resource goes into the United States – 60 per cent; 40 per 

cent is offshore. 

 

There is suggestions that perhaps we don’t need the U.S. 

market, and I find that astounding. Here we are, a land-locked 

province. We do not have many alternatives when it comes to 

transportation. That is our closest neighbour with a friendly 

border and let’s hope it stays that way, Mr. Speaker, for the 

future. Why would you not  

want to seek that as a market? Why would you deliberately cut 

it off when it is the best market that you could possibly have for 

the resources within your province? 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that we need to diversify 

our markets. And I believe that Canpotex has done a very good 

job on that end for us. We’ve increased markets into China, and 

we will continue to pursue that. 
 

As the market share relates to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we have 

simply said we’re not prepared to sit back and see us lose it. 

And the member from Assiniboia may say: well how are you 

going to fix it? It’s very simply, Mr. Speaker – you simply lift 

the volume limit and that will in fact take care of your market 

share. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope with these closing comments that 

this Bill receives unanimous support in this House, because this 

is one issue that we in fact need – a unified voice in dealing 

with those who would put up barriers for our producers and our 

people in this province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is there with the intent, first of all, 

to protect our industry, the jobs that go with it, and the 

investment. And we will ensure that when this legislation is 

passed that it is carried out in an equitable manner. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(1259) 
 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 46 

 

Muller Gardner 

Duncan Kopelchuk 

Andrew Saxinger 

Berntson Britton 

Lane Blakeney 

Smith Prebble 

Schmidt Brockelbank 

Hodgins Shillington 

Gerich Koskie 

Hepworth Romanow 

Hardy Tchorzewski 

Klein Thompson 

Meiklejohn Simard 

Pickering Solomon 

Martin Kowalsky 

Toth Hagel 

Sauder Calvert 

Johnson Lautermilch 

McLaren Trew 

Petersen Smart 

Swenson Van Mulligen 

Gleim Koenker 

Neudorf Goodale 

 

Nays — 0 

 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

  



 

September 11, 1987 

2482 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 1:09 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 37 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 1:11 p.m. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Visit of the Queen 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, just prior to adjournment, 

I wonder if I might have leave of the Assembly to deal with a 

change in sitting hours to accommodate Her Majesty when she 

visits our province later this month. I therefore ask leave of the 

Assembly to move: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, this 

Assembly shall on Thursday, October 15, 1987, meet at 

10 o’clock a.m. until 1 o’clock p.m., and that when this 

Assembly adjourns on Thursday, October 15, 1987, it do 

stand adjourned until Monday, October 19, 1987. 

 

So it will be adjourned from 1 o’clock on Thursday until 

Monday, normally, but that Friday will be a special day here in 

the Chamber with the Queen. 

 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:13 p.m. 

 


