













































September 30, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 30, 1987 

 

2975 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it is my 

privilege as Premier of the province to welcome eight 

distinguished Saskatchewan residents who are seated in your 

gallery, and one seated behind the rail opposite the chair. 

 

These very special men and women have made outstanding 

contributions to their country, to their province, and to their 

communities, and they have been awarded the Order of Canada. 

Their accomplishments reflect almost every facet of 

Saskatchewan life from agriculture to education, science, the 

arts, and our cultural heritage. They have made an important 

mark in Canadian society, and the honour they bring to 

themselves casts a glow on all Saskatchewan people. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, I sincerely congratulate each of these 

accomplished individuals, and I thank them for their vision and 

the ambition which has enriched all of our lives here in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will leave the honour of introducing these 

distinguished Canadians to their members of the legislature and 

would just ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 

this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we’re, I’m sure, all 

honoured to greet a group of outstanding Saskatchewan 

citizens, and I want to add my congratulations and those of my 

colleagues in the official opposition to the words of the Premier. 

 

We are meeting, greeting, and honouring leaders in agriculture, 

in scientific research and education, particularly university 

education, and voluntary organizations, and music and painting, 

and the cause of francophone citizens, and citizens of native 

origin. And as the Premier indicated, they will be more fully 

introduced later. 

 

But we are here greeting Joyce Blake and Jake Brown and 

Sylvia Fedoruk and Bob Ferguson and Howard Leyton-Brown 

and Father Marchildon and Allen Sapp and Dr. Simpson, and 

my old colleague-friend Senator John Tootoosis — a 

distinguished group who in their own way represent some of the 

ways in which Saskatchewan citizens can serve their fellow 

citizens. And we’re all delighted to have the opportunity to pay 

tribute to you, to thank you for what you have done, and what 

you will continue to do in making this province a more 

interesting and exciting place in which to live. 

 

On behalf of all of us here on this side of the House, thank you. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to be able to take 

just a moment of the time of the House at this point in our 

proceedings to join with the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition in making a few remarks on this very auspicious 

occasion in our legislature when we are favoured with the 

attendance of several very distinguished members of our 

Saskatchewan society. 

 

And with all other members of the legislature I want to join in 

extending congratulations to all of those that we are honouring 

today. In reverse form, I guess, we could very sincerely say 

they are honouring us by their presence here and by their record 

of accomplishment on behalf of Saskatchewan and of Canada, 

and certainly, to each and every one of them, congratulations 

and thank you for their accomplishments. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce to 

you, and through you to the Assembly, Joyce M. Blake of 

Regina, Member of the Order of Canada. It is my pleasure to 

explain to you and to the other members why and what she has 

done for this community in terms of service. 

 

Starting as a member of the office staff at the University of 

Regina, she progressed through the ranks to become the 

institution’s director of personnel services, a notable 

achievement in the world of academia. 

 

In the same manner, Mr. Speaker, she worked her way to the 

top of community services organizations and her church. Joyce 

Blake served as president of the Regina YWCA, president of 

Soroptimist International of the Americas. She served as the 

first woman people’s warden of St. Paul’s Cathedral and as 

director of the “Anglicans in Mission” fund raising campaign in 

the Diocese of Qu’Appelle. 

 

It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce Joyce M. Blake, 

Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege this afternoon 

to introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly and the 

people of Saskatchewan, Dr. Jacob A. Brown, Member of the 

Order of Canada. 

 

This agricultural economist is the former dean of the University 

of Saskatchewan’s College of Agriculture; a former 

commissioner of the Saskatchewan land bank commission; 

chairman of both the Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation and the 

Saskatchewan Task Force on Rural Development, and president 

of the Canadian Agricultural Economics Society. By his 

leadership in agricultural education he has trained the youth of 

the province to be among the world’s best farmers. Dr. Brown 

received the Saskatchewan Award of Merit in 1985. 

 

I would at this time like to ask all the members of the legislature 

to please join me in welcoming Dr. Jacob A.  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2976 

 

Brown, Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, Sylvia Fedoruk of Saskatoon, Officer of the 

Order of Canada. 

 

Ms. Fedoruk is one of the leading medical biophysicists in 

Canada, and former member of the Science Council of Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. She was director of physics services of the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation, and a member of the Atomic 

Energy Control Board of Canada. She has been a consultant to 

the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna. She’s a 

member of the Canadian Curling Hall of Fame. And in 1986 

Ms. Fedoruk was appointed Chancellor of the University of 

Saskatchewan and received the Saskatchewan Award of Merit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 

in welcoming Sylvia Fedoruk, Officer of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 

and honour to introduce to you, and through you in this 

Assembly, Dr. Robert Ferguson of Fort Qu’Appelle, Member of 

the Order of Canada. 

 

This agriculturalist, World War II air ace, and former member 

of the board of governors of the universities of Saskatchewan 

and Regina, is a driving force in Saskatchewan’s Qu’Appelle 

Valley. President of the Regina District Association of Regional 

Municipalities, a former municipal councillor, and now reeve of 

North Qu’Appelle, he is a former member of the Saskatchewan 

Conservation and Development Association board, and is so 

very much concerned with preserving his community’s 

heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to introduce again a friend, a man 

I’ve been honoured to represent for many years, Dr. Robert 

Ferguson, Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

privilege to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 

Dr. Howard Leyton-Brown, D.F.C., Order of Canada recipient. 

 

Dr. Leyton-Brown is known as “Mr. Music” in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, and this violinist and conductor has made a significant 

contribution to the educational and cultural life of 

Saskatchewan. From 1955 to 1986 he was professor and 

director of the Regina Conservatory of Music. He is responsible 

for the establishment of the Department of Music and Drama at 

the University of Regina. 

 

And so I ask the members of this House, Mr. Speaker, to join 

me in welcoming Dr. Howard Leyton-Brown, Member of the 

Order of Canada. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

is my pleasure and privilege to introduce to you, and through 

you to this Assembly, the Reverend Father Arthur Marchildon, 

Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

While carrying out his duties as a priest in North Battleford, he 

devoted several decades of untiring effort to the survival and 

the growth of the province’s francophone community. He 

founded the first French parish in the history of North 

Battleford, and helped establish a school and a senior citizens’ 

residence there. He also had a part in establishing the first 

French language radio station in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Would you please join me in welcoming to the Assembly the 

Reverend Arthur Marchildon, Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, on this, our national honours 

day, I would like to introduce to you, and through you to this 

Assembly, Mr. Allen Sapp, Member of the Order of Canada. 

Mr. Sapp is joined today with his partner, Margaret Sapp; 

Margaret Berryman, a long-time friend and promoter; and Mr. 

John Kurtz, his current manager. 

 

Allen Sapp, Mr. Speaker, is a renowned Cree artist from the 

Red Pheasant band south of the Battlefords. He has attained 

international stature and acclaim for his portrayals of native 

peoples and their way of life on his home reserve. He is a 

member of the Royal Canadian Academy of Art, and many of 

his works are permanently on display in galleries around the 

world. Mr. Sapp received the Saskatchewan Award of Merit in 

1985, and during lunch it was pointed out to me that Mr. Sapp, 

when he receives an award, does not only feel he receives that 

for himself but for his people as well. 

 

Mr. Sapp will be later presenting a book to the Premier and 

another copy of a book to the Legislative Library entitled A 

Cree Life: The Art of Allen Sapp, which we appreciate very 

much. 

 

In closing, I’d be remiss not to mention the relationship 

long-standing between Allen Sapp and the late Dr. Allan Gonor 

and his wife Ruth, who worked closely with Mr. Sapp. And 

their vast collection of these paintings will soon be on display at 

the North Battleford public library, a building that was 

originally built by the Carnegie Foundation. 

 

I would ask that you join with me to recognize this 

distinguished individual, Mr. Allen Sapp, Member of the Order 

of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege and pleasure to introduce a second resident of my 

constituency who’s received an award as Member of the Order 

of Canada. I’m very pleased to introduce to  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2977 

 

you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, Dr. Edith Simpson. Dr. Simpson, a former dean of 

women, Mr. Speaker, at the University of Saskatchewan, and 

Dean Emeritus of the College of Home Economics at the 

University of Saskatchewan. She has, as a teacher, as a mentor, 

and a friend, contributed to the well-being of families 

throughout our province, Mr. Speaker, as well as assisted 

greatly in the development of her profession at the provincial 

and national level. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure to ask all members of 

the Assembly to join with me in welcoming Dr. Edith Simpson, 

Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

my privilege and honour to introduce to you, and through you 

to this Assembly, Mr. John B. Tootoosis, Member of the Order 

of Canada. 

 

Mr. Tootoosis is known as the elder statesman of Saskatchewan 

Indians. He has devoted his entire adult life to seeking answers 

to the grave problems of his people. Beginning when the native 

organizations in western Canada were in their infancy, he was 

among the first Indian leaders to assert the right of Indian 

people to govern their own affairs and at the same time when 

such sentiments were unpopular. He remains a senior adviser to 

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the 

National Indian Brotherhood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s again my pleasure to introduce to this 

Assembly once again, Mr. John B. Tootoosis, Member of the 

Order of Canada. I ask all members to join with a hearty 

congratulation. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Cut-backs at Wascana Rehabilitation Centre 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the Acting 

Minister of Health, and it deals with yet another example of 

your government’s cuts to health care and how they impact on 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre here in Regina 

has been forced by your cut-backs, to cut their staff. This means 

that on weekends, every weekend, due to limited staff, some of 

the 58 long-term and geriatric patients are being left in bed for 

24-hour periods — left in bed without treatment and without 

exercise. 

 

Mr. Deputy Minister, are you aware, are you aware of what 

your cuts are doing and impacting on Saskatchewan people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly aware that in 

the Wascana Park one of the most modern and newest rehab 

centres in Canada is being constructed at this time as an 

initiative of this government. 

 

I understand the numbers that the member opposite points out, 

of staying in bed for 24 hours and staff cuts and  

so on. Mr. Speaker, judging from past performance by the critic 

of Health of the party opposite, I find that many times the 

statistics and the figures are somewhat stretched, to put it 

mildly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would be my intention to investigate this. I’m 

not aware of that situation, but I want to make it very, very clear 

to you and to the members of this Assembly, from past 

experience I would not take those figures on face value. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 

take it then you’ve taken notice of the question and that you 

will bring an answer back. I ask you a simple question then: 

what is the use of building large and marvellous facilities if 

you’re not prepared to adequately fund and therefore adequately 

staff those facilities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be glad to explain 

why we decided to build the newest and the best and the 

top-notch facility in all of Canada. I was the Health minister at 

the time that we made that decision, and I remember previously 

that the government opposite wanted to put it out by the Plains 

Hospital. I remember also that two days before the election in 

1982 the then leader of the Government of Saskatchewan said, 

hurry up and draw the plans for a new rehab centre. 

 

Well I can tell you that under the administration of the Devine 

government, we looked from side to side of this country, visited 

every rehab centre across Canada, and I can say with great 

assurance that what is being built in the Wascana Park is the 

state of the art, the top rehab centre in Canada. I also want to 

say . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I also want to say that it will be the 

intention of this government to staff that with the best 

professional help they can, so that we can say in Saskatchewan 

that we are the leaders in Canada in rehab medicine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 

asked and I ask again: what is the use of building marvellous 

facilities if those facilities are not going to be adequately funded 

and therefore adequately staffed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You know, I can see where the member 

opposite is coming from, and I remember not too long ago 

when the now apparent heir to the throne of the NDP party was 

stated publicly in saying, there isn’t a need for new facilities in 

Saskatchewan — and I want that on the record. That is the 

stance that the member from Riversdale had regarding new 

facilities in this province. I can assure you, and I take your 

figures under advisement because as I said in the beginning, 

from . . . (inaudible  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2978 

 

interjection) . . . no, from past experience, Mr. Speaker, one 

cannot put reliance in the statements put over from the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member has indicated here . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the same 

minister. Mr. Minister, I understand that there is now a plan 

under discussion at the Wascana Rehab Centre that patients will 

be asked to pay for the supplies they use — that is they’ll be 

asked to pay for the packages of kleenex and the soap and the 

shampoo. 

 

Mr. Minister, is that what health care is coming to in this 

province? That when people are checked into hospital, they’ll 

be given an I.D. bracket and then a price list for services 

available. Is that your vision for health care in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly not. Those are wild and 

whirling words. My vision for health care and the vision for 

health care of this government and this Premier is to be build in 

Saskatchewan, state of the art, the best that can be devised, the 

best that can be put together, and that’s exactly what we have. 

 

And you come with me and you look at the new floors in the 

University Hospital; you look at the addition to St. Paul’s; you 

look at the new City Hospital that is being planned and the 

rehab centre, and then you say that we don’t build the best 

facilities in Canada. I challenge you on that. And they will be 

adequately staffed also. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Budget for the New York Trade Office 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade, and it 

deals with the new trade office his government plans to open 

next month in New York. 

 

Yesterday in question period the minister refused to tell the 

taxpayers what budget he has approved for the New York 

office. Is the minister telling taxpayers that it’s his practice in 

these times of restraint to open up a trade office with no 

approved budget and without a clue as to how much it will 

cost? And if you deny that, Mr. Minister, then give the 

taxpayers of this province the information I asked for. What is 

the approved budget for the first year of operation of your new 

New York trade office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the member posed the 

same question yesterday. Let me respond to the hon. member as 

follows. Saskatchewan, along with Albert and Manitoba and 

British Columbia and all the other provinces of Canada, have 

come to the realization that we must not simply look inward to 

ourselves within our own individual jurisdictions, but we must 

go out t the world. We must go out to the world. Whether that is 

in the  

Pacific Rim where we trade a lot, we have offices there as do 

Manitoba and Alberta and B.C., or whether it’s to the United 

States where we also trade a lot — we have to open offices 

there. And we have to look to Europe and how we can better 

access those markets of Europe. 

 

The members opposite, what they’re really asking is this 

question, not how much it costs, but what they’re really saying 

is that we should not have offices in New York, we should not 

have offices in Hong Kong. I think that is short-sightedness; I 

think that is wrong-headedness. 

 

The world is becoming a global economy, a global village, and 

I think it’s time that we became part of it, and not keep our head 

in the sand as the NDP would have us believe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The people 

of this province know what I asked, and I know what I asked. 

And I want to indicate to you that everybody is in favour of 

increased trade. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, are you aware that the Government of 

Canada operates a consulate in New York City? And are you 

aware that the Canadian consulate has a staff of 21 trade 

officers? Mr. Minister, in this era of co-operation between 

Ottawa and Regina, you are asking the Saskatchewan taxpayers 

to believe that not one of those 21 trade officers would be 

prepared to help Saskatchewan businesses and companies to 

sell their products in the New York area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if we were to follow 

the logic of the hon. member, the Government of Canada has 

trade offices or consulates in most of the countries of the world. 

And so to follow your logic, what you would say is no province 

should have trade offices outside of Canada. That’s in effect 

what he is saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reality is that Saskatchewan is one of the first provinces, 

under the leadership of the Deputy Premier, to bring to the 

federal government the idea of combining the two together. 

 

Let me put it this way, Mr. Speaker. That situation where the 

federal government have had offices around the world has been 

in place for a long time. I think the provinces of western Canada 

have always had the view that the offices of Canada tend too 

often to support central Canada and disregard that of western 

Canada, and as a result western Canadian provinces, all four of 

them, are building their own offices abroad. I think that is 

proper. The Government of Manitoba thinks that’s proper; the 

Government of B.C. thinks that’s proper; the Government of 

Alberta thinks that’s proper. And I would hope, some day, the 

members opposite would come to conclusion that it’s proper as 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

. . . Mr. Minister, the Government of Saskatchewan has already 

been paying for a trade  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2979 

 

consultant in New York City, one Michael Cohen. The 

taxpayers are paying him more than $6,200 a month in salary 

plus fringe benefits and expenses. Can the minister confirm that 

over the last 12 to 18 months, Mr. Cohen has cost taxpayers an 

average of $10,000 a month in salary, fringe benefits, and 

expenses? And, Mr. Minister, I ask as well, can you tell us 

whether Mr. Cohen is, in fact, related to the Premier’s deputy 

minister, one Norman Riddell? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I went through in 

estimates the other day, the qualifications of Mr. Cohen — 25 

years in the service of various companies and international 

trading. If the member opposite is concerned about saving 

money, it costs $30,000 a day to run this Assembly in here for 

him to practise the debate as a back-bench NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Clearly the 

minister doesn’t want to answer, and I want to say in my 

supplementary that when patients are paying for kleenex and for 

toothpaste and those kinds of things and on and on, I want to 

know how you can afford to spend hundreds of thousands of 

dollars a year to open a new trade office in New York city 

unnecessarily and then staff it with one more of your political 

cronies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this individual is truly 

amazing, truly amazing. He’s the token small-business 

representative on that side of the House. I thought at least he 

would bring a new dimension, but no, it’s the same old thing; 

it’s the same old approach of the NDP — stay in your province; 

let the federal government do it for you. Well I think the people 

of Saskatchewan, businesses of Saskatchewan, are starting to 

grow up, are prepared to go out into the world, and this 

government is prepared to assist them and help them in that 

endeavour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Legal Aid Deterrent Fees 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 

absence of the Minister of Social Services, I’ll direct my 

question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, on Monday the Minister 

of Social Services informed this House that the legal aid 

deterrent fees were introduced without prior consultation or 

approval from the Government of Canada. Consequently the 

Mulroney government is monitoring legal aid in Saskatchewan 

with the possibility, I point out, the possibility that federal 

funding for legal aid in Saskatchewan may be withdrawn. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Premier, to explain why your government 

introduced legal aid deterrent fees without getting prior 

approval from the federal Government of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t accept the 

hon. member’s observations as being fact, and as a result I  

will go back and review the situation with the minister and 

make sure that the details are as he says because I have the 

feeling that perhaps they’re a little bit different. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, I point out, you 

may want to review the record of the minister’s statement in 

this House when he confirmed that he failed to get that approval 

in advance. 

 

New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier as well. Mr. 

Speaker, Professor Bill Wardell, who is a nationally recognized 

expert in legal aid, is quoted in national media earlier this week 

as saying that Saskatchewan and British Columbia — 

Saskatchewan and British Columbia — now have the worst 

legal aid program in Canada, and I quote from Professor 

Wardell. He says: 

 

We have gone from being a forerunner in innovative legal 

aid to being a backwater. 

 

Mr. Premier, at the same time one of your own legal aid 

commissioners in this province said earlier this week that the 

introduction of deterrent fees has been an abject failure. It’s 

failed to address the budget problems and, as a matter of fact, 

has driven people in need away from legal aid offices. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Premier: will you do what is right; will you 

withdraw the legal aid deterrent fees, fight the deficit by 

tackling waste within your government, and return to the poor 

of Saskatchewan the right to legal counsel? Will you do what is 

right, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have taken notice of the 

question with respect to the facts that the hon. member put 

forward. I will say subsequently that we are examining all of 

the welfare programs that we have in the province of 

Saskatchewan to make sure that we can be as fair as possible in 

providing the kinds of services to those who need then, and also 

to make sure that we have the kind of money necessary to 

provide new kinds of services for those that need new ones, and 

we will continue to examine those, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Investment by SaskPen in Real Estate 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I took notice the 

other day — there were two questions, one from the 

opposition’s finance critic, and one from the member from 

Regina Victoria. The allegation made that the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and I quote: 

 

. . .”speculate” — on commercial real estate. . .” with 

Saskatchewan pension plans because of a report from the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

In checking the matter, Mr. Speaker, it turns out that the 

investment in the properties questioned by the Provincial 

Auditor was made not by this government, and not by this 

Minister of Finance, but by the previous Minister of  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2980 

 

Finance, the member now from Regina North East, and the 

investments were made, Mr. Speaker, so-called speculation of 

pension funds were made and approved by the deputy minister 

of Finance on December 31, 1981, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Victoria, by 

implication, made the allegation that the Government of 

Saskatchewan had invested in First City’s and the second 

company in Alberta. That simply is not true, and no investments 

were made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance, 

that is the most bizarre answer that this House has ever heard to 

a question that has been asked of a minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — He did not even respond to the question, 

and I will repeat it to him now. Maybe if he takes notice again 

he will provide us with the answer which he should have had 

today. The question was: why has SaskPen not provided to the 

Provincial Auditor the financial statements for the years 1984, 

1985 and ‘86? He did not answer that. And the other question 

was: how much was there in amounts of money is disagreement 

between the evaluation of the assets between SaskPen and the 

Provincial Auditor, which is another part of the issue and the 

other question which I asked which the minister did not respond 

to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I will refresh the hon. 

member’s memory because it is obviously getting short for 

whatever reason. The question s imply was when you made the 

allegation, turned out to be wrong, that the government was 

speculating on commercial real estate, and your question was, 

and I will quote it verbatim: “. . . will you inform this House 

which those real estate properties are?” 

 

The real estate properties that you call speculation, that you 

approved the investment and your government, are the Bank of 

Montreal site at Scarth and 11th in the city of Regina; the Royal 

Bank site at 11th and Hamilton in the city of Regina; the 

McCallum Hill site at Scarth and 12th in the city of Regina; the 

Grosvenor site, Scarth and 12th in the city of Regina; and a 

parking garage site, Cornwall Street, between 11th and 12th 

Avenue in the city of Regina. And that is a specific answer to 

the question you asked. 

 

Secondly, with regard to the valuation of properties, the 

question asked by the Provincial Auditor was a question as to 

the valuation of the particular time. The response from the 

auditors to the Provincial Auditor was that the properties are 

bought as an investment vehicle and are held over a long period 

of time, and that the properly . . . accounting principles are that 

they are carried on the books at cost. The Provincial Auditor 

was asking whether they should be carried on the books at cost 

or not, and that was the question asked by the Provincial 

Auditor. It is  

properly accepted accounting principles that development 

property is held at cost. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the minister has made a point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A supplementary to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, will you address the question: how much 

is there in disagreement in value between your department, 

which has only been a disagreement for 1984, ‘85 and 1986 

when you were in this government’s office opposite. How much 

is the value of the disagreement between the Provincial Auditor 

and your officials or yourself on these investments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s my understanding that the department 

and the Provincial Auditor are still discussing, but it looks like 

there will be no difference in valuation. And there’ll be no 

difference in valuation that they accept that investment 

properties held over a long period of time are carried on the 

books at cost, Mr. Speaker, as they are. 

 

The hon. member also asked why we established . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct 

a question to the Minister of Finance. It has to do with this 

doctrine which is now promulgated by him that the proper 

accounting practice is to value development properties at cost 

even though they may be worth less than cost. The proper 

practice is to value them at cost on the financial statement. 

 

My question to you is: is not that exactly the same accounting 

doctrine which caused the collapse of Pioneer Trust, and is that 

not exactly the same accounting doctrine which caused the 

collapse of First Investors? Isn’t that, in each case, the reason 

why they collapsed is because they continued to value 

development property at well above its real value? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — That was certainly part of the question in 

the province of Alberta. I think it fair to say that the hon. 

member is not now standing up when he was premier of this 

province and saying that he, in fact, speculated with 

government employees’ pension funds in risky ventures and 

risky property, which was the allegation made by the member 

from Regina North East. I think it fair to the hon. member that 

these were carried at cost, that the sites were, I believe, as they 

are today, except for the Royal Bank Building, and that the 

properties are being fairly valued. 

 

If our allegation is: did you in fact speculate when you were the 

premier of this province with pension funds moneys? well that’s 

up to you to respond, Mr. Speaker, or we accept the argument 

that this was an investment of  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2981 

 

government employees’ pension funds over a long period of 

time, which was a reasonable investment, and they’re being 

carried at fair value. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder 

if the minister would try once more to answer the question. 

Does he support the accounting doctrine, which he just said he 

did, which says that development properties should be held at 

cost, even though their current value may be much less. Do you 

support that, or do you not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I think the more fundamental 

question is exactly the one . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. The minister is attempting to answer the question but is 

not getting much co-operation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the hon. members 

don’t like the answers they’re getting to day, but it is quite 

clear, Mr. Speaker, that the accountants believe that this 

property is to be carried at cost. That is the position that the 

chartered accountants are taking. 

 

Secondly, it is up to you to answer to the taxpayers and to the 

pension fund owners, whether you speculated or not, because 

you bought the properties and I remind this. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, they ask about SaskPen properties. Let 

me advise the hon. member opposite from Regina North East, 

that prior to, and in their administration, they bought a company 

and invested in a . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. I’m afraid 

the member is off the topic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Opening of Grasslands Park 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question today is to the Minister of Environment concerning the 

establishment of the hoped-for and long-awaited grasslands 

park in south-western Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that you’ve negotiated an 

agreement with the Minister of the Environment, the federal 

Minister of the Environment, Mr. Tom McMillan, that the water 

rights dispute that held up grasslands for so long has now been 

settled. I wonder, sir, if you could confirm that story. And 

secondly, could you give us some kind of date as to when we 

can expect the opening, now, of grasslands park here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m indeed pleased to reply to 

the hon. member’s question. To say that the dispute is resolved 

would be a little presumptuous. I did meet with the federal 

minister. We broke what was a deadlock in negotiations, and 

negotiations are ongoing at  

this point in time, and the officials have been meeting this 

week. I can’t give an exact time frame on when we will see a 

grasslands park, but it is my anticipation that we should see one 

before the end of this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill respecting the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 47 — An Act respecting Regional Colleges 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill respecting Regional Colleges. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, it has been previously 

arranged and understood, I think by both sides of the House, 

there is a gathering scheduled in room 218, I believe, to meet 

and mingle with our honoured guests. So I ask that we recess 

until 3:30, Mr. Speaker. And for the information of the 

members, at about 3:30 the bell will ring and that will be the 

signal to resume the sitting. So I ask that we recess till 3:30. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 3:30 p.m. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I wonder if we might have leave to go 

to government business directly to adjourned debates to deal 

with Bill 19. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion by 

the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The 

Education and Health Tax Act and the proposed amendment 

thereto by Mr. Koenker, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

are debating today an amendment to Bill 19. The  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2982 

 

government has proposed Bill 19, which would take the 

education and health tax up from the 5 per cent which it is now 

at, to a proposed 7 per cent, which is completely unfair and a 

move which betrays the government’s promise of 1982 to 

reduce the education and health tax. 

 

As a result, the opposition has proposed an amendment, an 

amendment which I would like to read into the record at this 

time again, Mr. Speaker, and that is: 

 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted in the 

Bill 19 and that the: Bill not now be read a second time, 

because: the 40 per cent increase in the provincial sales tax 

is a betrayal of the Progressive Conservative promise to 

eliminate the provincial sales tax in their first term of 

office; and the 40 per cent increase in the provincial sales 

tax makes Saskatchewan people among the highest taxed 

in Canada; and because the 40 per cent increase in the 

provincial sales tax is a regressive and unfair tax on 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this side of the House who have 

spoken on this Bill prior to myself have repeatedly mentioned 

that the government would never have had to go back on its 

promise if the government hadn’t been so incompetent in the 

last five years and had set up a program which would have not 

led to the tremendous deficit that we now face — a deficit of 

$3.4 billion, plus an additional 10 billion that the Crowns now 

owe. 

 

We remember quite well the rhetoric that the Premier used quite 

early in his first mandate. And I recall the papers talking about 

the Premier talking to a New York audience, saying that 

Saskatchewan’s economy was in such good shape it could even 

be mismanaged for several years and we’d still be all right. It 

seems that the Premier’s vision was not quite as far-sighted as 

he was giving himself credit for. Or perhaps he just took 

himself seriously and decided to test that theory, to test his own 

hypothesis, and we now have a record that indicates just how 

dismal his forecast at that time was. 

 

I have here in my hands the record, the fiscal record of the 

province of Saskatchewan under this Premier, under the 

existing Premier, the member from Estevan. The record shows 

that they . . . when they gained government, they forecast a 

budget of $219 million deficit. They forecast that — 219 

million. 

 

But what was the budget? What did it actually come out to? 

How close did he come? Well he forecast 219 million and he 

actually came in at 227 million. Well, a little bit of a miss, not 

enough to get really concerned about, but a bit of a miss. So we 

noticed it. Now prior to that time, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

had not had any deficit, had not had a deficit budget. 

 

Then we look at 1983 and ’84. The first figures I read were 

’82-83. Then we look at ’83-84, the second year of this 

Premier’s administration. And they said, well last time we sort 

of underestimated our spending abilities. So they forecast the 

budget this time for 316 million. They raised it by nearly 100 

million and they raised the prediction by nearly 100 million. 

But how close did they come? Well we found that this Premier, 

who had predicted 316  

million, actually came in at 331 million. Oh, oh! We see the 

difference between the prediction and the actual increasing. 

 

And then the same thing happened again in ’84-85. They 

predicted that the budget was going to be a deficit of 267 

million. They predicted a decrease in the budget deficit. But 

what actually happened is, it went up again., and this time to 

379 million. Now I repeat those figures — 267 million was the 

predicted deficit, and it actually came in at 379. 

 

Now we go to 1985-86. Again it very much looks like 

somebody was looking at this through rosy coloured glasses 

because the predicted budget was 291 million. And where does 

it go? It goes to 584 million. Twice, nearly twice, Mr. Speaker, 

what was predicted. 

 

And then in 1986-87, the year where we had the budget 

dribbled out — dribble by dribble by dribble, and it wasn’t till 

June 17 that we finally got it. But they predicted for that — 

pardon me, I’m going back to 1986-87 — they predicted a 

deficit of 389 million. Now that’s a $389 million deficit, Mr. 

Speaker. And what was it? It actually came in at 1.2 billion — 

nearly, nearly three times the predicted value. In fact it is over 

three times the predicted value. 

 

Now what happens here, Mr. Speaker? The government has 

done two things with this. First of all they’ve indicated, through 

this kind of record, complete incompetence, inability to run and 

manage a government with balanced budgets. And secondly, we 

see that we have been deceived year after year after year by 

their predictions. And the last one illustrates it even the most 

clearly. 

 

This year the budget has been predicted at 577 million — at that 

deficit. We don’t know what it’s going to be. But last year we 

know that it was 1.2 million . . . there was a $1.2 million deficit, 

and this one looks . . . $1.2 billion deficit, and this time it looks 

like kit could be that or more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I talked earlier and I referred to the promise. 

I said . . . to the promise that they made, and the promise being 

the promise of reducing the sales tax. And I have in my hand 

here a list of — a mimeoed list of advertising that was 

conducted by the Progressive Conservative Party prior to the 

1982 election, and I want to put some of these things on record. 

 

The quick reference for candidates that is titled Pocket Politics 

states right here that in fighting inflation that a PC government 

would battle inflation by . . . and one of the statements that 

stares right out here they will: 

 

phasing out the provincial sales tax. 

 

Well that was just advice, advice to the candidates. 

 

And then we saw the materials that went public, that everybody 

had a chance to observe, and I have here a copy of an ad from 

the people of Estevan were subjected to in the 1982, an ad 

under which the Premier made a commitment, and right there 

the . . . one of the headlines says, “Eliminate the 5 per cent sales 

tax in clothing and  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2983 

 

utility bills,” and then it says: 

 

We have a commitment to the complete elimination of the 

sales tax in its first term of office. . . (meaning his 

government’s first term of office). 

 

Well I wonder what the people of Bienfait think about that 

promise now, Mr. Speaker. And I wonder about the housewives 

at Lampman, or at Torquay; and I wonder about the senior 

citizens at Midale, all of these people being in the riding of the 

Premier. Can they believe the Premier when he says that the 

budget deficit this year is going to be 577 million, when in the 

years previous they’ve been out by as much as 300 and 400 per 

cent? 

 

(1545) 

 

Now that wasn’t just the Premier, Mr. Speaker, who made these 

kind of claims. And I think that if we look at them individually, 

look at claims made by other members, such as the member 

from Melville, and in some electioneering material that the now 

Minister of Labour from Melville has, and he has put out, he 

mentioned here that one of the policies for good government 

will be tax cuts. 

 

Now this Bill which they introduced certainly doesn’t represent 

a tax cut, if you’re increasing the E&H tax from 5 per cent to 7 

per cent. And he has right here that he will remove the 5 per 

cent E&H tax. 

 

Now this was passed around, not just to people that lived in 

Melville, but it was passed around to people who live Goodeve, 

people who live in Ituna, farmers that live around, and ranchers 

around Balcarres, Lebret. I wonder what the people of Lemberg 

think about this. 

 

And I wonder, if the minister would go back now to the people 

of Abernethy, would he say, well I misled you? Or would he 

have to say, well I didn’t want to mislead you, but this is what 

my Premier made me do? I wonder what he’s say, what 

approach he’d use. And I wonder if the member from Melville 

will actually vote for this Bill, because the minute he votes for 

this Bill it belies his promise of 1982. 

 

Now the member from Melville is not the only one that has 

done this. I have before me here now, Mr. Speaker, a picture of 

the member from Kelsey-Tisdale. Now the member of 

Kelsey-Tisdale went around to talk to the people of Hudson 

Bay and the people of Prairie River, people of Weekes. He went 

to the people of Porcupine Plain, and I’m sure they had a 

chance to look at this pamphlet, and they would probably be 

very interested in being reminded that one of the statements in 

his campaign literature said that what they will do is give a 10 

per cent across the board cut in personal income taxes. 

 

Now in the Bill that accompanies this Bill, this is Bill 27, Bill 

27 . . . it does exactly the opposite. It raises the flat tax. Now it 

would be interesting, Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting to 

hear what this member from Kelsey-Tisdale would say to his 

people in Archerwill or in Tisdale, and what he has to say to 

them when they ask him how he voted on this particular Bill. 

Next I have here a piece of paper which has on it a picture of 

the minister who was the former Minister of Finance, the 

present Minister of Justice, the member from Kindersley. Now 

you will recall that he was the person that presented the most 

intelligent budget. I wonder which one it was that was the most 

intelligent — the one that missed by 30 million, or the one that 

missed by 50 million, or the one that missed by something like 

800 million? Now it wasn’t the one that missed by 800 million; 

that we can attribute to the present minister. 

 

And in this document — and it’s interesting here because it’s in 

very small print, Mr. Speaker, it’s in such small print that you 

almost need a magnifying glass to pick it up — but under the 

headline that says, “Eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax on 

clothing and utility bills,” it says: 

 

This measure will be the first phase of a new PC 

government’s commitment to the complete elimination of 

sales tax in its first term of office, and its commitment to 

ease the burden of inflation for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when these kinds of statements are made 

and distributed to people around the constituency, and that 

includes towns like Plato, Eston, Eatonia, Brock, and Plenty. . . 

I wonder what the people in Plenty — the schoolteachers who 

have made a very valuable contribution to education in the 

province through some of the innovations — I wonder what 

they say when the minister comes back and says, well I’m 

going to have to renege on that promise. 

 

What’s he going to say about the next one? What are the people 

in Dodsland going to say? Or is he going to be able to go back 

and say, well I didn’t really want to do it, but the Premier is 

making me do it? Is that what’s going to happen? The Premier 

and the new Minister of Finance. I didn’t really want to do it. 

Which one? 

 

And it’s not only those people that he went to, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

the people at Coleville, Major, and Marengo that also were 

subjected to this literature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here a pamphlet, a copy of a pamphlet that 

was distributed in the Maple Creek area to the people in Gull 

Lake, the people in Tompkins, in Piapot, Sceptre, and Leader 

by the member from Maple Creek. And I look through this, and 

there are a series of promises. And as you go down there you 

get one promise which says a 10 per cent across-the-board cut 

in personal income taxes, which relates to again Bill 27 which 

accompanies and is a Bill that is being introduced and debated 

presently in the House, along with this Bill 19, which is 

proposing an increase in sales tax from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as some of these examples that I have given — 

and I could give other examples that I have here, members from 

Melfort and several others — and in each case we find that we 

have a broken promise, a betrayal. And that’s why we have to 

oppose this particular Bill. It’s a broken promise, just like the 

Bill now which was introduced just recently in the House to 

abolish PURC (Public Utilities Review Commission), which 

was a promise to the people of Saskatchewan. It was also a  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2984 

 

broken promise, just like the promise to reduce the gas tax 

which was recently upped to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member is 

starting to wander from the topic, and I would ask him to get 

back on. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will abide by 

your order, and I will try to relate the material a little more 

directly. 

 

I would summarize, Mr. Speaker, by saying that when we look 

at the effect of this Bill — it’s an increase in the education and 

health tax, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, which represents a 40 

per cent increase. This is a betrayal of promises. 

 

It came about, Mr. Speaker, because of the incompetence of the 

government, because this government, when they found that 

they had amassed a $3.4 billion deficit, decided that — and 

found that — they could no longer borrow money at rates which 

were preferred rates, decided to do a little study. And they hired 

a company by the name of Coopers & Lybrand, and Coopers & 

Lybrand told them, well, they had to do something about it. 

And they’ve decided to cut services and to increase taxes — 

exactly the opposite as promised in ’82 and, of course, not even 

mentioned in the election in 1986. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I close with that, and saying that there’s no 

way that my constituents or the members on this side can 

support Bill 19. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s important for me, 

representing the constituency of Saskatoon Centre, to stand and 

speak in support of the amendment that’s been brought forward 

by the members on this side of the House, and to speak against 

a Bill which proposes to increase the taxes, the sales tax, from 5 

per cent to 7 per cent. 

 

The news and the effect of this tax, which is already in force, 

has fallen as a very heavy burden on the constituents in 

Saskatoon Centre who I represent, as well as on all the people 

in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s just one more of a number 

of increases in taxes which people have had to bear at this time 

when their incomes are slipping and the cost of living is going 

up and up. 

 

And it’s important to me, as I said when I was talking about the 

flat tax, the fact that the government members opposite have not 

risen in this House to debate these increases in taxes and to tell 

the people of Saskatchewan why they’re doing this at this time, 

particularly when they have been elected on a promise of 

cutting out the sales tax altogether. 

 

They must justify the increases that they said they wouldn’t 

make. They must stand up in this House and debate this. If they 

don’t, it’s another sign that they don’t respect this legislature 

and that they’re failing to engage in the debate which is part of 

the process of governing in a province. And to me it’s another 

reflection of the incompetence of a government that will bring 

in changes  

that they’re not prepared to defend — not prepared to defend 

these changes. Another example of incompetence. 

 

It’s so interesting to see that the Premier’s own election 

brochure — and many people on this side of the House have 

quoted those brochures already — promised the elimination of 

the 5 per cent sales tax on clothing and utility bills as the first 

phase of a new PC government’s commitment to complete 

elimination of the sales tax in its first term of office, and it’s 

commitment to ease the burden of inflation for Saskatchewan 

citizens. The burden of inflation has not been eased, it’s been 

increased. The cost of living has gone up higher and higher in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The PC government did not eliminate the sales tax; it did not 

keep its promise to the people of Saskatchewan; and it did not 

keep faith with the low and middle income people in this 

province. Instead it now wants to raise the sales tax, raise the 

flat tax, raise the gas tax, raise the taxes on the cities by 

withdrawing provincial funding, and hurt the people of 

Saskatchewan over and over again with this huge burden. 

 

My colleagues have said that this is a Bill of betrayal, and that 

is very much what it is — betrayal when the tax goes up from 5 

per cent to 7 per cent, when they said they were a party that 

would eliminate the sales tax altogether. 

 

There have been many points made in the House in debating 

this education and health tax increase already, and I still think 

it’s important to say them again. Increasing the sales tax hurts 

consumers, and as the critic for Consumer and Commercial 

Affairs, I feel a particular mandate to point that out — the sales 

tax going up, the consumer price index going up, and the 

burden going up. 

 

Incomes are going down, people are being laid off by this 

government, and they can’t afford these tax increases. The 

people on fixed incomes can’t afford these tax increases. The 

people on the small farms and others who are self-employed 

can’t afford these tax increases. Yet they all have to pay the 

sales tax. 

 

It hits everyone, even the people on social assistance, even the 

people with $123 a month for food, clothing, and all their 

personal needs; the people who now have had their 

transportation allowance withdrawn from them, the people who 

have had their laundry allowance withdrawn from them, so they 

don’t even have the money for washing their clothes. These are 

the people that have to pay this sales tax. It’s a higher and 

higher burden on people with low and middle incomes. And it 

is an extremely unfair tax. 

 

The small businesses that I represent in Saskatoon Centre can’t 

afford this added tax either, because the people who they do 

business with are going to have less to spend on the goods and 

services that they offer, when they have to pay more in their 

sales tax, more for their gas, more in the flat tax, more in their 

income, tax, etc., etc. 

 

This Bill to increase the education and health tax is unfair, it’s 

cruel, and it’s uncaring. And this is a government that’s been 

incompetent, that has no credibility, and it has no compassion. 

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2985 

 

An Hon. Member: — A rotten government. 

 

(1600) 

 

Ms. Smart: — Completely rotten government, uncaring about 

the lower-income people particularly. 

 

One section of this Bill, for example, repeals the mobile home 

refund program so that people who buy mobile homes have to 

pay the taxes on them. Now housing problems are very acute 

across this province. Many, many people can’t afford homes, 

and a mobile home is often the one kind of home that people 

can afford who are living on low income. But now they’re 

going to be hurt. Their housing opportunities are going to be 

taxed. It’s always the people on the lower income scales that are 

bearing the burden of the decisions made by this government. 

And I think, as a member who represents many low-income 

people, I really raise my voice in strong protest about increasing 

the sales tax. 

 

I found it interesting too that my colleague, the member for 

Regina North, pointed out that there’s no education and health 

tax on things like investments; that people who already have 

money can buy shares in companies and have many other ways 

of investing their money without having to pay an E&H tax. So 

it goes again to show that it’s only the essentials that get taxed, 

and not the possibilities for investment. 

 

I was interested to read in the Star-Phoenix of September 25, 

the Business Council of National Issues speaking on the federal 

tax saying: 

 

Consumers, not business, should pick up more of the tab 

for the planned cuts in personal income taxes . . . 

 

And this body is described as “a powerful corporate lobby 

group.” They say: 

 

And Finance Minister Michael Wilson must quickly bring 

in a new sales tax or face the possible loss of business 

support for his tax reform package . . . 

 

Another new sales tax at the federal level being proposed by the 

PC federal government in conjunction with the increase by the 

PC government provincially of the sales tax provincially. More 

and more taxes on the people of Saskatchewan. But this council 

says: 

 

Failure to act swiftly may bear heavy consequences, 

among them the disintegration of business support for the 

federal tax initiative in its present form . . . 

 

A council composed of the heads of 150 major Canadian 

corporations — that’s where the pressure’s coming from to 

increase the sales tax; to increase the sales tax at the cost of 

consumers and to protect the interests of people who already 

have money. It’s just another example of the way in which this 

government, the PC government opposite with its lack of 

compassion and its lack of caring for the people of 

Saskatchewan, is prepared to put this tax  

burden on the backs of people who can’t afford it. 

 

Other colleagues on this side of the House have pointed out that 

this increase in the sales tax is not going to education and 

health, as it’s called the E&H tax. Instead those services are 

being cut back. And someone, my colleague from Humboldt, 

the member from Humboldt, has asked the question: why do we 

need this increase in the sales tax? Why indeed? 

 

This PC government can’t read a balance sheet. It doesn’t 

believe in properly audited statements, and it would have us 

believe that we have a huge deficit and have to pay taxes and 

more taxes to pay it off. But no one knows for sure what the 

deficit really is — nobody knows for sure. 

 

The auditor’s having problems with this government; the 

opposition is having problem with the government in finding 

out exactly how the money’s being spent. So we can’t answer 

the question, why we need this increase in the sales tax. 

 

We know though, that the money is going to pay for the salaries 

of people like George Hill and Paul Schoenhals and the other 

party hacks that are being funded by this government. We know 

that the money goes for airplane trips and other fringe benefits 

for the government opposite. We also know that this money 

that’s being collected — sales taxes on the backs of the people 

with low incomes — is going to pay things like exorbitant rents 

for private properties that are owned by people who already 

have a lot of money. For government services, these rents are 

being paid to private properties rather than having the 

government use property that they already own and that’s 

available public space. 

 

Yesterday in Saskatoon Centre I attended a reception hosted by 

the consumers’ association in the new office of the Premier set 

up on 22nd Street, right across the street from the Sturdy Stone 

Building. They’ve moved out of the Sturdy Stone Building and 

set up an office across the street in a privately owned building. 

The excuse is that there’s no store-front space available and 

they want to put the office down where people can reach it. 

There’s already store-front space available in the Sturdy Stone 

Building which is already owned by the government, and that 

space could have been used for that office. 

 

Instead, we increase the sales tax to pay the rent on a building 

that’s owned by somebody already with wealth so that the 

office of the Premier can be there. If the Premier wants to have 

his office where it can be easily reached by the people in 

Saskatoon, I call on the people of Saskatoon to go to that office 

and tell this government exactly what they think about things 

like the increase in the sales tax. 

 

The government wants to be open to the people of Saskatoon. 

Then I urge them to go, let them know what’s happening, let 

them know that this money that they’re taking on the backs of 

all the people in Saskatchewan is not going for staff in the 

health care institutions; it’s not going for better roads; it’s not 

going for the basic social services that we have long enjoyed in 

this province; it’s not going for all the things that we so badly 

need. 

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2986 

 

The money is being raised by increasing the taxes and by giving 

away assets and services that we already own. That’s how 

money is being raised in this province and it’s a real crying 

shame that this is happening. 

 

I think it’s just appalling, for example, to look at what’s 

happened to the Saskoil shares. And I will tie this in with the 

sales tax because the issue is how money is raised in this 

province and how we are losing the resources that we already 

own. I note, for example, that in the latest report, 62.04 per cent 

of the shares of Saskoil are now owned by people in Ontario, 

but only 258 people in Ontario own those shares — 62 per cent. 

There are still over 7,000 people that own shares in 

Saskatchewan. But if 258 own shares in Ontario, of 62 per cent 

of the Saskoil shares now, that suggests to me that it’s not 

individuals that own those shares, but that it’s probably 

Canadian branch plant companies from the United States. 

 

I wouldn’t be at all surprised if our resource, our Saskoil 

resource, has gone out of province, and out of the country — 

control of it. And that was a resource and that was a company 

that was to bring revenue into Saskatchewan to pay for the 

services and to pay for the really fine health and education 

systems that we used to have in this province. Now we don’t 

have them. They’ve been taken away, they’ve been destroyed 

by this incompetent government and we are still facing higher 

and higher taxes to pay for the hand-outs that have been given 

to people that this government favours. 

 

I think that the people opposite should have the courage to 

debate this. I put out some challenging comments to the people 

opposite, to the PC government opposite, and I would like them 

to have the honesty and the responsibility to stand up and tell us 

why they’re doing this, so that the people of Saskatchewan can 

understand your thinking and your ideology. You should be 

proud of it. You ran for election on it. It’s part of this 

democratic process that you represent, a way of thinking and a 

form of logic that requires that this be explained. And this 

House deserves to have that kind of honesty and that kind of 

debate. 

 

It’s very badly needed. But I’m afraid that from a government 

with the lack of credibility that this government has, the lack of 

competence that this government has, the lack of competence to 

read a balance sheet or to understand the impact of added taxes 

on people, and to understand what happens when you sell off 

our resources, and from a government that obviously doesn’t 

care . . . It obviously doesn’t care because it’s made up of 

people who’ve never had to try to live on very low incomes. 

You don’t know what it’s like not to have a home, and not to be 

able to afford one. You don’t know what it’s like to not to be 

able to afford the basic necessities. 

 

You’re quite prepared to support a federal government that 

wants to increase the sales tax. You’re quite prepared to do it 

yourselves. I protest that on behalf of the constituents that I 

represent. I join my colleagues in support of this amendment, 

and I join them in condemnation of this increase in the sales tax. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a 

brief intervention in the debate here today. The remarks I have 

will be in support of the amendment to this very important Bill, 

tax collectors Bill, to raise the education and health tax from 

what has traditionally been 5 per cent in the province for a 

number of years, to an amount of 7 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would say that people never particularly 

like to pay tax. But the majority of the population see a need for 

taxation because the taxation translates into services for them, 

that any particular government might place before them as 

representatives, as governments that represent them in 

establishing some equity in the province, making sure that 

people are provided for, and we have social programs, and that 

they have housing, and they can feed and clothe their families. 

So they can understand taxation. 

 

And taxation is usually brought in when it can provide the least 

pain to the individuals who have to pay the tax or during a time 

where people can be impressed very heavily with why the 

taxation is necessary. And I don’t remember the specific time 

myself, Mr. Speaker, nor likely do you, but I understand that the 

First World War — the war they called the Great War to end all 

wars, and of course we all know there were more wars after that 

— but just before the Great War to end all wars, the 

government of the day in Ottawa decided to bring in a taxation 

Bill to charge personal taxation, to charge income tax. 

 

And at that time it was a very, very temporary measure, they 

described it as, and of course we all know now that the 

government was never able to again remove income tax as a 

burden on people within the country. And of course the income 

taxes continued to escalate, especially in the area of personal 

taxation. 

 

If you go back to the period, Mr. Speaker, in the early 1950s, it 

worked out that corporate taxation paid about half of the 

income tax generated, and personal income tax the other half. 

And we’ve come to a point in time today where the amount of 

tax that’s paid by corporations is down in the teens, about 12 to 

14 per cent, and the balance of the taxation is raised by personal 

income tax. 

 

And it just seems to me that taxation charges over the years, but 

there are times, Mr. Speaker, when it’s more palatable for the 

public to pay tax than in other times. And I use that example of 

income tax coming in prior to the First World War where 

people saw the need for taxation. It was a very dire moment, 

and we wanted to defend our country and wanted to have the 

assets and the tools of war that were required to defend the 

British Commonwealth and all of our friends in different parts 

around the world. 

 

Now we’re in a situation, Mr. Speaker, where the public in 

Saskatchewan don’t understand more increases in taxation 

because to a large extent the current government has got 

themselves into a difficulty, very difficult situation of having a 

very heavy burden of debt hanging over their heads and a 

requirement to gradually at least pay that off. And I’ve never 

seen any plan to actually pay it off. 

 

But people aren’t seeing the services that they receive being 

comparable to the tax that they’re being asked to  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2987 

 

pay. And I hear that on a more recurring basis each time I’m 

back in The Battlefords or in different places in the province. 

People don’t want to pay any more taxation, whether it’s 

personal income tax, or whether it’s flat tax, or whether it’s a 

sales tax or a gas tax. People feel as if they’re taxed enough. 

And they don’t see any dramatic situation that affects them, 

such as a war, for a need for taxation. And they don’t see an 

increase in benefits that they’re getting back by paying the 

taxation load. 

 

(1615) 

 

And I would want to talk, just briefly, for an example of using 

road contractors within the province of Saskatchewan. I know 

many of my colleagues on this side of the House have talked 

about how taxation has affected people on the lower end of the 

economic scale. But it also affects a number of people that have 

traditionally been on what we might call the middle or higher 

end of the taxation scale as well, and I think road contractors 

are a very good example. The road contractors’ association have 

met recently in Saskatchewan, talking about the vast 

underfunding of highways in the province of Saskatchewan, in 

fact right across Canada, and how there’s going to have to be 

several millions of dollars put into our road system before they 

deteriorate to such an extent that they’re not able to repair those 

roads, that they in fact will likely have to rebuild them. 

 

So road contractors are having a very difficult time right now 

because there isn’t enough work to go around, that’s usually 

funded by the government, for them to keep busy and generate 

the levels of revenue that they’ve been traditionally used to. 

 

And then the government comes along and introduces a taxation 

Bill which increases E&H tax, the sales tax, the education and 

health tax, by 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. It goes from 4 per cent 

to 7 per cent- a 40 per cent increase. Now that might not be a lot 

if you’re going to buy yourself a tooth-brush, or if you’re going 

to go out and buy yourself a barbecue for your backyard. But 

when you’re looking at a piece of road machinery that could 

cost you $200,000, the taxation bill on that now, Mr. Speaker, is 

$14,000 that that road contractor has to pay on a piece of road 

equipment that would cost $200,000. And $200,000 for a piece 

of equipment is not an unduly high amount, Mr. Speaker. That 

happens with a fair degree of regularity when contractors are in 

position to buy a piece of machinery. 

 

And not only does it cost them $14,000 now for that piece of 

road equipment that would cost $200,000, that’s an increase, 

Mr. Speaker, from the 5 per cent, from $10,000 to $14,000 — 

an increase for that particular contractor, Mr. Speaker, of 

$4,000 just by a simple stroke of the pen of the government 

opposite in increasing that type of tax. And I think that that runs 

true for many small-business people in the province that rely on 

purchasing capital equipment to keep their operation going. 

And they’re having a hard time to justify why they would want 

to support this government. 

 

And I can’t understand why the government wishes to make 

these heavy burdens of taxation on Saskatchewan people right 

now when they can ill afford to pay those  

levels of increased taxation. And the government, Mr. Speaker, 

I would warn them through you, are becoming very, very 

unpopular out there because of the sad state of the economy and 

the increase of taxes like this particular tax. 

 

The road contractors as well, Mr. Speaker, and this ties in — I 

hope you give me some small degree of latitude. But the 

gasoline tax that came back on, many of the bids that went in on 

pieces of road that were tendered through the Department of 

Highways were bid on the basis of a particular price on fuel. 

And of course we know that there’s now been a 7 cent a litre 

increase. The tax that had been removed . . . Were you referring 

to me, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Just carry on. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — And that’s just one sector of our economy. 

The road contractors have been very, very heavily hit. It can 

mean tens of thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker, for a road 

contractor when you look at the price of fuel jumping 7 centre 

per litre. And then when you look at the cost of their equipment 

going up — for example, I used an extra $4,000 on one piece of 

equipment — I think that there must be some message coming 

through to the government that people are not any longer in a 

position to pay increased taxation. And so I suppose I don’t 

want to be just critical, Mr. Speaker, I think that there has to be 

some alternative suggested to the government that they could 

follow to pay off the very heavy debt that we have. And I think 

it is more important than many people realize is that that debt 

be paid off so we don’t burden future generations with a debt 

that was created in a very short period, a relatively short period 

of time by the government opposite. 

 

And my suggestion is, Mr. Speaker, that we have to look at the 

resources in the province of Saskatchewan. If people are 

supersaturated, so to speak, with the taxation burden that federal 

and provincial and municipal government place upon them, 

then where else do you turn. And I suggest, with all due respect 

to you Mr. Speaker, and through you to the government, that we 

have to look at our resource sector for paying a larger share of 

the dollars that are needed to maintain services and pay off the 

debt in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think unless the government does take that notice and 

look at that very carefully that, Mr. Speaker, there aren’t going 

to be many of those members on the government side of the 

House that are returned after the next election. And I know that 

that’s a few years down the road, but people have it ingrained 

very deeply in their minds as to what the taxation burden is. 

And members opposite can stand up and say how good the 

taxation system, how low the taxation system is in 

Saskatchewan, but you can’t tell people that and make it stick 

because they know what they’re being forced to pay in taxes. 

Whether it’s an individual, whether it’s someone who’s on a 

fixed income or a small-business person or a road contractor, 

they know that the taxation burden in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is very heavy. They understand the 

transfer of taxation from provincial governments to municipal 

governments. 

 

What affects individuals in the province of  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2988 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is the money in their pocket. And 

there isn’t much money in their pocket right now to pay these 

taxes, and I think the government should sit up and take notice, 

otherwise there won’t be many of those members opposite that 

are returned after the next election. 

 

I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, that the 

amendment we’re putting for here today is: 

 

that all the words after the word “That” be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

Bill No. 19 not now be read a second time, because: (a) 

The 40 per cent increase in the provincial sales tax is a 

betrayal of the Progressive Conservative promise to 

eliminate the provincial sales tax in their first term of 

office; (b) the 40 per cent increase in the provincial sales 

tax makes Saskatchewan people among the highest taxed 

in Canada; and (c) the 40 per cent increase in the 

provincial sales tax is a regressive and unfair tax on 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

And I thank you for your indulgence here this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I, too, 

would like to enter into this debate and just talk about the 

promise given by this government to the people of this 

province. 

 

They promised to reduce sales tax; to reduce the income tax — 

income tax by 10 per cent, they said. What they gave us is a flat 

tax. They added to the cost of living — the highest in Canada 

— they added to the cost of living in this province. With the 

increase in the E&H tax to 7 per cent, as it has been mentioned, 

a 40 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker — 40 per cent. Can you 

imagine if anything else increased by 40 per cent. How great it 

would be for people to increase their wages by 40 per cent. But 

in one slash of the pen they increase the taxes by 40 per cent, 

taking away spending power from the people of this province, 

drying up the economy and putting it into the hands of Tory 

hacks. And where is the promise now? 

 

I have here a commitment, a little brochure that was put out, 

and it says “commitment.” Supposedly, if y you were reading it 

you would think it was a commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax on clothing and utility 

bills. 

 

A picture of the Premier of this province right underneath 

“commitment.” 

 

This measure will be the first phase (and I’m quoting) of a 

new PC government’s commitment to complete 

elimination of the sales tax in the first term of office, and 

its commitment to ease the burden of inflation for 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I promise, I commit, said the Tories, and what did they  

do? They broke that promise to the people of this province, 

leaving the people of the province saying: why? Can I not trust 

a government that says in no uncertain terms that they are going 

to reduce my taxes, and as soon as I turn my back, they’re 

carving more taxes out of me? 

 

What type of impression are we leaving on the people of this 

province, not only on the voting people, on the young people 

who have to sit and listen to their parents talking about why 

governments can’t be trusted. Governments in general can’t be 

trusted because they reverse their promises. 

 

And the people out there, Mr. Speaker, the people that are 

talking to me when I go out to the coffee shops are saying they 

lied to us. And I will not . . . I just say, because that’s what the 

people are saying. They misled the people of this province. 

They led them down the garden path, and as soon as the people 

gave them their confidence, they knocked the feet right out 

from under them. What a betrayal, Mr. Speaker, to the people of 

the province. 

 

And what, I ask, what will the 40 per cent increase in this E&H 

tax be used for? I have a nice little old lady in my constituency, 

a senior, who said to me, they promised to give me a free phone 

— promised to give me a free phone. And she says, I didn’t get 

my free phone, but what I got was increase in taxes. 

 

And she says why — why — do they need to increase my taxes 

when they said they were going to give me free telephones? She 

said, who is minding the store? Didn’t they know that there was 

going to be a need for an increase in taxes before the election? 

Didn’t they know they weren’t going to give me a free phone? 

She said, who is in control? 

 

How many members, Mr. Speaker, opposite, I ask, knew the 

state of affairs? Or did they go around blindly on the orders of a 

few power people in cabinet, in powerful positions in the Tory 

caucus, saying, you do this and you do that? The Premier says it 

on his brochure, so it must be gospel. Did the people in the back 

benches of that . . . members opposite over there, did they not 

realize what was going to happen? Did they have no input? Or 

were they the puppet on the string of the Premier, saying, listen 

to me, boy; I’ll get your elected. Where is the commitment to 

your people in your constituencies? Where is your gall to stand 

up and defend their rights? And that’s what you’re elected for. 

 

Instead, what we have is mute silence, not saying anything to 

defend the move, and I know why. I wouldn’t, either, if I told 

the people, my people, that I was going to reduce their taxes, 

their sales tax to zero, and I turned around and increase it. I 

certainly would be hiding behind my desk or lurking in the 

hallway somewhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — We have to know where this money is going 

to be spent, and I ask some questions: will it be spent in 

agriculture? Will it be spent for a soil test . . . money to soil test 

labs or money to feed test labs? I mean, 40 per cent increase, 

two cents, that’s a lot of money going to be coming in, but those 

things are gone, so  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2989 

 

they’re not going to use it for that. 

 

Will it be used to fund the farm purchase program — great Tory 

promise? Will that money from taxes be used to fund that? 

What farm purchase program? It’s gone. Will it be used to help 

those farmers that have Crown leases and can’t meet their 

commitments? Will that increase in the E&H tax be used to 

help them stay on the land a little longer so if we get over this 

crisis that we’re in they’ll still be there? They’re foreclosing on 

them, so it won’t be used for that. 

 

Will it be used, Mr. Speaker, will it be used to help the farmers 

in rural Saskatchewan by establishing crisis centres where many 

farm families now are in crisis because of the severe economic 

conditions? Will it be used to put into place buildings and 

people to counsel, to help them over this? No, it won’t, because 

they just cut the Yorkton crisis centre; instead of increasing 

they’re cutting that too. 

 

(1630) 

 

So I wonder, I wonder where all this money is going to be used. 

Will it be used to maintain the dental program in schools so 

families can have good access to easy dental care instead of 

pulling their families out of school and driving to the dentists, 

incurring more costs besides the two cent increase, and the 40 

per cent increase on their E&H tax? There’s an added tax. 

Instead of using this 40 per cent increase to fund the dental 

program, they cut it. So we have people paying the 40 per cent 

increase; we have people paying to take their kids to a dentist. 

So you can add that on to your E&H tax too as a hidden tax. 

 

Or will it be used to carry on the prescription drug program to 

the seniors, especially, of this province, who need their drugs 

desperately, and many poor people who can’t afford them? Will 

this 40 per cent increase be used for that? No way. Cut her 

back. 

 

This may be a little thing, but will it be used to give grants to 

agriculture and horticulture societies — and I know members 

opposite think that maybe is a bit of a hoot — a cultural activity 

in small towns every year that the majority of the people go to 

and attend and enjoy themselves. Will it be used to maintain 

that or increase that? No way. They’re cutting them back. So 

here again, another hidden tax, because that money’s got to 

come from somewhere. And you know where it’s going to 

come from — out of the people’s pockets. So you can add that 

on to your 40 per cent increase. 

 

Will this be used for grants to . . . urban capital grants? Gone. It 

won’t be used for that. Add some more on because the money’s 

got to come from somewhere. Will it be used for school grants 

for teachers? It won’t be used for that either. It won’t be used 

for that, so what are they going to use it for? 

 

I would ask members, instead of speaking from their seats, if 

they want to get up and defend this, defend it on your feet, 

because it’s the people in your constituencies who you have to 

answer to, not me. And they know that they’ve been betrayed; 

they know that you’ve led them down the garden path. And I 

guarantee you, it won’t  

happen again. 

 

All these programs, Mr. Speaker, that have been cut in this 

province, and add that to the 40 per cent increase in the E&H 

tax and you have one lot more than 40 per cent, because that 

money has to come out of the people of the province . . . out of 

the pockets of the people of this province, and that’s the only 

place it’s going to come from. It’s not being used for health to 

decrease the waiting lists. It’s not being used to keep the 

hearing aid plan or help . . . Mental health, cut 100 positions. 

That money is not going to patient care fund; it no longer exists. 

 

Our health capital fund no longer exists, so what do you need 

the money for? Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, what the 

government needs the money for. This government needs the 

money for patronage like George Hill, Paul Rousseau, Gordon 

Dirks, Currie, Parker, Embury, Schoenhals, and the list goes on 

and on. Add that to Bob Andrew’s little flits around the country 

on government expense. That’s where the money is going, the 

E&H tax is going to, and that’s why it’s being imposed upon 

the people of this province. 

 

It is going to be used, Mr. Speaker, to line the pockets of Tory 

friends — people like Peter Pocklington. We need money for 

Peter Pocklington. We need money for Weyerhaeuser, Manalta 

Coal. We need money for the oil companies. 

 

Picking pockets of Saskatchewan people and giving it to people 

who least need it, this is the legacy that’s being left by this 

government. The people are being trodden down by high taxes 

and uncaring government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, again I would ask — and this is 

the crux of the whole thing, because what we’re talking about 

here is the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan in 

government. 

 

When you promote a promise or a commitment as the Premier 

of this province did, when you spread that across this province 

saying, elect us, this is what we will do, you are creating an 

atmosphere, you’re creating an environment of mistrust. And I 

say to the back-benchers over there, I would like you to stand 

up, break your chains from the power of the caucus and the 

Premier; break the chains from the incompetent management 

that has led to your . . . this is leading to your demise in your 

constituencies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Stand on your feet and tell the people why you 

need to have a 40 per cent increase in the sales tax. Stand up 

and tell them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would just like to say, this tax Bill for 

all intents and purposes, does about three things. First of all it 

lays the groundwork for a mistrust in government, and that is 

the lowest form of hypocrisy that I’ve ever seen. Secondly, it 

takes money out of the pockets of families in this province who 

cannot afford more taxes — they have children to feed; they 

have businesses to  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2990 

 

run. And I guess the third thing it does, Mr. Speaker, it tells me 

that this government of Tories simply cannot be trusted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 

notice that I delayed somewhat in getting up during this debate 

because during the last speaker, my colleague from . . . Oh, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m sorry, this is my wallet. I’m afraid the Minister of 

Finance will come in and we’re talking the taxation Bill. I’d 

better lock it up. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan do exactly the same thing as I did here. Lock up 

your wallets because the tax man is around in the name of the 

member from Lumsden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are discussing today is Bill 19, an Act to 

amend the health and education Act. And before I begin, Mr. 

Speaker, so that you don’t rule me out of order, I want to 

convince you and convince the House that one of the main 

reasons that we have Bill 19 before us and many of the other 

taxation Bills, and why the government opposite had to increase 

taxes in almost every sphere of our lives, every sphere of our 

lives, is twofold: one, that we have an incompetent government 

opposite; and secondly, Mr. Speaker, because their counterparts 

in Ottawa, the Mulroney government, refuses to collect taxes of 

about $30 billion that have been outstanding for a number of 

years. 

 

Now so that you don’t rule me out of order, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to say to you that if the government opposite, if the Premier and 

the Finance minister would convince the Hon. Michael Wilson 

and Mulroney to collect those taxes, Saskatchewan would 

benefit to the tune of about half a billion dollars. A half a billion 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, would wipe out — if this minister is 

accurate this year with his deficit — would wipe out the deficit 

for this year. 

 

That why, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk today in this discussion, 

not just the incompetence and the mismanagement of this 

government, and the wrong priorities that this government has 

put on its taxation policies, but also in their lack of competence 

in dealing with the federal government. As I indicated, there are 

companies now who are delaying the paying of their taxes that 

are duly owed by them to the federal government — and 

consequently we would reap the benefits of that in 

Saskatchewan — who are delaying it because they are hoping 

for tax reform. 

 

And if you have tax reform, the federal minister has already 

indicated that he would reduce the rate of corporate taxes in this 

country. If that is true, then the company, the corporate citizens 

of this country will benefit to a huge extent. Some indicate that 

they will benefit at least to the tune of $6 billion to $7 billion of 

taxes that they would otherwise have to pay. I will address that, 

Mr. Speaker, a little bit later in my speech. Now the reason I 

say I indicated that, because I wanted to tie the two together so I 

would not be ruled out of order. 

I want to go back, Mr. Speaker, and say as many of my 

colleagues have, this Bill is about broken promises. This Bill is 

about betrayal. This Bill is about mismanagement. This Bill is 

simply about incompetence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — This Bill is about incompetence. In 1982, Mr. 

Speaker, when the people of this province decided that they 

wanted a change in government, they left this government with 

$140 million in the kitty. What did they do with that . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Wascana says, 

rubbish. Is he saying that the former minister of Finance, the 

member from Kindersley, and the member now who’s the 

Finance minister, lied when they signed the annual statement? 

Is he saying that? Is he saying that they were deceitful? Is he 

saying that they were deceitful? Because they signed the annual 

financial statement, Mr. Speaker, which is sitting in my office, 

and had I known that the member from Wascana was going to 

bring it up, I’d have brought it along, where they signed the 

statement saying that there was $139 million surplus in the kitty 

in 1982 when they took office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — It wouldn’t surprise me, Mr. Speaker, that they 

were somewhat deceitful, because how can a Finance minister 

be out $800 million and not be deceitful to the people of this 

province. I say that that was done intentionally to get 

themselves re-elected . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I notice that the Minister of Education is back again 

babbling from his mouth with very little sense coming out of it, 

and I would ask him, if he’s so interested in speaking, he should 

defend his colleagues and his Finance minister and speak in this 

debate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that . . . I said it was 

incompetence. I say it’s incompetence because a week before 

the budget came down, a week before the budget came down, in 

speaking to a group in Saskatoon, the Premier, when asked 

about what the deficit would be, indicated that the deficit for 

this year would be about $1 billion — a week before the budget 

was presented in this House. 

 

Now if you have a competent Premier who runs the Executive 

Council, surely, Mr. Speaker, he would have known that the 

following week the Minister of Finance — his Minister of 

Finance — would present a budget, not with a deficit of $1 

billion, but with a deficit of $540 million. 

 

Who, Mr. Speaker, is deceitful? Is the Minister of Finance 

deceitful? Is the Premier deceitful? And I say, Mr. Speaker, I 

can only conclude that both are. They’re both incompetent; 

they’re both deceitful. 

 

And should we have expected something different? Of course 

not. Look at the Minister of Finance preceding him, and his 

calculation of the deficit. He was way out, as my colleagues 

have indicated. This minister hasn’t been close to any of his 

calculations. What can we expect? What can we expect, Mr. 

Speaker, from an incompetent  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2991 

 

government, a government that mismanages, a government that 

hasn’t got the interests of the ordinary folks in mind but, as my 

colleagues have indicated, only their friends? They want 

patronage, and that’s it. 

 

(1645) 

 

Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I see the member from 

Moosomin indicates I should put my wallet back in. I want to 

tell him, it’s locked up in here while he’s in this House, because 

he sits on the Executive Council and, Mr. Speaker, he was one 

of them that increased my taxes and the taxes of the people of 

this province by $265 million. That’s why my wallet is locked 

up in here. And I say to the people of this province, lock up 

your wallets while they are in government, because you won’t 

have anything left by the time they get through with you. That’s 

the kind of racket we have from this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that there’s incompetence because how 

otherwise can you expect, how otherwise can you expect a 

headline like this: “Devine, Lane split on impact of tax reform” 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The hon. member knows that 

the use of members names is not permitted. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, every member in this House 

quotes from type . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order! Order, please. Yesterday in this 

House, I ruled that the use of members’ names even if they are 

in quotations will not be permitted, and I don’t expect any 

further discussion. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago you allowed it in 

this House in question period. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I want no further comments 

from the hon. member as regarding this ruling. And I’ve clearly 

stated the ruling. I ask the member to get on with his speech and 

make no more inferences to any type of a challenge to the 

ruling. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that when 

governments change, rules change. They change for taxation, 

they change . . . When government change, rules change. And 

we see them changing as far as taxation purposes are concerned. 

And those aren’t the only rules that are changed. 

 

I was absent from this House for four or five years and I know 

that rules have changed, and they’ve changed certainly as far as 

this government is concerned when it comes to taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, there is mismanagement by this 

government. There certainly is incompetence. I indicated 

earlier, a week before the budget came in, the Premier when 

asked what the deficit would be, indicated it would be about a 

billion dollars. He was only out by about $500 million — the 

Premier of this province, a week before the election . . . before 

the budget came down. Then a little bit later when speaking to 

the press again about tax reform, the Premier says, no — tax 

reform, Wilson’s tax reform will have no impact, will  

have no impact. But his Minister of Finance says, oh, it is going 

to have a tremendous impact, and we may have to come in with 

a tax proposal next fall. 

 

What I’m saying, the point I’m trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is 

that if you have incompetence, then you should expect 

mismanagement. And that’s what we’ve seen over the last five 

or six years. It proves the point that I want to make. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated a little earlier about the 

federal government not collecting the taxes that are owed. And 

we have here again a headline in The Globe and Mail, 

“Deferred tax corporate windfall”. That’s the point that we want 

to make on this side, Mr. Speaker, is that the government 

opposite and their colleagues in Ottawa simply have the wrong 

priorities. If I as an individual owe the federal government 

$100, well I’ll tell you it won’t take them long to collect it. Why 

should that rule not apply equally to their corporate friends? 

 

As this article indicates, over $30 billion owed by several 

corporations to the federal government, and they do nothing 

about collecting those taxes. And I want to read into the records 

just what the impact of the tax reform is going to have. It says 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well I’ll read them to you: 

 

All will find (all corporations will find) that the 

government does not really want more than 1 billion of the 

total 5.5 billion this trio — corporation giants — has 

already set aside to pay future taxes. 

 

And the member asks me, which are they? Well, Canadian 

Pacific Ltd., Bell Canada (Enterprises) Ltd., and Imperial Oil 

Ltd. Those three, Mr. Speaker, owe the federal government — 

at least they think they owe and have set it aside — over $5 

billion. And yet if tax reform comes in, all that the federal 

government expects them to pay is $1 billion. Why, Mr. 

Speaker? Where is the fairness? Those taxes are owed by the 

corporations. Surely if you and I owe money, they’ll collect it. 

Why should those three giant corporations, which have made 

huge profits, which could well afford to pay them, why should 

they be forgiven $4.5 billion so that then this government — 

who would get a portion of that back from the federal 

government — so that this government has to increase the 

education and sales tax, health and education tax here in this 

province. That, Mr. Speaker, is unfair. 

 

As I indicated earlier, if the whole $30 billion of deferred taxes 

was collected, and I challenge the members opposite, your share 

would be about $550 million. It would erase all of your deficit 

for this year. You could do away with all the tax increases that 

you had this year — all of them. You wouldn’t have to increase 

any of your taxes. That’s where the unfairness comes in, that’s 

where your incompetence comes in, and that’s where your 

mismanagement comes in. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The unfairness comes in the  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2992 

 

formula you guys worked out. That’s what it is. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — That is not our formula. That is a formula that is 

stated by the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Just so that we’ll put it in perspective, and as I 

indicated before, Mr. Speaker, this Bill and all these taxation 

Bills are related to what has or has not happened at the federal 

level. And if we had a competent government, if we had a 

government that saw to it that the federal government, of which 

they are of the same political persuasion, were to carry out their 

duty, we wouldn’t be debating today a health and education tax 

increase of 40 per cent. At least we shouldn’t be. 

 

Well the member said, he’s wrong, and maybe I will grant him 

that, because the way this government has managed money they 

probably would have bungled the whole thing of the $550 

million would be down the drain too. And maybe he’s right, and 

I’ll grant him that. But an ordinary competent government 

would have known what to do with that money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many indications that we have had one 

of the highest tax increases by this government since they 

formed the government in 1982. But this year alone, this year 

alone it says . . . I have an article here in the Star-Phoenix, June 

18. It says: “Tax man takes $265 million bite”. That’s what the 

Finance minister took from the pockets of the people of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, that is unfair. It is almost criminal when 

you look at how much the people in this province have suffered 

due to the mismanagement and the wrong priorities established 

by the people opposite. 

 

There are thousands of people in this province who don’t have 

jobs. There are thousands of people who have suffered under 

the policies put forward by the Minister of Social Services. 

There are thousands of people, Mr. Minister, who have left this 

province because there was no future for them. 

 

What did we have in 1982? And I well remember in 1982: bring 

our children home. Let’s bring them back. Let’s give them the 

alternative. We’re open for business; there’s a bright future. 

Yes, there is a bright future for those youngsters, because now 

they are somewhere else. They are no longer in this province. 

And all due, Mr. Speaker, to broken promises, incompetence, 

and mismanagement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance often wants to brag in this 

House and outside the House that we are the second-lowest 

taxed people in this province. Simply not borne out. I don’t 

know where he gets that from. Or is it a further proof of the 

deceitfulness of what’s going on, and that they don’t care what 

they say to the people, that as long as they get re-elected, that’s 

the ultimate objective? 

 

And if it is, Mr. Speaker, it is no wonder that so many people 

out there, as my colleague for Humboldt had indicated, who are 

so cynical about government and politicians. Can we blame 

them out there, of what’s  

happened in this country since 1982, when this government . . . 

these people formed the government, and re-elected in 1986, 

and the dozens of broken promises? And to top it all off, when 

the Mulroney government was elected in 1984 — all the broken 

promises we’ve seen from that government. Can we really 

blame the people out there for being cynical of us, of politicians 

and government? I say, no, we can’t. And there is a lot of 

cynicism out there. It’s time that we start being truthful with our 

taxpayers and our residents out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to show now that the Minister of Finance 

simply either has his facts totally mixed up, or he deliberately 

does not give the facts to the people. Now it says here that the 

Fraser Institute — and certainly the Fraser Institute is not a 

friend of the opposition; they are friends of the members 

opposite, and we know how they send people to their 

conferences to gather what the next thing will be suggested by 

the Fraser people. The Fraser Institute indicated that . . . or it 

says: a June 1987 Fraser Institute report shows Saskatchewan 

people are more heavily taxed . . . 

 

And I want the member from Swift Current to listen to this. It 

says, a June 1987 Fraser Institute report shows Saskatchewan 

people are more heavily taxed than those in Newfoundland, 

Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick, and even NDP-run 

Manitoba. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how can the Minister of Finance claim that 

we are the second-lowest taxed people in this province? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Deceit. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Deceit — that’s what it is. It’s nothing else. And 

I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that even the Minister of Finance is 

that incompetent that he can be out by $800 million on one 

budget. I don’t believe that. Surely, Mr. Speaker, there must be 

some — as some of my colleagues have said — some cooking 

of the books. And I just don’t believe that the members on 

treasury board and members on the Executive Council are that 

incompetent that they couldn’t have judged it closer than $800 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, getting back to taxation. I want to read an article 

here that was put forward, Mr. Speaker, by the final report of 

the Local Government Finance Commission. And this was a 

commission, Mr. Speaker, as you probably are well aware, that 

was established by the government opposite, and it is a 

submittal to the . . . Well, okay, the Minister of Finance — I can 

read his name again, obviously which I find really, well, 

incredible. I don’t know. But I’ve been in this . . . Well, okay, 

better not get into that. Twelve years experience means nothing; 

it’s all down the drain, I guess. 

 

The personal income tax, the member from . . . Oh, she’s back. 

Well, welcome back. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 

please. I think the debate is getting a bit out of hand, and 

without mentioning any names, let’s get back to the debate as it 

should be. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, if you bring the members to  

  



 

September 30, 1987 

2993 

 

order I will speak, but if I’m interrupted I think I have the 

opportunity to respond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just read from this article. It said if you 

add on the flat tax, the effective rate of income tax for this 

province is 55.7 per cent. But now if you add on the 40 per cent 

— this was before the 40 per cent increase in the education and 

health tax — that 55.7 per cent would be much higher. This, 

Mr. Speaker, brought forward by the Local Government 

Finance Commission set up by the government opposite. If they 

don’t believe the other figures, surely they would believe their 

own commission. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No we don’t. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Well they don’t even believe that one. 

 

But it says before the 40 per cent increase in education and 

health tax, it said this would suggest the 55.7 per cent in federal 

basic tax. This would suggest that income is currently being 

taxed substantially, more heavily in Quebec, British Columbia, 

Alberta, and Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more to say, and I wish now to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


