













































August 17, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 17, 1987 

  

 

1847 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, for the sake of saving this House 

some time, I just simply want to say on the Pine Grove question 

that a concern has been expressed to us that there's no infirmary 

there, particularly with respect to women who are suffering from 

chemical withdrawal. And you have made reference to a half-time 

nurse there, but in fact in some cases I have been advised that 

these women, for example, need their pulse taken on a 15-minute 

basis, 24 hours around the clock. And I just want the minister to 

satisfy himself that these women are being properly treated and 

properly looked after. 

 

And I also want to make another statement with respect to the 

private family visiting area. The concern has been expressed to us 

that the women need a private area within the institute itself, and I 

would like the minister to give that some consideration. 

 

I also want to talk now a bit about family violence, and the 

Department of Justice's part, and the government's 

interdepartmental committee on family violence, a committee that 

was set up in 1984. 

 

In its 1984 budget speech the government announced it would 

commit $800,000 to new programs against family violence. 

Previous to the budget speech, in the fall of '83, the then Justice 

minister took several measures against spouse abuse. They were as 

follows. 

 

Public prosecutors were instructed not to withdraw wife battering 

charges except in exceptional cases. Prosecutors were requested to 

press for more severe sentencing. And police agencies were asked 

to lay charges against batterers if the victim was reluctant. 

 

These actions and other initiatives which are outlined in 

Saskatchewan's final report of the federal-provincial territorial 

working group on wife battering, were introduced because the 

government recognized the need to take a leadership role in 

addressing the problem. 

 

And that's a quote from the then minister responsible for the 

women's secretariat, Mr. Minister, " . . . and that to do nothing, the 

government is not prepared to live with that socially or morally," 

was the statement made by the member of your government. 

 

But in spite of your government's strong commitment to address 

family violence, provincial shelters across the province are in a 

state of severe crisis. There have been a number of . . . From April, 

’85 to March, ’87, provincial transition houses provided shelter for 

some 4,692 women and children. And these houses also turned 

away, Mr. Minister, 2,627 women and children because of lack of 

space. That means that nearly 50 per cent of all women  

and children seeking shelter are being turned away. 

 

It's important to note, Mr. Minister, also when we're talking about 

women who are fleeing violence, that women are beaten on the 

average 28 times before they leave the home and look for help in 

some other area. And there's no question . . . One cannot deny that 

women who are fleeing from situations . . . You know, they are 

fleeing from situations which can only be described as 

life-threatening. 

 

And some women, Mr. Minister, are put in low-cost hotels. The 

problem, of course, with low-cost hotels is the fact that their 

husbands still will have accessibility to them and the violence 

could continue, notwithstanding that they may be kept in a 

low-cost hotel. It's better than being at home, mind you, but it's 

still not the ideal situation. But in spite of all these statistics, your 

government has made substantial cuts to transition homes, as 

much as 7 per cent in Saskatoon, 11.5 per cent in North Battleford, 

and 14.5 per cent in Regina. 

 

I also wish to point out, Mr. Minister, that women and children 

leaving abusive relationships are forced to rely on legal services to 

provide them with protection and safety in situations which are 

dangerous and life threatening. And this takes us to the question of 

legal aid, which I know is under the auspices of the Minister of 

Human Resources, but nevertheless it has been cut back by your 

government. 

 

These women who are already in dire financial straits because of 

the fact that they have to relocate, buy new furniture, perhaps find 

another house, pay for transportation and all the other expenses 

that pertain to fleeing from a violent situation, they will also now 

have to pay for legal aid if they wish to acquire legal services to 

bring a restraining order against their husband, or to insist on 

prosecution. 

 

Now in 1984, Mr. Minister, as I indicated before, your 

government established an interdepartmental committee to deal 

with family violence. And the Department of Justice was involved 

with that committee, and yet despite the government's 

commitment to take the leadership role in this area, nearly 50 per 

cent of all women and children who are fleeing from 

life-threatening situations are being turned away from shelters 

because of a lack of space. Now I would like the minister to tell 

the House how placing so many women and children at risk shows 

the government's leadership role in addressing the question of 

family violence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member raises a number of 

questions with regard to battered women. And I hope that you can 

appreciate that while in 1984 this particular study was undertaken, 

the main focus of that study is directed by my colleague the 

Minister of Social Services., and the Minister of Health. The 

Justice component was more into the area of prosecutions, and 

how the prosecutions would work, that type of thing that are 

Justice specific. 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1848 

 

I'm not trying to beg off your question. I don't think it would be 

fair of me to attempt to explain the particular decisions taken on 

transition house funding — or some of them were increases, as I 

understand — that was not done by the Department of Justice and 

therefore neither me nor the officials are really involved in that 

type of thing. So I think the hon. member would be better to save 

those questions for the Minister of Social Services when the 

estimate comes up. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I understand that the Department of 

Justice had discussions with the RCMP and the Saskatchewan 

Police College on training police on the question of spousal and 

child abuse. Now what proposals were made by the Department of 

Justice respecting training for policemen, with respect to the 

problem of wife beating? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that the nature of that training 

was where people from the Department of Justice would . . . met 

with the various police forces as they were going through the 

training process that would be provided for them by the police 

force, in particular. And the Department of Justice people would 

be there attending, advise from their view as to maybe the cycles 

involved in wife beating — what you might look for, that type of 

thing; the type of individual; how you would respond to it; those 

types of things. 

 

They then participated, initially, in how they would explain to 

them how they would deal with it, how they would bring it then 

forward to court — those types of questions. I could perhaps get a 

report and send it to you from the various people in Justice that 

were working on that particular area, but certainly they were 

involved and had worked with the police for some time on it. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I will take your offer to provide us 

with the information. I should point out that we asked for this 

information earlier in correspondence with your department, and 

we were told to ask you in estimates instead. But if your 

department is now prepared to give us the information by 

correspondence, that would be adequate. 

 

May I just itemize the questions that I would like responded to. 

What proposals regarding training were made by the Department 

of Justice to the police? Is this training mandatory or voluntary? 

What is the number and percentage of police in the force that have 

received the training? Is the training mandatory for new recruits? 

And what is the nature of the training — the man-hours? Are there 

lectures, films, presentations by women's groups? And what sort 

of input is there in the training programs by women's 

organizations that are interested in the particular problem of wife 

beating? And has there been an evaluation of the training 

program? And if your department can provide me with that 

information, Mr. Minister, say within the next two or three weeks, 

that would be very helpful to us. 

 

I understand there has also been some training on wife battering 

for professionals and paraprofessionals. And I'm wondering, Mr. 

Minister, what professional groups have undergone the training in 

this program, and how many professionals and paraprofessionals 

have completed  

training in this program. And I'm wondering if you can give me 

some information on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that that particular program 

was conducted by the Department of Education, that it was 

originally done through the community colleges. I'm also advised 

that there were a number of prosecutors, defence counsel, some of 

the correction workers, etc., involved in taking the course. We are 

not aware or familiar with the number of people that have taken it 

and how many completed the course. We could perhaps attempt to 

find those statistics for you from the Department of Education. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will then itemize 

some other questions in the area that I have and if you could also 

put that in your correspondence to me, I would certainly 

appreciate that. 

 

They are as follows. What is the percentage of professionals and 

paraprofessionals, of those who might have to deal with wife 

battering, that have undergone training? How many training 

programs have been offered throughout the province, where have 

they been offered, and what was the duration of the training? Who 

provides funding to the community colleges so the training 

program may be offered? And what is the name of the consulting 

firm which developed the training program, and what are the 

firm's qualifications? Were evaluations made of the training 

program, and if so, could you please make these available to us? 

 

Now I understand there was a pilot project at the Regina 

prosecutions unit to assign greater priority to wife abuse cases, and 

I'm wondering what the results of the pilot project were. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that one of the results of this is 

they were able to attain earlier court dates, and they put a priority 

on it the same as someone that would be in custody. And therefore 

by having an earlier court date perhaps their success rate would be 

better. Perhaps I can phrase this in a diplomatic way. Some of the 

success was perhaps not . . . or the lack of success was not always 

attributable to the prosecutors. 

 

(1915) 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, what percentage of all spouse abuse 

incidents result in charges being laid? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Of ones that are reported, you mean? Of 

the ones reported? 

 

Ms. Simard: — Yes, it would be on which ones are reported. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that the instructions from the 

Department of Justice to the police is that in any case where there 

is reasonable and probable grounds to believe that an offence has 

been committed, charges are laid. 

 

Ms. Simard: — And what percentage of the charges laid then are 

later withdrawn? 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1849 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that it's a very small 

percentage. The instructions to prosecutors are to proceed. And we 

don't have the exact percentage broken out for you, but as I 

understand from the director of public prosecutions, it's a very low 

percentage that are in fact withdrawn. Even in the situation where 

the wife or the person battered suggests that the case not proceed, 

the instructions are to proceed anyway. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, has the Department of Justice 

carried out any research as to the problem of victims of violence in 

rural areas, women living in rural areas, and what services should 

be made available for them? Has there been any research done on 

this, and if so, can we have access to this research? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No specific studies that we have, other 

than the study that you earlier referred to. As I understand, that 

will be ready fairly soon. It will be made public, and there's some 

reference in that to the rural areas as opposed to what we have 

today. 

 

But to answer your question, we have no studies available at this 

point in time, nor have we any studies with regard to wife 

battering in rural Saskatchewan, specifically. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I'm assuming, Mr. Minister, that there are 

education programs in rural Saskatchewan advising rural women 

of the services that may be available for them. Is that not true? 

And if not, why not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I can speak only for a couple of the 

small communities that I represent — Kindersley and Eston — 

and there are facilities there and there are people there, either on a 

voluntary basis or working for some department of government, I 

assume Social Services or Health, that would work in that. 

 

What type of facilities? I don't think there's a facility per se, in the 

sense I think that it's tied down with some of the voluntary 

organizations that work downtown — mental health — work in 

conjunction with a variety of those. I forget what they call it, but I 

know there is that type of facility in Kindersley or the service in 

Kindersley. Whether it's as good as it would be in the cities, I 

would doubt it; and probably the more remote the community, the 

fewer the services that you're going to find, or . . . you know. So I 

wouldn't be able to answer that question other than my own 

personal knowledge from an area I represent. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, as a member of your 

interdepartmental committee on wife battering, I want to urge you 

to make this problem a priority. Some 50 per cent of the women 

who are now fleeing life-threatening situations are being turned 

away from transition homes — 50 per cent. And that's a very high 

figure. It's unacceptable. 

 

I want you . . . as a member of that committee, I urge you to urge 

this government to implement whatever is necessary in terms of 

services to make sure that these women are adequately protected 

and adequately looked after in the follow-up situations. I urge you 

to urge your government to implement education programs for 

police  

officers and to implement education and rehabilitation programs 

for abusers. 

 

This problem . . . Society just cannot allow this problem to 

snowball in the fashion that it has been, and we have to take hold 

of it and grapple with it immediately. Cut-backs to transition 

homes, cut-backs in legal aid suggest to me that this government 

no longer considers wife beating, the elimination and the 

prevention of wife beating as a priority. 

 

I would like to move on to the area of maintenance enforcement, if 

I may, Mr. Chairman. And I want to first of all compliment the 

government on the implementation of the maintenance 

enforcement provisions. The program is a good program and it's 

been long overdue. And my main problem with the matter, 

however, is that it isn't being carried forward in the manner that I 

believe it was originally anticipated that it should be. The 

program, I understand, was originally implemented to alleviate 

money being spent from the provincial treasury to support 

single-parent families. And I understand that there was some 1 

billion annually being spent, and I will ask you, of course, to 

correct me if these figures are wrong — 1 billion annually on 

support of single parent families. I have billion here, but if the 

figure is incorrect, advise me. 

 

I understand also that there is some 50 to 80 per cent default rate 

on maintenance orders, and therefore there is no question that this 

program was absolutely necessary. I'm very pleased to see that the 

government came forward with it. 

 

I understand that in the past fiscal year the enforcement office 

collected some 3 million in support payments. I would ask for you 

to confirm those figures if that's the case. 

 

I understand also that some 1,742,000 was collected for the 

provincial treasury, which was money originally paid out in social 

service assistance benefits. And that's a good sum for the 

provincial treasury. I understand there are a number of people on 

social assistance, however, who have not signed an assignment of 

rights allowing for a transfer of their rights to the enforcement 

office. 

 

And I'm wondering why this has happened in light of huge savings 

that have been made by the government. The information I have is 

over 1,742,000. That's a lot of money. Why aren't the additional 

people signing these assignments of rights to the enforcement 

office so they can pursue those payments? 

 

Another problem that I understand that has arisen is the phasing 

out of the Saskatoon family law office. The family law office was 

responsible for enforcing maintenance orders in Saskatoon and 

northern Saskatchewan, and it also provides legal counsel to the 

Department of Human Resources on family law matters. And I 

understand it provided legal counsel on child protection and child 

custody issues to the Department of Human Resources. 

 

But now I understand the government has been moving to 

privatize the family law office, and the work is being sent to a 

private law firm. And I'm very curious as to why the government 

would be doing this in light of your defence  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1850 

 

of your department earlier in this session. I am very curious that 

you would be phasing out departmental services when, for 

example, on July 16 of 1987, at page 1205 of Hansard, you are 

quoted as saying: 

 

. . . that the Department of Justice in this province has a long 

and credible tradition — a tradition, I think, we should all be 

proud of. 

 

And you spoke in glowing terms about the Department of Justice. 

So I'm wondering why you would be moving to privatize the 

family law office when you have such excellent workers in the 

department, or in your departmental agencies. 

 

Another problem that exists that has come to our attention with the 

maintenance enforcement office is the long waiting list. I'm not 

suggesting here that it has anything to do with the workers, 

because I understand that they're working very, very hard — if 

anything they've been overloaded with work. But I understand 

there's a very, very long waiting list. 

 

If this program indeed saves money for the government, I'm 

wondering why the government isn't taking the bull by the horns 

and adding more staff and getting the job done the way I am sure 

it originally intended to get the job done, and that was to enforce 

as many maintenance orders as possible in the province of 

Saskatchewan instead of fooling around with this on again, off 

again attitude; speak about a program in glowing terms and, you 

know; come forward with a good program and then not come 

across with adequate funding to made sure that it really works. Mr. 

Minister, if you may just address some of the questions I've raised. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I am advised that we're collecting in excess 

of $2 million — million with an m — and that that level is 

increasing each year, 2 million. 

 

Ms. Simard: — That's what you're collecting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — At this stage of the game, but it's 

constantly increasing. Now early on in your questioning I thought 

you say something about a billion dollars being spent? 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's the support of single-parent families. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — A billion dollars? 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's what I have here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I don't know, because the budget for 

Department of Health is not much larger than $1 billion and I 

would doubt that a $1 billion figure would . . . that sounds rather 

high to me. 

 

When you made reference to the Department of Justice and the 

proud tradition, I think if you go back into Hansard when that 

statement was made, it was made at a time when the member from 

Riversdale I believe, and I'm going from memory — maybe it was 

Saskatoon Fairview; I think it was from Riversdale — was making 

some accusation that somehow the Department of Justice  

would cover up details and the RCMP would cover up details. I 

think that was sort of the reference that was being made, and it 

certainly wasn't dealing with the particular question that you're 

talking about here. 

 

But as you indicated, this program goes forward. I suppose you 

could try to take it forward faster, but I guess . . . And we're adding 

people, additional staff to this particular function, the problem 

being is that you still have some fiscal restraints. You are not able 

to perhaps hire if you did want to hire in that given area, so we 

haven't been able to in that sense. 

 

The program is going forward. I assume that some simply do not 

want to sign up for the program for a variety of reasons — perhaps 

from a lack of education on it; perhaps a lack of trust of the 

authorities, if you like; a series of reasons, maybe. My guess 

would be, most often it would be simply out of lack of knowledge 

or lack of understanding of how the system works. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want to 

turn to what we used to call the native court worker program. And 

this was a program that was designed to meet the special needs of 

native people accused of criminal offences, and provided what 

was widely considered to be a very important and useful services 

in the court system. 

 

The native court workers were present all day, every day, while 

people were being brought before the court, in order to help those 

people understand their rights and their responsibilities and their 

obligations to the court. They served as a friend of the court by 

providing assistance and counselling and advice, and improving 

the communication between the native accused people and the 

prosecutors, and the court on the other hand. And they were 

successful in large measure in bridging social and cultural and 

educational gaps between native accused people and the court 

system. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now that was the purpose of the program, and that was the role 

that the native court worker had filled in this province for quite 

some time. My information is that approximately 27,000 people 

were served by this program in 1986-87. 

 

Now the cutting of that program, Mr. Minister, occurred as a result 

of a decision of this government to cut its funding. It was at that 

time making a grant which was matched by the federal 

government. At the time that that cut was announced, the federal 

government had indicated that it was prepared to increase its 50 

per cent share. It was prepared to increase the amount of money 

that it was putting into this program, presumably because it liked 

the program and considered that the program was serving a useful 

and valuable service. At the very moment that the federal 

government was deciding that and prepared to increase the amount 

of funds it put in, your government was deciding to eliminate its 

funding altogether. 

 

Now this, I think, is a good example, Mr. Minister, of a  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1851 

 

short-term view of a difficult situation. I don't think there's any 

serious question that the absence of native court workers in the 

courts is going to complicate the process that takes place there. It 

will take longer to accomplish what has been done in the past. 

Hearings will be lengthier. There will be more difficulty in the 

court communicating with native people, and vice verso. And all 

of this will have long-term social costs. 

 

Now the question I have for you, Minister, is: why did you 

consider this program to be a target for elimination, particularly in 

light of the attitude of the federal government towards this 

program? And what do you think is going to take up the slack? 

Which agency is it that you believe will move in and perform the 

role formerly performed by the native court worker program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well as I indicated I think, earlier in the 

. . . when these announcements were taken, that this was simply 

and clearly a decision taken based on fiscal questions, that so 

many dollars, and which services were sort of, we couldn't 

possibly do without — the police, the courts, that type of thing — 

in the justice field. It was decided that this would have to give way 

in that the bar, the private bar, and the court, or the bench would 

have to pick up the slack of this. 

 

There was also a . . . In 1984 the Saskatchewan Law Review 

undertook a study on this and what they found was the following. 

That even with the native court worker program, the statistics were 

not being stopped at all in the sense of more and more native 

people were being incarcerated. And the conclusion of that — 

whether it's right or whether it's wrong — was to the effect that it's 

really not . . . If you had a court worker working with the court, 

well you might change the incarceration rates very modestly. 

 

The reality of the problem was the socio-economic conditions in 

which area we find the native people in our province living in. 

And that's what tends to lead them into the criminal system. 

 

The conclusion being is that if you were going to address the 

question and address that problem, and I think as looking at the 

question, that you had to get it more at the cause, the 

socio-economic causes, the other causes that we can talk about in 

great length. Ultimately, if you were going to solve the problem, I 

suppose in the long term, you have to see some economic activity 

taking place that they can participate in. 

 

Now I'm sure that's not the answer to the question. That was not 

the main reason that we looked at it within the Department of 

Justice, other than to say perhaps it's not as essential as the court, 

or not as essential as the police, or not as essential as a variety of 

other things. 

 

Now again there was two major cuts that we had in Justice, major 

cuts in the sense from our department. One was the native court 

worker program, and the other was the cuts referred to earlier in 

the John Howard Society. Neither one of those were easy cuts to 

make. But as I say, it came down to the fiscal reality of the 

Department of Justice — 17 per cent increase. And it was a matter 

of saying, are you really making an effort to look  

at your particular programs? Were they the right things? 

 

I suppose we could argue back and forth on that particular 

situation, but those decisions were taken, and it was the view that 

perhaps if that money was going to be used, it could be used 

maybe more appropriately to deal with the beginning cause of the 

problem, that is maybe more economic activity, as opposed to 

only how they interfaced with the court. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well I don't disagree with that at all. You know, 

I think that the best thing is for all people to be working and 

productively employed, and remove the economic causes of crime 

to the extent possible, and also try to remove the social causes of 

crime. 

 

But in the meantime, the role that the native court worker was 

performing that was so appealing to so many people, including I 

think, the federal government, was that it resolved communication 

problems in the court setting between the accused person of native 

ancestry and the court system — the prosecutor, the judge — and 

to be certain that this person understood the charge, to be certain 

that this person understood what were the options, what were the 

consequences of pleading guilty, whether or not there was a 

defence; all of these things which commended themselves to 

people on the basis that they were a substantial improvement to 

the justice system. And I have no doubt that you will concede me 

that point. They were making a substantial contribution to justice, 

to the administration of justice. And that's what makes it hard to 

understand. 

 

I'm not arguing for a moment that the function of the court 

workers was to reduce the number of people of a native ancestry 

who were brought before the courts. But they certainly made a 

substantial contribution to the administration of justice, to ensuring 

that all people in Saskatchewan who come before the criminal 

courts are treated equally. 

 

The other thing about your cut, Minister, that is so disturbing, is it 

is yet another example of coming down on the poor people. It's 

another example of putting the boots to the people who are least 

able to take care of themselves, putting the boots to people at the 

bottom end of the rung — of the social and economic rung. And 

we on this side of the House protest against that kind of a cut 

because it is so unfair. If you're going to cut somebody, cut people 

who can afford a cut; don't cut people who need this service so 

manifestly as is the case with this particular program. 

 

Now I'd ask you to comment on that, Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I'll take two comments. One is that in 

our view the mediation and diversion program makes more sense, 

has more effect of keeping people, and in this case, native people, 

out of jail than does the native court worker program. Now the 

federal government who have been known, who have been known 

throughout time to sometimes not always take the right decisions 

— we are presently negotiating with them. If they are prepared to 

put money into the native court worker program, are they also then 

prepared to put money into the mediation and diversion program, 

which  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1852 

 

we believe has a better effect of solving the problem. In fact, I 

think if you look back in time from the previous questions from 

the member from Regina Lakeview, I think that if you give an 

honest comparison to those two programs, mediation and 

diversion makes more sense and solves the problem better than 

does some interfacing with the courts. 

 

I'm not saying that that in fact can't be of assistance in some cases. 

Clearly, it can. But I think if you were sitting priorizing where you 

would spend your money, I think an argument can be made for 

mediation and diversion, which we hope to expend sizeably more 

amounts of money in the future. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — The final question, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister, with respect to the native court worker program. My 

information is that there is a problem there of a transitional nature. 

It's a transitional funding problem. My information is that they 

don't have enough money to make adequate severance 

arrangements with their staff, some of whom have been employed 

by the program for a long period of time. 

 

Can the minister assure us that adequate transitional funding will 

be made available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that as far as the transition 

funding, that we had given the proper share to the native court 

worker program. The problem then developed between Social 

Services and AMNSIS (Association of Metis and Non-Status 

Indians of Saskatchewan). There was some money owed back and 

forth between the native court worker and AMNSIS. In some way 

that is presently being dealt with by the Minister of Social 

Services, and I understand they're in negotiations at this point in 

time to cover that. 

 

I understand the concern that was raised. There was also a concern 

with the transition funding for John Howard Society that we had to 

deal with, I think, and give them 11,000 more dollars into John 

Howard Society, and that was done, I think, last cabinet or cabinet 

before. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now with respect to the Law Reform 

Commission, Mr. Minister, if I could turn to that subject. I'd like 

you, if you'd outline . . . I'd appreciate if you'd outline to the 

legislature the government's plans for the future, so far as the Law 

Reform Commission is concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me put it to you in this way, is that the 

government has cut back on the amount of money that we are 

putting into the Law Reform Commission. We have talked to the 

law society. The law society will in fact be funding that through 

the law foundation, the view being is that perhaps law reform 

should be more . . . that part of it should be picked up more by the 

lawyers, the people that surely can afford to pay something, and so 

that there will be increasing funding from the law foundation, 

there will be a closer tie then to the Law Reform Commission and 

the university, the College of Law. So I think it will be an 

arrangement that we see working out fairly well now between the 

Crown, which will take a smaller share, the law foundation, and 

the law school. 

 

And I think that three parties, the law school, the present . . . the 

lawyers of the province, and the government — and I think that 

the other two, and particularly the lawyers, should pick up a larger 

share. That's what the strategy is. 

 

It would still then function as it always has before, choosing its 

own topics and going from there. One would hope, though, that in 

choosing its topics that it would perhaps deal with some areas that 

I believe are significant to the justice system, one being presently 

the law as it relates to farm debt in this province, and how we 

grapple with that particular problem. And I don't think anybody 

has a quick and easy solution to that question. 

 

The question of arbitration and mediation — is our courts really 

serving the people, and do the people have the confidence in the 

court system? 

 

And three, an area that is being, I think, investigated to a larger 

degree by some of the American law schools, which is the 

economic ramifications of the courts making decisions. Too often 

I know you can't have a court making a decision based on the 

economic realities of our time, but I would suggest that perhaps 

the courts at least give more cognizance to the fact that their 

decision can have a ramification to the economic reality in which 

we live, and that they should be perhaps a little more cognizant of 

that. 

 

(1945) 

 

Those are the three areas I would like to see the Law Reform 

Commission look at. I suppose it's still up to them to decide, but I 

would hope that each party that puts money forward can also put 

ideas forward. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Minister, I'll ask a series of questions now, 

and then ask you to answer all of them at the same time. 

 

First of all, is pay to the chairperson of the Law Reform 

Commission included in your budget, and if so how much is that? 

 

Secondly, Minister, one very controversial report that was issued 

by the Law Reform Commission some years ago now concerned 

The Matrimonial Property Act. I say controversial because a 

coalition of interested people and groups was formed very quickly 

after the report was first circulated — or I think even rumoured at 

— and it was active in Saskatchewan for some time. The former 

minister who's now the Minister of Finance didn't seem much 

interested in it, but your predecessor, Mr. Dutchak, did seem 

interested in doing something as a result of that report. 

 

The unknown factor in this area right now is you, Mr. Minister. I 

don't believe that you are on record on the subject of the report of 

the Law Reform Commission to The Matrimonial Property Act. 

 

What we're looking for, Mr. Minister, is some confirmation from 

you that you have no intention of opening up that Act or 

amendment pursuant to the report of the Law Reform 

Commission. 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1853 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I am advised on your first question that the 

chairman's salary was included in the estimates; that the chairman, 

the present chairman, Mr. Schmeiser, is finished at the end of this 

month and we are in the process of negotiating, or the group is in 

the process of negotiating who would replace him; nobody has yet 

been chosen as to who that would be. 

 

With regard to The Matrimonial Property Act, I'm not . . . From 

memory I can't recall exactly what it said. I take it it was some 

changes of the existing, what we have now. We have no intention 

of dealing with that. I would not see that as a priority that I would 

wish to deal with. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you for that, Mr. Minister. I appreciate 

that answer. 

 

I want to turn briefly to the Police Commission, and I noticed that 

there is a budget cut to the commission of approximately $16,000. 

Now the function of the Police Commission as I understand it is to 

promote the efficiency of police services and to improve 

relationships between police forces and the communities, and in a 

general way to upgrade police services generally through training 

and standardization. 

 

Now in its report, the pages of which I have before me, the Police 

Commission raises the subject of restraint and budget restrictions 

and expresses some concern of page 19 of that report. 

 

And I quote: 

 

The commission and the college are mindful of the need for, 

and of course support good financial management. However 

funding to the college has had the following effect: (and I 

think the meaning there is cuts in funding to the college) it 

does not provide for two recruit classes per year; the 

production of training films is severely restricted; research 

and update of course content lags; and certain important 

seminars and training courses must be put on hold. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I wonder in your relationship with the 

commission whether you have any say over what training courses 

and seminars will or will not be held. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that the negotiations are 

between the commission and the local municipalities, or the police 

chiefs of those local municipalities, to determine what courses 

they take, and then they simply come to us. So we're not directly 

involved in the details of any course to be done. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — The programs that they provide, the trainings 

and seminars that they provide, would seem to me to be a rather 

minimum kind of fare, and I wonder in light of that and the small 

amount of money involved, what the minister's thinking was in 

imposing a budget cut on the Police Commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well we looked at it as a fairly minimal 

cut, and that we are advised that it has not had a  

large impact on the effectiveness of the training program. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now another subject, Mr. Minister, and it 

concerns the rumours that I have heard respecting plans being 

considered for the privatization of some of the services provided 

by the department. And I would like you to comment on rumours 

that the office of the Public Trustee is being considered for 

privatization in one way or another. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The Public Trustee . . . The accounting and 

the money management dimension of that particular function was 

in fact put out for tender to the private sector. No decision has 

been taken on that. My guess — and I could only guess because it 

has not been dealt with at cabinet — my guess is that matters will 

stay the same as they are. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — And similarly, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

I've heard rumours about consideration being given to 

privatization steps in the property registration branch. I wonder if 

you'd comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, I think what we . . . When the 

government indicated and when they in the throne speech said if 

we could provide a service cheaper through the private sector than 

we could through government, then we would explore those, one 

of the ones that was put on the list was the property registration 

branch. Nothing has been done on that, and my view is that it's not 

a proper candidate for contracting it out to somebody else. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A question in the same vein concerning the land 

titles system. Is any consideration being given to privatizing all or 

any part of the land titles office system in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think I would answer that in much 

the same way I did the earlier question with regards to . . . I think 

it . . . I see nothing wrong with exploring the idea. My view again 

with the land titles system is that our system of land titles relies 

upon the government guaranteeing the title. And I think that you 

could not privatize that. 

 

I can say that we are going to explore in the land titles system 

some automation, or some computerization within the land titles 

system that one would hope that in the very near term we'll be 

looking for proposals as to how we might not privatize but 

computerize the land titles system. And some of the new 

technology presently out could have some significant implications 

for the land titles system. 

 

But again, I would see the land titles system remaining as it is. I 

don't think there would be merit in having the private sector do 

that. In fact, we are now making money out of the land titles 

system, and have for some time. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now, Minister, I'm going to approach another 

subject now. It concerns freedom of information legislation. And 

prior to the 1982 election, your party extolled the benefits of 

freedom of information legislation and campaigned on it during 

that election. Over five years have passed since then and the 

support for freedom  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1854 

 

of information legislation was reannounced in the throne speech in 

1986, but there was no mention of it in this year's throne speech. 

I'd like to ask you, Minister, what the status is of freedom of 

information legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think following 1982 we commissioned 

former chief justice Culliton to do a study with regards to the 

freedom of information legislation. He brought down his report; 

that report is available for all to read. At this point in time there is 

not the funds to put into that and until funds become available 

there will be nothing done. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — If funds were available, Mr. Minister, can I ask 

you whether it remains the view of the government that freedom 

of information legislation is desirable and ought to be enacted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I've often . . . While in opposition I often 

spoke of this. When I find myself in government, you see the 

information flowing out to you folks on that side of the House in 

any event. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I'm smiling, but I'm not impressed by the 

answer, Minister. Not impressed at all. Let me put the question 

this way: has the idea of freedom of information been buried? In 

other words, is your view common to ministers of the Crown, and 

have we seen the last of that idea for as long as you guys stay in 

power? Or is it likely that we'll be seeing legislation coming 

forward at a time when you feel you can afford it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Perhaps I could put it this way. The idea of 

freedom of information was more attractive to me when I was in 

opposition. It was perhaps not as well received by my colleagues 

in opposition and in government, and I would say that probably 

the view of the government today is the same as the view of the 

government we replaced, that it's . . . would be put off for another 

day. No, I think that probably there is not a great drive right now 

for freedom of information, and quite frankly, I think if you . . . 

The largest criticism of the freedom of information legislation is 

that 95 per cent of the use made of freedom of information 

legislation is made by our friends in the media and not by anybody 

else, certainly not by the public. And in times of restraint when 

there is not money, and there's a variety of items begging out for 

money, probably the folks in the media would probably not rank 

that high on the priority list. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Chairperson, Mr. Minister, it's very 

high on our priority list over here for the simple reason that we 

can't get the information from the government that we want and 

that we think we need in order to do our jobs properly. You have 

only to look at the order paper in this House to see the kinds of 

information that we've been requesting and the period of time in 

which it's been outstanding. And while it may not have been so 

necessary while you were in opposition, that was probably 

because the government of the day attempted to answer those 

questions, attempted to provide the information to the then 

opposition. And if you people had been doing it the way that it 

was done prior to 1982, I probably wouldn't be pressing so hard 

for it now. But the fact is that freedom of information legislation is 

now more  

than ever necessary for the opposition, and it's not just the media 

that has an interest. 

 

(2000) 

 

Now I won't give you an opportunity to comment on that. Let me 

turn to corrections. Can you tell me what was the prison 

population in the Saskatchewan correctional centres as of March 

31, 1987? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If you want to have a series of questions, 

then I can dig that information for you. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I'll just enlarge on that question. I'd like to know 

the total prison population as of March 31, 1987, and break that 

down between the various correctional centres, and then tell me 

how many persons these correctional centres were designed to 

hold. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What I'll do is send a page over that has 

the bulk of that information, I think. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Minister, you've sent me over this page, and 

I'm going to refer to it. But in referring to it, when you use the 

term operational capacity, does that mean the number of inmates 

that are normally there? Is that considered to be the normal 

population of the prison, or the correctional facility as you're 

running it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The design capacity represents what it was 

originally designed for. Operational capacity is sort of the redesign 

and what it can . . . changes that have been made now, new dorms 

and that type of thing that have been added. So it's a revised 

design, if you like. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well, I'm . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shocked and amazed! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — The Deputy Premier says shocked and amazed. 

And I'll take those words — I'm shocked and amazed to look at 

the Saskatoon Correctional Centre and see that the facility was 

designed for 170 inmates, but its operational capacity, which is the 

number of people who are normally there, is 247 — 170 versus 

247. Does that mean that there are normally 77 more people at the 

Saskatoon Correctional Centre than the place was designed to 

hold? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, I think . . . But if you look at what the 

average daily count is on the right hand of your page for 

Saskatoon which is 275, that's for all three Saskatoon institutions. 

The data of June 1, 1987 — it was at 237. And the original design 

was for 236, with the adjustments at 322 as the maximum capacity 

that they could handle. Including the dorms, that's what they could 

handle. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well what changes were made? What happened 

in that correctional centre to convert space, or whatever you did, in 

order to raise the numbers from the design capacity of 170 to the 

operational capacity of 247? What space was converted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that the following things were 

done. Number one, the shop was converted  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1855 

 

into a dorm up to health standards — that added 35 people; every 

second cell for remand was double bunked — there were double 

bunks in every other cell of remand; and put four people in each 

dorm room. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I have to ask you whether you as the minister 

responsible are satisfied with that kind of an arrangement. I mean, 

what's your position? Was the original design totally out to lunch 

with all this extra space that was just there and it was logical to 

convert it? 

 

I mean, does it make sense to convert a shop into a bedroom? 

Does it make sense to double bunk where the design had been for 

single bunking? Was the original design wrong when it provided 

for single bunking? How do you react . . . How do you react to a 

situation like that as the minister responsible? And depending on 

what your reaction is, do you plan to do anything about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that when the shop was 

converted over . . . The shop was converted over because it made 

sense of this proximity. Another shop was in fact built. So there's 

still a shop that they can use. 

 

Was it designed properly? I don't know. I mean, it was designed 

before we came to government. I suppose that times change, 

maybe because there are four people in a dorm, or maybe there are 

two people in a bunk. I suppose, you say, is that adequate 

facilities? Well I suppose you could look in the core of any city or 

any town and ask if that's adequate facilities where people live 

there too. And my guess is that if we had priorities to meet, that 

we'd be tending to be more interested in that than we would be in 

how comfortable it is in jail for people. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well I think that's an adequate answer, Minister, 

because it certainly does stake out very clearly where you stand on 

the question of correctional facilities and the housing of inmates. 

 

I wonder whether you could provide me with the number of 

people on remand in the Saskatoon Correctional Centre and the 

number for which the remand area was designed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The average number on remand in 

Saskatoon in 49 people. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — The other part of my question, Minister, was 

what was the design capacity? I want to know how many it was 

designed for and how many it holds. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Twenty-six. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Am I not correct in my information that there 

have been as many as 80 people staying in the remand section of 

the Saskatoon facility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Last year the highest was 59. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now in April of 1986, the federal and provincial 

governments signed an exchange service agreement with allows 

for the transfer of federal prisoners into provincial institutions. 

This agreement, according to my information, provided for the  

construction of 125 additional cells necessary to accommodate 

lower security federal inmates, as well as the addition of 80 new 

beds for the province's use. Now how were these beds distributed 

among the province's correctional centres, and how many new 

staff were brought on stream as a result? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I am advised that it will be broken down as 

follows. Regina will have 120 new beds; Saskatoon, 40; Prince 

Albert, 40; 87 new staff. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now that leads us to the numbers in the 

estimates with respect to what's happening at the various centres. 

 

And I note that some correctional centres have lost person-years. 

For example, Prince Albert has lost 15 positions, Battlefords has 

lost slightly over 11 positions, Saskatoon has lost nine positions. 

And at the same time, the provincial correctional centre in Regina 

has gained 25 positions, and has gained about $1 million in 

budget, while the other centres have had only modest decreases or 

increases in budget. And I wonder if you'd explain to the 

Assembly, Mr. Minister, what's happening that results in those 

numbers in your budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that the reason for that 

particular number in the book is, one, the young offenders which 

before were shown in the blue book as a staff position have been 

taken out with the young offenders and put over into another 

department. And that explains the bulk of the number of fewer 

positions. 

 

(2015) 

 

Then the new positions that are coming on because the facilities 

are not likely to be built until about the beginning of 1988. 

Therefore, in the budgeting process, you only would budget a 

quarter of a position for the fiscal year. And that explains those 

numbers. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Okay. Thank you for that, Mr. Minister. Now 

I've another question with respect to the correctional facilities, and 

it's back to the privatization line of questioning. The question I 

have is: are you, is the government, considering making any 

changes in the way our corrections system currently operates? Are 

you studying any measure in the direction of the privatization of 

any part of the correctional services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think that the initial statement, are 

we looking at selling a jail to some entrepreneur to run a jail, no, 

we're not now looking to do that, although that's been done in the 

United States, as I understand, with some building of new 

facilities. We're not looking at that at all. 

 

Is there some services that are presently being done internal to the 

correction centres that could perhaps be done more appropriately 

or in combination with other institutions? Those types of 

questions, I suppose, we're exploring at this point in time. I don't 

think we've gone down the road a great deal with regards to that. 

And that type of services, if anything would be how you would 

maybe provide laundry, or how you might provide food, or 

something like that, but nothing of any magnitude. 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1856 

 

The one area that we would be looking at in the field of 

corrections would be the bracelets that are being used now in other 

jurisdictions as a replacement to incarceration; where you would 

be able to put a bracelet on a convicted person — and sort of like 

grounding your kid, you would ground the convict, or the 

convicted person, and he would be required to stay in his house. If 

he left the perimeters of his yard, it would alert a computer at a 

central police station, and therefore alert them to the fact that he 

was breaking whatever conditions it was that he was being 

restricted to. 

 

Now that has been used, has been explored in B.C., and is being 

explored very aggressively in Ontario. And we have been 

following the Ontario experiment on that area. It's been used in a 

number of areas, and I think that it has some merit to further 

explore that type of treatment of people that are in trouble with the 

law, that are low security risk people, and perhaps they could be 

handled in a much more economical way, and maybe in a more 

humane and productive way as well. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I'm fascinated by the answer. I'm not reacting 

negatively to it necessarily. I mean, I know it's a serious thought 

that you are putting forward, and I want to react to it with due 

respect. It does have a sort of Orwellian overtone to it, you know. 

Big brother's computer, which plays such an important role in the 

book, Nineteen Eighty-Four, is a reality, at least in the minister's 

mind, in Saskatchewan in 1987. So that if you step off your 

property, the computer rings a bell, and all kinds of things start to 

happen, and it's really kind of a startling proposition. But as I say, 

you don't expect me to react to it now, and I'm not. It's a serious 

question, of course, that has to be looked at, but it is a bit chilling. 

 

The one thing that I hope you don't do, Minister, so far as 

privatization is concerned, is to do as your federal counterparts did 

in the Regional Psychiatric Centre in Saskatoon, where the food 

services, the cafeteria, was privatized. And all that meant is that 

the institution itself stopped preparing and serving its own food, 

and that service was contracted out to a private business interest. 

Now all that happened was that the staff of the centre, who had 

been engaged in preparing and serving the food, and who were 

employed there at a decent salary — at a decent competitive-type 

salary under the appropriate collective bargaining agreement — 

were all let go, all fired. And the private contractor came in with a 

staff of people, most of who are working at minimum wage. Now 

I know that that's a "saving." 

 

The Fraser Institute would classify that as a cost saving, saving 

money for the taxpayer. But what it really means is that you're 

substituting jobs that are being paid for at a relatively decent level, 

giving people enough money so that they can maintain their 

families and their households with dignity, and replacing those 

people with minimum-wage workers who also need the work — I 

recognize that — but are being paid at, I think, in the case of 

Saskatoon Regional Psych Centre, the wages are something like 

half of the wages that were previously being paid to people for 

doing exactly the same work. And I don't think that the 

government should be a party to that. I don't think the government 

should be encouraging  

that. And that seems to me to be one of the inevitable results of 

"privatizing" the food service facility at a correctional centre or at 

the Regional Psych Centre. And I hope that your privatization 

efforts and your cost-cutting efforts aren't being made on the backs 

of the people who are in this instance, preparing and serving the 

food at the facility. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — There's probably a significant difference 

between the two in the sense that the provincial correction centres 

. . . The bulk of the work in the food preparation is done by the 

inmates and they don't even make minimum wage. Now perhaps 

that's not possible at the Regional Psych Centre as it is in a 

provincial correction centre. But in a provincial correction centre, 

the bulk of the work in food preparation is done by the inmates 

and we have but supervisors dealing there, so I think the 

application perhaps is quite different. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I have a question to the Minister of Justice and 

it has to do with the way people who are mentally ill are handled 

by the justice system. I would be interested in knowing, Mr. 

Minister, if you can outline to me the procedure used by police 

officers or peace officers when dealing with a person who's 

obviously mentally ill. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Chairman, I beg leave to introduce some 

guests in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

Leave granted 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Chairman, it gives me great pleasure to 

introduce the delegation from the Jilin Provincial Academy of 

Agriculture. What we have with us here today is the Jilin wheat 

and barley delegation who are visiting us in Saskatchewan for the 

next week. The gentleman on our right, our far right, is the head of 

the delegation, Mr. Hu, who is the president of the Jilin Provincial 

Academy of Agriculture and Science. They're in Regina and 

Saskatoon during this next week. With him are two members of 

the Economic Development and Trade department. 

 

Gentlemen, welcome to Saskatchewan. Enjoy your visit, and I 

hope you take back lots of information about wheat and barley. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The question posed by the hon. member is 

somewhat difficult in the sense of how do the police handle . . . I 

suspect that the police handle it . . . in a given situation they would 

handle it perhaps differently. 

 

If a serious crime is alleged to have been committed, then  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1857 

 

I suspect that they would deal with that in the way that they 

normally would, and from there down to varying offences. It 

would be hard for me to answer how (a) the police handle it, and 

(a) how an individual policeman handles it; and (b) how an 

individual policeman handles a variety of situations. And I think 

that the police would handle a variety of situations in a variety of 

ways, I suspect. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, in Saskatchewan we have a 

problem with the lack of facilities for persons who obviously have 

mental illness disease. We have cases where people are charged 

with loitering or charged with mischief, and it's obvious to the 

police that they are suffering from a variety of 

paranoid-schizophrenic or they've got schizophrenia. They are not 

in a state that one would call normal behaviour; they have 

abnormal behaviour. 

 

Consequently, people are ending up in city police cells, in RCMP 

cells, because there's no place to take them. They are people who 

don't have a home necessarily. They don't have any resources to 

go to in the community. Consequently, they may be charged with 

mischief, left in the police cell overnight, and really where they 

really need to be taken to is a place for persons with this type of 

illness. 

 

I think it's inappropriate that the police are having to put persons 

suffering mental illness into jail cells when there should be 

resources in the community. Now I'm told by the Department of 

Health officials that this really is a problem for the Justice minister 

to resolve, and it has to do with the way persons are handled in this 

type of situation by peace officers, or police officers. 

 

So I'm simply asking you, Mr. Minister, what are the procedures 

and what sort of guide-lines have you given peace officers in 

Saskatchewan to deal with persons who are suffering this type of 

illness? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — There's no specific guide-lines in the sense 

that they're to be dealt with on an individual departmental matter. 

Our advice to the prosecutors . . . and remember that we can sort 

of advise the prosecutors. It's far more difficult for us to tell the 

police what to do. That is a step removed certainly from the 

Attorney General's department — that if they are aware or have a 

knowledge of this that they should refer those particular 

individuals to the appropriate authority, whether Department of 

Health official, Department of Social Services, that type of thing. 

That's our instructions to our prosecutors. 

 

Now does that always happen? I suppose there's cases where it 

does not happen, and I guess you just have to try to deal with those 

cases where they fall through the cracks, on an individual basis. 

 

The other problem is to say that a police officer should deal with 

somebody suffering a mental illness in a particular way, we would 

then fall right into the category of saying, should the police be able 

to decide whether or not a person is suffering a mental illness? 

And I'm sure defence counsel would climb all over the backs of a 

police officer if he sort of made that assessment based on  

his perhaps limited knowledge of the illness or that type of 

situation. 

 

So that's why it has to be dealt with (a) the police; if they're not 

dealing with it properly, then I agree that they have to become 

more cognizant to that particular question. Our prosecutors are 

clearly instructed though to deal with, where it's an obvious case 

— where they're not prejudging someone that would take offence 

for them to prejudge — to have them assigned to appropriate 

authorities in the field of health, or quasi-health related areas, to 

deal with it and not to be dealt with by the court system, and try to 

be handled as a normal court process. 

 

(2030) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, part of the problem is that people 

are falling through the cracks, and there are numerous persons 

known to police as people who suffer mental illness. They're 

wandering. They're loitering. They are talking in abnormal ways 

to citizens. Police are called. The police have no place to take 

them because they can't get into a hospital because of the situation 

where there are long line-ups for persons waiting to get into the 

psychiatric wards. There are no places to take them in terms of a 

half-way house. The services at Social Services are overloaded. 

 

There aren't appropriate resources. Consequently, the police are 

put in a position where they charge the person with mischief, for 

example. They are taken to the police cells in order for them . . . 

they go into court. They go back to the police cells. They wait for 

a psychiatrist to go to the police cells to assess the client or the 

patient. They are then taken back into court and then they're 

referred to an appropriate resource. 

 

That's the problem. People fall through the cracks, and it's 

happening more and more often. If you talk to anybody who's 

involved in the field of mental health, one of their concerns is the 

lack of resources in the community for persons suffering mental 

illnesses. They are ending up in jails. They're ending up on the 

street. They're getting into difficulty with the police. 

 

So I'm just curious in knowing whether or not your department has 

had any liaising with various police departments around the 

province to try and set up some sort of procedure to deal with 

persons who have these types of problems so that they don't end 

up in jail; that they do go to the appropriate resources. 

 

And if the appropriate resources aren't there then, Mr. Minister, I 

think it's incumbent upon you as the cabinet minister who sits 

around the cabinet table to lobby for those kinds of resources so 

that your Department of Justice isn't having to deal with persons in 

a legal way, when they really should be treated in a health way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that we have not had many of 

these types of situations come to our attention. Perhaps there's 

more out there, as you say, than perhaps come to our attention. We 

will investigate into that. 

 

As it relates to Justice, I can pass your concerns on to the Minister 

of Health, the Minister of Social Services, but  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1858 

 

you don't expect me in my estimates to get into the details of 

mental health facilities. I think that's more appropriate to the 

Minister of Health with his officials as to what facilities are there. 

And quite frankly, I'm not familiar enough with the details of 

Health to advance a response to that. So I think you'd be more 

appropriate to address that question to the Minister of Health. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I will be doing that, Mr. Minister, but it's 

become a Justice question because peace officers are having to 

deal with persons in this particular kind of situation. 

 

Nevertheless, I'd like to go on to another issue. My colleague from 

Regina Lakeview had asked you about contracting out of the 

services at the Saskatoon office for maintenance enforcement, and 

you didn't advise us which firm has received the contract for 

maintenance enforcement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can answer the question in a broader 

sense. There was four firms involved in Saskatoon and Regina 

doing this work. In Saskatoon, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Act was being done by Hnatyshyn & Company; The 

Family Services Act is being done by Finley Hymers & 

Associates. In Regina, the work of the enforcement of 

maintenance orders is being done by Wellman Andrews & Blais. 

And the Family Services Act is being done by Alexander 

Kruzeniski Goudie & McLaren. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

just have a few questions concerning policing. I note that there's an 

increase in the budget this year from last year. I believe last year's 

figure was in the neighbourhood of 37 million; this year it's 40 

million for RCM policing services in Saskatchewan. Can the 

minister tell us about the nature of that increase, what the increase 

is for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The increase is, we pick up a goodly part 

of the RCMP cost pursuant to an agreement negotiated between 

the provincial government and the federal government. Now that 

agreement that was negotiated 1980-81, expires in 1990-91, and 

each year the province agreed to pick up a larger and larger part of 

that cost. And that cost is the all-in cost that the RCMP would give 

to us, including any salary increases, etc., that would be negotiated 

by the force, as opposed to any, say, by the provincial government. 

 

So the increase was probably a direct result of (a) some salary 

increases; and (b) because of the province taking a higher 

percentage of the total cost shared between the province and the 

feds. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — It's reasonable to assume then, or deduce 

from your remarks that there will be no increase in policing 

service as such, by virtue of this agreement; that the increase is 

due to higher salary costs, and as per the contract, is simply the 

province picking up greater costs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In fact the contrary is probably the case, in 

the sense that the RCMP have in fact scaled back some of the 

manpower of the RCMP around the province. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, in February of this year, the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association presented a brief 

to the cabinet. And at that time, they indicated some concerns 

regarding policing services. 

 

They're concerned that the present 10-year agreement which was 

arrived at in ’80-81 will expire in 1990-91. And they encouraged 

the cabinet at that time to begin discussions not only with the 

RCM Police, but also with the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association, and I suppose other concerned 

organizations in the province, with a view to arriving at a new 

agreement. If I can just quote from their submission to the cabinet, 

they indicate, and I quote: 

 

While the present rules and agreements came into being at the 

beginning of the 1980s under a 10-year term contract, we 

believe it is not too soon for us to start meeting with your 

officials to talk about our requirements under the next 

agreement. 

 

And they go on to say, quote: 

 

We think it is necessary to get our act together with your 

officials now to establish our requirements, and to commence 

negotiations before we get into an 11th-hour situation. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can tell the Assembly just what 

kinds of discussions you've entered into with the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association and other groups in the 

province, as well as the RCM Police, with respect to a new 

agreement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We haven't met specifically with the 

municipalities; we will be. At this stage, we are in negotiations 

with other provinces, the other provinces that use the services of 

the RCMP, as to attempt to put our strategy together as to how we 

would approach the feds in the new round of negotiations. That's 

still three years away, until the time of a new deal taking place and 

taking force. 

 

It would be our intention to dialogue with the — certainly with the 

municipalities, in particular with the ones involved, I would 

suggest, as to what tack that we should take. I would guess that 

that negotiation would be between ourselves, the RCMP, the 

communities that in fact use the RCMP — as opposed to, let's say, 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) which 

would be an overall organization — with the other provinces that 

use the force, and then ultimately with the federal government to 

try to negotiate the best deal for all concerned. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that, and I use 

your words: "We haven't met specifically with any 

municipalities." Am I to deduce from that that there had been 

meetings of a general nature to discuss the new contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I meant to communicate that we are 

dealing at this stage with other provinces. We would then probably 

next year take up that negotiation  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1859 

 

with the local government in Saskatchewan that uses the RCMP 

and proceed from there. 

 

Any dealings we've had with the local municipalities have tended 

to be in situations maybe where the RCMP has scaled down their 

operation, and some problems obviously associate with that. Small 

towns perhaps lose another individual that lives in their town. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I certainly understand the 

wisdom which suggests that you would meet with other provinces 

with a view to forming a common front, as it were, in your 

discussions with the federal government when it comes to policing 

services. 

 

Having said that, might I commend to you also discussions with 

groups inside Saskatchewan, whether it be particular 

municipalities or associations for urban municipalities and rural 

municipalities, so that this province can develop a bottom line as 

to the kind of policing services that we want. It seems to me that if 

you want to form a common front with other provinces you need 

to know, and you need to know very clearly, what is the bottom 

line for Saskatchewan. Because it's difficult to negotiate with 

someone unless you have a very clear sense of what limits you 

have and what boundaries you have and what you will not go 

beyond. And I would commend that to you, sir. 

 

I just want to turn very briefly to local police forces, and whether 

or not the minister or any of his officials might have attended a 

meeting in Moose Jaw on June 25. This is a meeting that was 

called at the request of the chairman of the Estevan Board of 

Police Commissioners, and the invitation was extended to all 

boards of police commissioners in Saskatchewan. The purpose of 

the meeting, as I understand it, was to discuss a number of 

concerns that the Estevan board had identified with respect to local 

policing. And I wondered whether you or any of your officials 

might have attended that meeting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that the Saskatchewan Police 

Commission people went to that meeting; nobody from Justice 

did, though. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, at that meeting — if you've 

not had the report from the Saskatchewan Police Commission — a 

number of concerns were put forward by the board of police 

commissioners from Estevan, and to an extent these are shared . . . 

And there may well be additional concerns that were brought 

forward by other boards of police commissioners. There's a long 

list of these, and I could make a copy of this available to you. 

 

In saying that, I wonder if the minister has given any consideration 

to a review of The Police Act to see how well the system is 

working at this time — that is to say the administration and control 

of local police forces, the relationship between the police force and 

commissioners, the relationship between commissioners and 

councils. I know that — from my own experience — that there are 

some sensitive and problem areas, areas that perhaps should be 

addressed in the context of the legislation. And I wonder if you 

have any plans to take a look at The Police Act. 

 

That legislation was put into place some years ago. One never 

thinks of that kind of legislation — especially where you're 

dealing in a very dynamic context — as lasting for ever, and that 

perhaps the time has come for us to review the experiences of all 

these boards of police commissioners, to review the experiences 

with a view to seeing if there are reasonable amendments that can 

be made so that policing services and the administration of 

policing can be improved in Saskatchewan. And I wonder if you 

or your department has given any thoughts to an overall review, a 

review that might provide for public input and input from specific 

concerned parties such as police and boards of police 

commissioners. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The Police Act is always under some 

review within the Department of Justice. We have been in 

communications with the people — you referred to the Moose Jaw 

meeting — indicated to them if they had some concerns from that 

meeting with regards to the Act and how we might be able to 

respond, to please let us know. 

 

To date we have heard nothing from that particular group. So until 

such time as we hear something from that group, it would be more 

difficult for us to respond. And we would await any kind of 

response that they might give to us, at which time that we would 

look at it. 

 

Whether or not we will go through a total reorganization or 

re-look at The Police Act, I suppose, is determined whether or not 

our manpower is best doing that or doing something else. And that 

would be the type of decision you'd look at, something that clearly 

could be considered. I wouldn't rule it out. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate what you're 

saying and that you will respond if there is a written request of you 

to review certain aspects of The Police Act. But I wonder if that 

might not set the stage for trouble if local authorities, given their 

scant and limited resources, will only communicate to you when 

they have problems at hand. 

 

And I wonder if it might not be advisable for you to — and I'm not 

suggestion that this be a matter of immediate priority, but it's 

something that should go into your planning for your work-load 

— that you ask your officials to do a review, and to ask the 

various boards of police commissioners and other interested 

parties as to their opinions of the Act, and how well it's working. 

And if after such an internal administrative review you see the 

need for a wider-ranging inquiry or review, then so be it. 

 

But I would commend that approach to you, rather than waiting 

for individual problems or for suggestions to be brought to your 

attention as a result of individual problems which may arise in 

various situations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, I don't disagree with the hon. member. 

That's something that we can look at in the future. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, I wonder in the past several days whether or not the 

Minister of the Environment or the Minister of Consumer Affairs 

has made representation to you or your  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1860 

 

officials of your department regarding the sale of canned 

beverages in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Have they made representation to the 

minister, to me? Not that I know of. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to refer to a story which 

appeared August 14 in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald. The 

headline says, "Moose Jaw stores accept canned pop." And I want 

to read a little bit from this story. It says: 

 

Canned pop has arrived in Moose Jaw. Blake Pitts, owner of 

Mohawk Pit Stop gas station is stocking his shelves with 

carbonated beverages. Canned pop was banned in 

Saskatchewan by the NDP provincial government in 1972, 

according to Ron Schmidt, cold drink manager for Coca-Cola 

Ltd. The ban was implemented by the Department of the 

Environment in an attempt to reduce litter. 

 

The current Litter Control Act has been in effect since 1973, 

said Larry Lechner, director of air and land protection of the 

Saskatchewan Environment and Public Safety department. 

Refillable glass containers are the only ones approved at the 

moment, Lechner says. Returnable is the key. 

 

Pitt says he buys canned pop through Western Grocers in 

Winnipeg. He said he isn't the only one in Saskatchewan selling 

canned pop. From what I understand, a lot of Mohawk gas 

stations in towns such as Regina, Saskatoon and Yorkton are 

selling it, Pitt said. Canned pop has been sold at the gas station 

since it opened for business June 15 of this year. 

 

It is illegal to sell pop in cans, Lechner said, and the department 

has asked the Saskatchewan Bottling Association to try and get 

distributors and manufacturers to withdraw all illegal 

containers. 

 

And the question, Mr. Minister, is, we have here a case of business 

people in Saskatchewan openly flouting the laws of the province. 

We have, from your own admission, no representation to your 

department by the Minister of the Environment, and the 

Department of the Environment is aware of it. I'm sure that the 

minister for the Department of Consumer Affairs is aware of it. 

 

My question is: will you now begin to, on the basis of the fact that 

everybody in Saskatchewan seems to know that these business 

people are selling pop in cans, and that's illegal in the province, 

will your department begin now to take prosecutions against those 

who are openly defying the laws of the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I suppose what I . . . You asked me, 

did I have representation from the Minister of Consumer Affairs 

and the Minister of Environment in the last few days with regard 

to cans, and pop in cans, or something. I said I didn't. What I can 

do is undertake to meet with the Minister of Consumer Affairs and 

Minister of Environment. If somebody's out there breaking the 

law, then that's an area that we will look into. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is not the first time this 

issue's been raised in the House. It was raised during 

environmental estimates, almost several months ago, it seems like 

now, that we raised the whole issue of the fact that people were 

breaking the laws in Saskatchewan and were apparently breaking 

it with impunity. I want to know is that you make the undertaking, 

but will you also make the undertaking before the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan that you will, in fact, begin 

prosecutions and say here in this House that, we will begin to 

prosecute people who have broken the laws of the province when 

it comes to breaking The Litter Control Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I suppose you could . . . I suppose you 

could say that people throw litter out of the car and that breaks The 

Litter Control Act and I guess that's a violation. I was not aware 

that this was brought up in estimates so I will undertake to review 

it and give you an answer. I mean I'm not going to at this stage of 

the game say that I'm going to tell all the prosecutors to go out and 

prosecute if they find a pop can. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, don't you . . . Mr. Minister, don't you 

think that it's irresponsible when the Minister of Environment and 

Public Safety was notified more than a month ago that violations 

to the Act were occurring — open violations; that when there's 

stories in the newspapers of the province that talk openly about 

how the law is being broken; don't you think it is somewhat 

strange that the minister involved wouldn't come to your 

department, or the ministers involved wouldn't come to your 

department, and ask that, in fact, the Department of Justice begin 

to take action in this matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I will undertake to you to raise this with 

the deputy — and they're both here — and the director of public 

prosecution to see whether or not they will pursue prosecution. It's 

up to the prosecutions department to determine what prosecutions 

to be laid, not up to me. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I will accept that you will undertake 

it. Will you give an undertaking to give a response to this House in 

this matter within . . . before the end of the week? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As I indicated to the hon. member, the 

decisions to take prosecutions are taken by the director of public 

prosecutions and by the prosecutors. They are not taken by the 

Attorney General, they have never been taken by the Attorney 

General over a long period of time, nor should they. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Just a bit of background before I ask questions, 

Mr. Minister, in regards to the history, I suppose, on incarceration 

rates in northern Saskatchewan, and for native people in general in 

this province. There was a great public outcry in the latter ’60s and 

in the early ’70s of the situation, and during the ’70s and early 

’80s some improvements have been made in that area. 

 

Such things as increasing the support to groups like John Howard, 

and also providing a native court workers program were important 

developments that provided very good support for people who 

were bringing into a  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1861 

 

situation of having to deal with the law. 

 

The PC approach, since you have come in in the ’80s, was one 

where immediately there was, you know, a jail built in the North, 

which sent a signal to a lot of people that some of the support 

systems might be, indeed be, cut back, and that, you know, the 

system prior to the ’60s was the one that was going to be put into 

place. There was a lot of concern, you know, voiced by people, 

and you've heard about it, you know, this spring when the native 

court workers program . . . you know, where 30 people were 

eliminated. 

 

One of the key concerns that a lot of people had was the issue of 

language, and especially for a lot of people in northern areas in 

terms of understanding the law and doing what was in front of 

them. I just worked with a native court worker in the area and she 

helped quite a bit in getting people to understand the situation. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

She spoke, you know, automatically in a bilingual capacity and 

was able to translate those things that were taking place in a court 

situation and relate the same type of information back to the 

people in their own language. 

 

There was also a concern by a lot of people that, you know, 

although we had a native court worker program which hired a 

Cree speaking person, there wasn't one for Dene speaking people. 

In light of the recent court decision in the province which well 

understands the importance of people dealing with law in their 

own first language context — and I refer to, you know, the 

decision in regards to French in the understanding, you know, of 

the importance of language and understanding of key concepts of 

law in your own language — what is your own position in regards 

to that development, and especially as it relates to northern 

Saskatchewan where a lot of people are still Dene speakers and 

Cree speakers, and also in certain areas in the province here? What 

is your position in regards to providing that type of similar idea as 

what has happened in this court case with French when it comes 

down to Cree and Dene language? What is your own position on 

that as a minister in charge today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The position of the department is that we 

supply translators for anybody, and that would be primarily in the 

North in their access to the courts. They have translators that will 

translate one language to the next. If your question to me is, 

should the same rules apply to the recent Court of Appeal decision 

with regards to the right to have a trial in French, a French judge, 

conducted totally in French. One has not . . . I have really not 

looked at the implications of that, I can honestly say to you. It's 

something, I suppose, that is worthy of some consideration. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Same question. In regards to that translation 

services that are provided in the South for different speakers, for 

example on French speaking people, how much are the translators 

paid down here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — On the question of French, there's no 

translators for French. What you have in Saskatchewan now, if 

somebody applies to have their  

case conducted in French, under the most recent Court of Appeal 

decision and under the decision that we took to implement that by 

September 1, what we have would be a bilingual judge, a bilingual 

prosecutor, and if it was a jury trial, a bilingual jury; or at least a 

French speaking jury, French speaking judge, French speaking 

prosecutor. And then I would assume the defendant would want a 

French speaking defence counsel if he made application to have 

his case conducted in French. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — In regards to that translation payments, are they 

the same when you pay for your translation services for speakers 

of different languages? Are they paid the same as the ones you pay 

in northern Saskatchewan? What's the rate of pay? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that it varies in the sense that 

the translators that we'd use, let's say, for translation to Greek or 

translation to Chinese, we would employ somebody in the private 

world that acts as a translator, and whatever that might be, that's 

what we would have to hire. We don't do that as a policy of the 

department, but that's something that would be arranged by the 

individual prosecutor. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Could I get more information in regards to that 

specific issue? Because I'd like to compare the rates, the pay on 

the translators, you know, that you use in northern Saskatchewan 

as compared to the translators down here to see if there's any 

discrepancy at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that what we'd have to do is go 

through a list of bills submitted by prosecutors to see if we can get 

you some kind of statistical information on that. That might take 

some time to do, but we'll undertake to try to get it for you. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — You mentioned in your previous comments that 

you supported the concept of mediation diversion. You also 

mentioned that you provided mediation diversion help through 

Social Services. My understanding in northern Saskatchewan is 

that I haven't heard of a . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Only under young offenders. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Under young offenders only? Okay. The same 

problem arises, you know, whether you're dealing with court 

workers or mediation diversion, is a language situation — making 

sure that you have bilingual people. What steps are you taking in 

mediation diversion, if you're pursuing a policy on that, to make 

sure that it is indeed in a bilingual capacity so that you'll be able to 

deal with people in a fair and just manner in northern 

Saskatchewan? Are you trying to proceed with that idea in mind? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think as I indicated to the hon. member 

when the question was posed to me that that mediation diversion is 

now used in Saskatoon for adult offenders and around the 

province for young offenders. Young offenders fall under the 

jurisdiction of the Minister of Social Services, not the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1862 

 

What I did indicate further was that in the mediation arbitration 

approach that we're taking, we would hope to be able to have a 

white paper out or some similar type document by this fall, and 

that's certainly something that could be considered. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Just one final comment. Most of the court workers 

that I've talked to in the native court workers program say that, 

you know, the change in policy will make the situation worse than 

it is right now, and that careful steps should be taken to make sure 

that the situation is monitored and researched; that in fact the 

initial thrust, you know, the idea that having more jails and having 

more native people going into jails is just not the solution. 

 

People are saying that with a bilingual context they need the 

support system. Mediation diversion is not enough, that you'd 

need a specific targeted group of people such as court workers to 

be able to work with a mediation diversion situation, and that 

would in itself — a combined approach like that — would be a 

better approach. And that's the feedback, you know, I'm getting. 

And I would like to hear you make a comment on that floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well it's certainly something that we are 

going to monitor, as indicated in response to the member from 

Saskatoon, was that the number of native people being 

incarcerated was still increasing significantly, even with the court 

worker program. 

 

And the question is: would a properly run mediation diversion 

program for adults — which we don't have now, but for in 

Saskatoon — would that accomplish the purpose better than 

before? So that's something that we'll look at. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in the May convocation, the 

Law Society of Saskatchewan was asked by your department to 

provide three representatives, I believe, to a committee which was 

to consider farm debt. The minutes that I read — I reviewed them 

actually this morning — indicated that those members were 

appointed. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is day 56. If there is a critical problem facing 

this province, it's the farm debt situation. If there was one problem 

that I would have thought that you would have taken some time to 

deal with, it would've been farm debt. And yet, as I say, this is day 

56; we've had nothing from you. And I'll venture to say, when you 

get on your feet, you're not going to be able to give us any 

description of what that legislation might eventually look like. 

 

Mr. Minister, you people have a policy on agriculture. It's the 

throw money at the problem, and let the chips fall where they lay. 

And that is simply not good enough, Mr. Minister. If we don't do 

something about the farm debt problem, we're going to lose a lot 

of the younger and the more productive farmers. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister: when in the name of heavens are we 

going to see this legislation that you have had in the oven for some 

months now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I can advise the hon. member that 

there is few issues that are drawing more attention from our 

cabinet than how we deal with that. If you are to look at the farm 

debt numbers in this province, the largest farm debt numbers 

probably come from an area of the province that I represent. So to 

say that somehow we're not dealing with that is, in fact, not true. 

 

Now the reality . . . Now the member from Regina Centre would 

somehow have us believe that you can simply sit down and write a 

law and solve the problem. Well you can't do that. This is a 

complex area; it's an area that we intend to give a great deal of 

thought to. For the hon. member to somehow suggest that we do 

not have the interests of the farmer at heart, I think is rather a long 

bow to draw from an individual that lives in Regina, that says all 

we ever do is throw money at the farmers. To make a statement 

that all we do is throw money at the farmers, I think reflects the 

attitude of a person that really doesn't understand rural 

Saskatchewan and the farm problem in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I don't pretend to be an expert 

on the farm problem. I can tell you what the effect of the 

agricultural crisis is on urban people, and it is creating economic 

problems in the cities every bit as much as it is in the rural areas. I 

don't pretend to be an expert on agriculture, but I know what the 

crisis is doing. Mr. Minister, this is our major industry, and it is in 

very serious difficulty. It has been in very serious difficulty for a 

long period of time. 

 

Mr. Minister, I cannot imagine that on day 56 of the session you 

would tell us it's a complex problem. Mr. Minister, you seem to 

belong to the "gee ain't it terrible" school when it comes to dealing 

with this problem. All you can do is weep and gnash your teeth 

and tell us what a terrible complex problem it is. We know that. 

 

The time, Mr. Minister, has come for some solutions. The time has 

come for your government to make some decisions and to do 

something and stop agonizing about the problem and provide this 

province with some solutions, because this is the most critical 

problem that this province has. It’s been around for a long time, 

long enough that you ought to be embarrassed that you haven’t 

done anything about it. 

 

When I say, Mr. Minister, that your solution is to throw money at 

the problem and let the chips fall where they lay, what I mean 

when I say that is that the money you have spent has not been very 

constructively spent. You've spent a good deal of money, and 

you've accomplished very, very little. The industry is in worse 

shape now than it was before you spent the money. So I say, Mr. 

Minister, I say to you that the time has come for this government 

to make some decisions about what it should do about agriculture 

and have the courage to implement those. The time is long since 

past when you should be telling us how complex it is. Of course 

it's complex. It's also serious enough that it demands immediate 

action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1863 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the hon. member knows full well that 

the way the cabinet process of government works is that you . . . 

while you are exploring and developing policy, that is not made 

public. When it is decided as to what you're going to do, you make 

that public. 

 

To indicate somehow that this side of the House does not have a 

concern on, or an interest in agriculture and farming, I think is 

drawing on a very long straw. Now we can be criticized for a lot 

of things, but I don't think you want to stand up, representing a 

core riding in the city of Regina, and say that all you folks that 

represent rural Saskatchewan don't care, don't understand rural 

Saskatchewan. I don't think that is believable, quite frankly. 

 

Now you can maybe criticize us for a number of things, but I 

would suggest you don't criticize us for being concerned and 

sensitive to rural Saskatchewan and to the farm community of 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I'm not saying, Mr. Minister, that you don't 

care. I'm saying you're unable to make a decision. It's the only 

conclusion one can draw. 

 

Your Premier does . . . Your Premier spends a good amount of his 

time in public talking about the problem. What he has never done 

is provided anything that looked like a solution. In fact, some of 

the programs that have cost so much have exacerbated the 

problem. Those aren't your particular programs. Your particular 

responsibility, Mr. Minister, is to come forth with some legislation 

to deal with farm debt. It's been known for months that this is a 

serious problem. We're going to start losing a number of farmers if 

something isn't done about it. 

 

The federal government has one solution which is abhorrent, and 

that is to get the speculators owning the land and the farmers 

working for them. Other institutions, the Credit Union by way of 

example — I saw a proposal that came from them — they have a 

different system. 

 

Mr. Minister, you don't seem to have a system at all. You don't 

seem to have any programs. All you've got is a statement in this 

House that it's a very complex problem, and we're worrying about 

it. Well, Mr. Minister, while you're worrying, farmers are 

disappearing off the land. And those which are actually declaring 

bankruptcy are a small tip of the iceberg. There's a lot more that 

are simply turning the land over to the bank and walking away 

from it. I wish, Mr. Minister, that there were some accurate 

statistics as to how many farmers we're losing because of your 

failure to bring debt legislation into this House. But it should 

alarm everyone and embarrass you people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I don't want to get into an argument 

on agriculture with the hon. member from Regina Centre. I would 

dearly love to argue agriculture with him for some period of time, 

but I don't think we will do that. I think you will have your chance 

when the Premier's estimates on Agriculture comes up. I can 

indicate to the hon. member that nobody in this House is more 

concerned about farm debt than I am, representing an area that I 

represent. 

 

(2115) 

 

And I will also advise the hon. member that when that legislation 

comes through, it will be thought out in a proper direction, just 

like our other agriculture policy has been, and been very well 

received by the farmers. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might beg 

the indulgence of, particularly the member for Quill Lakes, to 

make an introduction. If I have that leave, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would like to introduce a couple of 

people who are visiting us here tonight, Mr. Chairman, on their 

way to Washington. They are D'Arcy and Barbara McGee. They 

represent Canada in . . . Actually they have represented Canada in 

many parts of the world, including Brussels and Tokyo and other 

parts of the world as an energy specialist in embassies around the 

world for Canada. 

 

D'Arcy is currently on his way to Washington to represent 

Canada's interests there with an emphasis, I believe, on oil and gas 

and coal and hydroelectricity and that kind of thing — very 

important questions relative to the Saskatchewan scene these days. 

 

And I might also add that D'Arcy was in Tokyo at the embassy 

there at the time that our uranium markets were expanded to a 

couple of utilities in Japan and served us very well there. Just a 

small sample, Mr. Chairman, of the calibre and quality of people 

that represent Canada around the world on these kinds of matters, 

and I invite all members to welcome D'Arcy and Barbara here this 

evening and wish them well in their stay in Washington. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I wish 

to turn to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission at this 

point, and I wish to say, Mr. Minister, that it's ironic that cuts in 

the budget and staff at the Human Rights Commission should 

come the same year that we celebrated the 40th anniversary of the 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights — the first human rights legislation 

in North America. 

 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission's annual report for 

1986 states: 

 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission joins others 

in the celebration of that event and pays  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1864 

 

tribute to those whose respect for human rights was evident 

in the legislation that they passed. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Minister, the actions of the present government in 

Saskatchewan reveal little, if any, respect for human rights. And 

not surprisingly, this attitude is prevalent across a number of 

policy areas. 

 

Your government has shown little inclination to support those 

measures which serve to protect the disadvantaged and those 

Saskatchewan residents with the least power. Instead, you've 

sought to dismantle or seriously underfund agencies which serve 

to monitor or regulate your activities, such as the Saskatchewan 

Association on Human Rights, John Howard Society, for example, 

Voice of the Handicapped, and many other advocacy agencies. 

 

In the particular case of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission, if the province continues its current approach to the 

commission, there may not be one left when the government's 

term is over. And in particular, in 1984-85, the estimated budget 

for the commission was $1,050,950 and the person-years were 

estimated at 21.4. In 1987-88, we're down to 860,900 and 

person-years of 15.4. 

 

Now while the commission's budget has remained virtually the 

same or been reduced in the last three and four years, the number 

of complaints, Mr. Minister, the number of complaints have 

increased dramatically. We understand that the number of 

complaints with the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 

has increased by approximately 40 per cent in the last four years 

— 40 per cent and yet their budget has been decreased, and the 

person-years have been decreased from 21.4 to 15.4. 

 

Now in addition to its investigative and adjudicative functions, the 

commission plays a very important role in the area of education, 

education of the public. It also plays an important role in 

reviewing exemption requests and affirmative action programs 

submitted to the commission, exemptions from the code for the 

affirmative action programs. 

 

In order to balance their budget, the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission employees have agreed, Mr. Minister, to take a 10 

per cent reduction in work hours and salaries, rather than lose five 

staff as a result of budget cuts. And it will also close its offices in 

Saskatoon and Regina on every second Friday in an attempt to 

reduce cost. It will make itself, in that sense, less accessible to the 

public through no particular choice of its own, but because of 

necessary cut-backs and the need to reduce the costs. 

 

The number of complaints, therefore, waiting to be investigated 

will increase because the reduced work week means the staff will 

provide 10 per cent less service to the public. And as you know, 

Mr. Minister, there has been a serious backlog in cases before the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, a serious backlog. And 

yet this government has seen fit to cut the Human Rights 

Commission by some 15 per cent. 

 

This point must be emphasized over and over again, because in 

times such as these, when we have high  

unemployment, tough austerity measures, we need constant 

vigilance of our human rights in this province, particularly in these 

tough times. But instead, we see a cut-back of 15 per cent and a 

supposed reduction of 10 per cent in terms of working hours. 

 

I also want to point out, Mr. Minister, that one-third of the 

complaints before the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, 

before the commission, were complaints based on sex 

discrimination. So the Human Rights Commission is very 

important to the women of this province, and once again, 

according to your government measures, women are being 

neglected, and their programs that protect them are being slashed. 

 

And I also want to once again refer to the backlog that existed in 

the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, and which I fear 

will be increased once again and will be added to because of the 

cut-backs, and I want to bring this to your attention because we are 

all aware that there was at least one case that was thrown out 

because of the backlog, because it wasn't being dealt with 

expeditiously. 

 

And in the House when I asked a question about the backlog, the 

minister has referred to a 32-hour work week for the commission. 

Well the minister was aware when he referred to that 32-hour 

work week that that only applied to five clerical staff in the 

commission, and that the five clerical staff had little if no effect on 

the backlog. It did not apply to human rights officers. The minister 

was aware of that, and yet he referred to the 32-hour work week, 

and in that fashion, I believe, left people with the impression that 

the entire commission was working for 32 hours. I'm not 

suggesting those were the words he used, but it left people with 

that impression. 

 

I think the employees of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission, Mr. Minister, deserve a lot more than that. Many of 

them, many of them — I'm not sure how many, but I do know 

some of them — have put in overtime, overtime, their own time, 

to help with that backlog. And instead, what do they get in this 

House? They get the minister saying there's a 32-hour work week 

when most of them have a regular work week of 37 to 38 hours. 

And I think that's very unfair treatment of the employees of the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Minister, I'd like to hear from you tonight are 

the proposed amendments to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code. There have been amendments put forth to this government, 

back in 1985, by the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, a 

proposal for some very good amendments to the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code. I have them here if you're not familiar with 

exactly what they are, the most important one, I suppose, being the 

general equality provision, or open-ended discrimination clause, 

somewhat like the clause in the charter of rights. 

 

And I would like to know tonight, Mr. Minister, whether this 

government is planning to implement the amendments that were 

suggested as far back as 1985 by the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission; whether this government is intending to bring the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code in line with the charter of 

rights?  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1865 

 

Because I suggest to you, sir, that those amendments are long 

overdue, and I would like to see them forthcoming in this session. 

 

And I want to say something, Mr. Minister, about the Murray 

Chambers case. I think it is absolutely appalling that the Social 

Services department would be given a carte blanche right to 

discriminate against people who apply for social services, contrary 

to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. I think that's absolutely 

appalling that they would be allowed to go ahead and discriminate. 

Does that mean that they can refuse to give natives social services 

and it's not discriminatory, that they can refuse this on the basis of 

race? Can they refuse a Jew or a Roman Catholic social services 

on the basis of his or her religion? I ask you whether that's possible 

as a result of the Murray Chambers case, Mr. Minister? And if it 

is, I strongly suggest that this government immediately comes 

forward with legislation that will rectify the situation, and make 

sure that those grounds of discrimination are not permitted in this 

province. 

 

I want to also ask the minister what emphasis he is going to ask 

the Human Rights Commission to put on education because, in 

my respectful opinion, one of the best ways to eliminate 

discrimination in a province is to educate our young people and 

our adults with respect to what is discrimination and what the laws 

are with respect to discrimination. And the role that the 

commission plays with regard to education has too long been 

underestimated by our governments. It's absolutely imperative, in 

order to have an effective human rights system in a province, that 

education be given a top priority — education of human rights be 

given a top priority by our commission. And I strongly urge the 

government, strongly urge the government, to ensure that the 

commission is properly funded in order to play that very, very 

important role in the human rights area. 

 

I would ask the minister then to reply to some of the matters that 

I've raised. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the hon. member's raised a number of 

issues. We in fact did cut back the Human Rights Commission as 

she questioned me in question period. She says I somehow 

referred to the fact that all staff members of the Human Rights 

Commission were working a 32-hour work week. If I was to read 

from Hansard, July 13,1987, I said " . . . a group of employees 

who work on a 32-hour work week." So I don't think that says the 

entire group. You say that left the impression a group of 

employees within the Human Rights Commission work on a 

32-hour work week. Well that's what I would read that to say. 

 

Now a couple of observations. Number one observation is that I 

think it's a valid criticism to ask, is it proper that you have a 

32-hour work week? Now it used to be a 40-hour work week; 

we're now down to a 37.5-hour work week for the most part. Is it 

proper to have a 32-hour work week? Is that not a legitimate 

question to pose to the Human Rights Commission? I suggest that 

it is. 

 

If you look at the funding of Human Rights Commission in the 

three prairie provinces, which I think is a worthwhile gauge, is the 

. . . Alberta spends on a per capita basis 50  

cents per capita for Human Rights Commission; the province of 

Manitoba spends 86 cents per capita on the Human Rights 

Commission; the province of Saskatchewan spends 85 cents per 

capita on the Human Rights Commission. 

 

Now the province of Saskatchewan, province of Manitoba, are 

approximately the same size of 1 million people. I would assume 

the two provinces would face roughly the same number of 

concerns. The population, the type of people in both provinces are 

roughly the same. And I would guess that the dollars that we 

spend on the Human Rights Commission are pretty much identical 

to what is being spent in the province of Manitoba. 

 

With regard to the human rights in education, the question, I 

suppose, can be properly posed: is the Human Rights Commission 

the proper function by which to provide education, or should that 

be done by various education — other education mechanisms 

around, or the media itself, that type of thing? 

 

(2130) 

 

You asked whether or not that we would be proposing, or bringing 

forward, amendments to the Human Rights Commission. I 

indicated, I believe, last December or early 1987 that I would be 

bringing forward to cabinet a proposal to amend the Human 

Rights Commission as it relates to mental disability. And I would 

hope that we would see that in this session. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the 32-hour work 

week, I didn't say that you had said all staff; I said you left people 

with the impression that the staff was only working the 32-hour 

work week. But I wonder why you even mentioned it. 

 

I wonder why you even mentioned when you knew that the human 

rights officers, who looked after the backlog of complaints, were 

working 37.5 hours or 37,8 hours, something like that per week, or 

38, somewhere in there — but longer than 32 hours, and when, in 

fact — and when, in fact, Mr. Minister, some of them were putting 

in overtime at their own expense. And I felt that it was very unfair 

to them, and that they deserved far better than that. 

 

You haven't answered my question with respect to the Murray 

Chambers case, Mr. Minister; that's the Social Services case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Our view is the . . . The view of the 

department is that the Chambers case was decided on a question of 

fact. To somehow suggest that the interpretation of the Chambers 

case would mean that you could discriminate based on colour or 

based on religion, I think, would be hardly fair to make such an 

accusation. So I don't believe that to be (a) the case; and I don't 

believe that to be (b) any kind of interpretation that could be made 

from the Chambers case. 

 

Ms. Simard: — What was the question of fact, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Perhaps my answer was not quite  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1866 

 

accurate in this sense that when it was appealed — I think it's 

appealed to the Queen's Bench court — to the Queen's Bench 

Court, the appeal was denied, based on that it was a question of 

fact, and it could only appeal on a question of law. So that was . . . 

Perhaps I misunderstood from my officials as to what was 

involved. 

 

As I understand that particular case, it was a question of can you 

pay a lower rate, or should you pay conversely a higher rate to 

single employables on welfare as opposed to married couples on 

welfare. I take it that was the interpretation, and that was the just 

. . . the crux of the argument was on that basis. 

 

Ms. Simard: — It was decided, Mr. Minister, on whether or not 

the Social Services Department was offering a public service, and 

the board of inquiry held that it wasn't a service within the 

meaning of the code, Mr. Minister. It was decided on whether or 

not there was a public service being offered, and the board held 

that service wasn't a service within the meaning of the code. 

 

Now the Court of Appeal may have said that was a question of 

fact, but if indeed that was the crux of the decision, then your 

government is faced with a decision now as to whether or not 

you're going to amend the legislation to make sure that the Social 

Services department is subject to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code, because some people argue that it isn't, because of that 

decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can simply say to the hon. member that 

the department is not at this point in time . . . has not to this point 

in time actively considered changing the Human Rights 

Commission to cover the particular situation that you referred to. 

It's something that we will discuss at a later date to see whether we 

might do this. That would then have to go forward to cabinet. It 

would have to be . . . consult with the Minister of Social Services, 

so I can't answer the question. 

 

If I was to fairly answer the question at this point in time, I would 

say it has not been actively considered to change the Human 

Rights Commission to cover this particular case to date. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, will you give the House your 

understanding that you'll look at the Chambers case and consider 

amendments to the Human Rights Code to rectify the problem that 

exists as a result of that case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I will give consideration to the matter that 

you raised in the House today with regard to the Chambers case. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now with respect to 

your comments on education, you said that the education function 

perhaps could be better performed by an agency other than the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. I'm not suggesting that 

I agree with that, but given the fact that that is the case, who then 

is performing this function, and if there isn't anyone performing it, 

are you prepared to make sure that education in the area of human 

rights becomes a priority of your government, regardless of which 

agency performs the role of being the educator. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — When you say, am I prepared to say that I 

will make it a priority of our government, I can undertake to 

indicate to you that we will look at that question. I can't indicate to 

you that we will make it a priority, or how you would define the 

word priority. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Are you prepared to make this an important thing 

for your government to have done in the next year or two years, 

for example. If it's not included in this budget, will you be looking 

at this in your next budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I will undertake for the hon. member 

opposite that I will review this and bring forward proposals for 

budget finalization next year. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you give me a 

breakdown in the salary for personal services — how much goes 

to the commission, and how much goes to the staff of the 

commission as opposed to the commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We have to do a calculation on that. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Okay, I'll ask another question then while you're 

getting that answer, Mr. Minister. I would like to know what's 

being done in your department with respect to implementing an 

affirmative action program for the three target groups: women, the 

physically disabled, and natives. And does your department have 

an affirmative action program, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I will get them to get the details, but I think 

that if you look at some of the actions that we have taken, number 

one, Ellen Gunn has been promoted to the position of director of 

public prosecution, which is the first time that's ever happened in 

the province of Saskatchewan; that recently Judge Wedge was 

elevated to the Saskatchewan Queen's Bench court, which I think 

was a positive step, a step that we endorsed. In our government, 

the chief of staff from my office is a woman. Most recently we 

appointed a new coroner in this province, which falls under our 

jurisdiction, and that particular individual was a woman. And we 

are looking at a couple of new appointments, perhaps down the 

road, in Justice, too, that we could look at that would be that way. 

 

I would undertake that when we look at appointments to the court, 

women are going to be given a priority; they are going to be 

ranked in there. I think in fairness that you need 10 years at the bar 

to be appointed to the bench, and in fairness I think in the last 10 

years there has been a tremendous increase in the number of 

women that are graduating from law school compared to the days 

when you and I graduated from law school where there was only 

perhaps two or three. 

 

Now that's not in fact the case today, so I think that over time that 

type of thing happens, and I think in fairness from the professional 

positions that you, in fact, see more women graduating from law 

school in the last 10 years which will mean, in turn, more women 

ultimately being appointed to higher positions within the 

department. 

 

I've made a concerted effort in that regard, and I suppose  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1867 

 

it's never perfect by — certainly by women's standards, that they 

would like to see more, but I think progress has in fact been made. 

So that takes time and will take time. I'll perhaps then get some 

more details on the other two areas. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just a comment on 

affirmative action programs. I assume that in appointing the 

individuals you have earlier referred to that it wasn't part of an 

affirmative action program because you need approval from the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission to have an affirmative 

action program, and if you don't have that approval, then you 

could be accused of reverse discrimination — so just a note of 

advice. 

 

I would like to see your government, both in the public sector and 

on a longer-term basis in the private sector with large corporations, 

look at and seriously consider legislating affirmative action and 

the necessity to implement affirmative action in the government. 

 

You have referred to a number of appointments that are women. 

One of them was Judge Wedge, and of course she's a federal court 

appointment, as the minister knows. But it doesn't deal with 

natives and it doesn't deal with the physically disabled. So when 

you're looking at affirmative action, we are looking at it from the 

three target groups, or we should be looking at it from the three 

target groups. 

 

I would like to know from the minister, then, what the status of the 

accessibility regulations are for the physically handicapped? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The question relates to the facilities of 

handicapped people. That falls under Environment and Public 

Safety and not under the Department of Justice. 

 

I can advise that we have a committee in the department dealing 

with the particular issue on . . . I stand chastised. I shouldn't have 

talked about affirmative action, but a committee within the 

department that encourages in recruiting and hiring, to hire more 

women into the Department of Justice. 

 

We are working and attempting to hire more people, in 

corrections, of native ancestry. And you've got to appreciate that 

the hiring of those people . . . you have to have qualified people 

and properly trained people to go into that job of corrections, 

because that's not a job that you can put someone in through an 

affirmative action question. So that is being pursued as best 

possible. We are in fact looking at, perhaps, one of our correction 

camp facilities, in fact, having it totally native and run by the 

natives is an area that we are exploring with various people in the 

community. 

 

(2145) 

 

So affirmative action, I suppose we can sit and argue all night 

whether we should have affirmative action have quotas. I've never 

been one that really supported that theory that you should say that 

we should set a quota that says 50 per cent of the people working 

in the Department  

of Justice have to be women, or whatever. 

 

I believe that we have to move towards that. I believe that progress 

is in fact being made in this department and other departments, 

and I think you have to acknowledge that in fact it is. I never said 

for a minute . . . I heard someone suggest that I never elevated 

Marion Wedge to the Queen's Bench court. What has developed 

though is a situation where the federal government and the 

provincial government collaborate, if you like, on the 

appointment, and that appointment I certainly endorsed as having 

been made. Now I might not have said that about some of the 

previous appointments, but I wasn't in this department at that point 

in time, so I withhold my comment on that. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, with respect to affirmative action, I 

just wish to comment on a couple of your last comments. The 

reason for establishing an affirmative action program and going to 

the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission is not to set quotas, 

but to establish goals that you work towards — that you may not 

fulfil but that you have something to work towards. But it's not to 

establish inflexible quotas. 

 

And what one has to do with an affirmative action program in 

areas where you know you just can't stick a person in the area, as 

you mentioned, you have to train people and provide them with 

support services so that they are qualified and able to fulfil the 

position and do it properly and adequately. And that's another 

good reason for going to the Human Rights Commission with the 

program for approval, because they can assist you in setting up a 

workable program, one that really works, not just an ad hoc 

program that has been thrown together. And therefore I urge you 

to do that if you haven't already done so. 

 

The other point I want to make at this time is that 22 per cent of all 

complaints that went to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission were complaints on the grounds of sexual 

harassment. And I want to know if the government has any 

specific policies with respect to sexual harassment in the public 

service, and if it has, what are they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I don't want to beg off your question, but 

that particular issue is dealt with by the minister responsible for 

Public Service Commission and the chairman of the Public 

Service Commission. And we might advise them with regard to 

various legal questions, but that is not something that we would set 

policy for, or be responsible to answer for government for. 

 

Ms. Simard: — On July 13, Mr. Minister, you said that 17.1 per 

cent of the total Department of Justice budget . . . you said that 

there was a 17.7 per cent increase, pardon me, in the total 

Department of Justice budget. That was on July 13, I believe. 

 

Now as I understand, Mr. Minister, and correct me if I'm wrong, 

but as I understand, 80 per cent of that 17.1 per cent increase has 

gone to the property management corporation. In other words, it's 

been a payment made to another government agency. 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1868 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In response to the question that there has 

been a 16.8 per cent — if I said 17.1, I was wrong; 16.8 per cent 

by calculation today — increase in funding to the Department of 

Justice, if you zero out the property management it would be 3.55 

per cent. And if you look at that, you would go as follows: that 

31.7 per cent of the budget goes to RCMP contract, 31.7; 26.3 per 

cent goes to corrections; 14.6 goes to the courts and prosecutors; 

12 per cent goes to property management to pay for facilities — 

that's the courts, the correction institutions, that type of thing . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No but, that is not to pay for them; that 

is to provide the upkeep and the service and that type of thing. 

Legal services and administration count up for 6.5 per cent. 

 

So that tallies up to about 91 per cent, comes into that area, which 

leaves you with about 3.6 per cent to land titles. The long and the 

short — and this is classic government, it seems to me — is that 

you end up then with discretionary spending, if you like, of about 

5 per cent on a $126 million budget. And that discretionary 

spending of 5 per cent covers the following: personal property, 

public trustees, the coroner, the Human Rights Commission, the 

Law Reform Commission, the Police Commission, Public and 

Private Rights Board, Surface Rights Board, Farm Ownership 

Board, Securities Commission, mediation board, land security, 

crimes compensation, and grants to third parties. 

 

So when you get down to it, if you really look seriously at how 

you allocate budgets in a department like Justice, your 

discretionary dollar is really quite fine as to what you can do, 

assuming that you can't do a great deal about the police, and you 

can't very well cut your budget to a very much degree in the area 

of corrections. Okay, I will . . . 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you haven't answered my question. 

Did 80 per cent of that increase in the budget go to the property 

management corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I don't know whether it's 80 per cent of 

that increase. It was increased from 107 to 126, I believe. Is that 

what the blue book says? Just a minute, I had it in my book here. 

Yes, it went from 107.8 to 126, that's an $18 million increase; 14.5 

million of that was property management; 3.8 million of that was 

to the other services. That's 80 per cent; it's 80 per cent; if it's 75, 

it's 75. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have two or three 

questions I want to direct to the minister having to do with farm 

law issues that have been mentioned in general terms in this House 

in the committee earlier this evening. Before I do that though, one 

specific question about a matter that the minister has dealt with on 

other occasions in question period with respect to the troubling 

circumstances, Mr. Minister, surrounding the Principal Trust 

matter. 

 

You have indicated in the House in question period that an RCM 

Police investigation has been launched upon your instructions with 

respect to that matter in Saskatchewan. While I would not ask you 

to comment in any way at this point upon that investigation, I 

wonder if you could simply inform us as to the time frame that 

may be in play here, and when you might expect to receive a  

report on that matter, if you have any indication of that at this 

moment in time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It's somewhat hard to indicate. The 

investigation involves some investigation what you might call 

white-collar crime, or perhaps it's not fair to call it that, but that's 

the type of thing that would be looked for. The RCMP indicate 

that the investigation is ongoing. They have not given us a date as 

to when they might have a decision for us as to what they might 

do. And I can . . . I would, one, not obviously seek to inquire of 

them what they have for information, that type of thing, and so I 

guess we must still wait to see where that comes down. I would 

guess that they would probably take a decision — again, I'm only 

guessing — but in the near term. I can't imagine it dragging on for 

an extended period of time. One would hope that it wouldn't. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Well I thank the minister for that indication. 

 

With respect to the farm law matters, Mr. Minister. You've had 

some questions on that subject already in the committee and on 

other occasions in the House. In reply to a question which I put to 

you some weeks ago with respect to the general laws in 

Saskatchewan governing the farmer-creditor relationship, you 

indicated that in the view of the government some of those laws in 

Saskatchewan, dating back to the 1930s and ’40s, are perhaps out 

of date in terms of the modern circumstances of agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. And you suggested at that point in time, some 

weeks ago, that a review would be under way to examine those 

laws and to determine whether or not they need an entire revision 

to bring them up to date with modern circumstances. 

 

I wonder if you could indicate tonight if that review process is 

now well under way, and when you might expect to be in a 

position to come forward with some specific legislation as a result 

of the review, modernizing the law in Saskatchewan governing 

farmer-creditor relationships at a time when farm debt issues are 

particularly painful for a significant number of Saskatchewan 

farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The study is under way and it is very in 

depth. Let me suffice to try to answer the question for you this 

way. While the law today is very confusing, as many Acts 

involved, the very nature of that confusion has perhaps a desired 

effect of delaying the foreclosure process, and one therefore does 

not want to streamline if the streamlining helps the financial 

institution to the detriment of the farmer. And so you have a 

problem there, and sometimes maybe confusion is good rather that 

bad as seen through different sets of eyes. 

 

You have that problem. You have the problem that you referred to 

in question period today. If the debt . . . and it's measured in a 

variety of ways. You can perhaps take it from one group or the 

next, but for the sake of argument let's say the debt in 

Saskatchewan is $6 billion — farm debt. The farm debt of $6 

billion is held by some of the major financial institutions, 

including the credit union, including the federal government in 

Farm Credit Corporation, and I suppose you could say, in the 

Saskatchewan government and farm production loan. 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1869 

 

The question becomes, I suppose in yesterday's terms, is simply 

say, well let's make it so that nobody can collect the money, and 

the institution eats the debt, and then the institution no longer lends 

money. Have you really solved your problems? That's a dimension 

that you have to sort of wrestle with on the one side. On the other 

side, you don't want to free it up so that foreclosures become more 

commonplace. 

 

And so the dilemma is there. And it's easy to say that, you know, 

snap to attention and find a solution. Those solutions are fairly 

delicate as to how you do it and, improperly done, I think you get 

the exact opposite results that you intentionally set out to solve in 

the first place. 

 

So that investigation is under way. It has not yet come to my desk, 

and from my desk it would then go to a joint meeting with 

Agriculture, and then from there to cabinet and to caucus. That has 

not taken place yet. In my view, it's an urgent matter that I would 

hope to be able to come to grips with. And I think maybe at the 

end we're probably going to have to look at a series of things, not 

simply one magical little law that is going to solve the problems. I 

would guess that you're going to have to look at a series of things 

as to the nature of finance. I won't get into a great deal more detail 

than that because I'm sure the Premier has more to say about it 

than I. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, would it be fair to say that you 

might be in a position to report to the House in detail on this 

matter some time early in the fall? Would that be a reasonable 

time frame? And while you are answering that question, I would 

also ask you to indicate whether or not your review in this area is 

specifically covering the question of whether The Saskatchewan 

Exemptions Act should apply to government lending agencies, 

just as it applies to private sector lending agencies. Is that included 

in your review? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Your second answer, I think, that's 

certainly something we will consider in that review. The 

exemption obviously is a way that you might look at protecting 

certainly a minimum standard of assets for a farmer, that's number 

one. 

 

Number two, I would hate to be pinned down on the exact time, 

because I would not want to be held to the fact that cabinet or 

caucus decided to go a different way, or one way, and that has not 

been taken yet. So I don't really want to pin us to that. 

 

The whole area's going to be driven primarily by the Premier in 

the sense that the minister responsible for Agriculture is the 

Premier. We are taking an active role in trying to look at the 

various legal dimensions that we could fit into the puzzle, if you 

want. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — One final question, Mr. Minister, having to do 

with any actions that may be commenced now under existing rules 

and existing legislation by government lending agencies in 

relation to their farmer clients. 

 

The Premier has indicated on other occasions that any legal 

remedies available to a government lending agency  

now would only be pursued now in those cases where the farmer 

client essentially puts himself in an incommunicado position, not 

responding to inquiries and so forth. 

 

Could you indicate if that is the general policy of the government 

— whether it be the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, or any other Saskatchewan lending agency dealing 

with farmers — that in terms of immediate legal actions that might 

be contemplated while this whole other area is under review, that 

those legal proceedings would be taken only in those cases where 

farmers seem to be deliberately refusing to communicate with the 

government with respect to their debt obligations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Those particular actions are taken by the 

Ag Credit Corporation who have their own counsel and instruct 

their own counsel. And that would not be something that Justice 

would do. Your question is more appropriately put to the Premier. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, in the Saskatchewan Highways and 

Transportation, 1986 Saskatchewan Traffic Accident Facts, it 

states that fatal accidents have increased from 1985 to ’86 by 11.9 

per cent. Fatal accidents have increased by 11.9 per cent in 

Saskatchewan from 1985 to 1986. Now I would like to know what 

the Minister of Justice, in — you know, having regard to his 

department's responsibilities — what the Minister of Justice will 

do to reduce that figure of 11.9 per cent from ’86 to ’87? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The area that would primarily be involved 

in the Department of Justice would be in the whole area of 

prosecutions on the impaired driving offences, where I think that 

probably if you looked at the number of fatalities — and I don't 

know what the percentage is — but the percentage across Canada 

has always been fairly high that alcohol has been used in, in many 

of the fatal accidents — in fact, in many of the automobile 

accidents, so . . . 

 

We have always, as a government — and this is not something I 

think that's new — have taken a fairly aggressive stand as it relates 

to the prosecution of impaired drivers, particularly the prosecution 

of second offenders and that type of thing. We would explore that, 

and I think that . . . I mean everyone is concerned about fatalities 

on the highway. I don't think that's an issue from one side or the 

other, and I think it's an area that is deserving of some further 

action. Perhaps more advertising of the dangers of it helps. I'm not 

sure that simply prosecuting after the fact is going to solve the 

problem in itself, although it should contribute to it. Maybe the 

bench has to start imposing heavier fines; I don't know whether 

that would solve the problem, whether longer suspension of 

driving privileges would work. Those types of things I would 

certainly be prepared to consider. 

 

Ms. Simard: — And, Mr. Minister, I'd also ask you to consider 

not cutting back on police forces in the province, because it's my 

understanding that there are fewer policemen out there patrolling 

the roads. 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1870 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Again, I indicated to you that the budget 

has increased 17 per cent in the Department of Justice. The 

funding to RCMP is increased from 37 million to $40 million — 

and that's a $3 million increase. That's almost a . . . That's becomes 

almost a 7 per cent increase in policing funding from this 

government. Now if you'll look at . . . There's very few 

departments of government or services of government that have 

had an increase of 7 per cent. 

 

And I think that, well, clearly some have been cut back. You have 

to also bear in mind that what you have is perhaps on a per capita 

basis, five or six criminal offences committed in some of these 

small areas — only five or six criminal offences. And then you 

come to the larger centres where you have sizeably more. And so 

do you deploy your police force more to where the crime is being 

conducted or into the rural areas where they're pretty much crime 

free by world standards? 

 

So I think it's not so simple as to simply say: well, we're cutting 

back on police. They have had as large an increase as anybody 

else in this budget on standards. 

 

Ms. Simard: — The problem may not be so simple that it's just 

policemen that make the difference; and that's not what I 

suggested, Mr. Minister. But the fact of the matter is: regardless of 

the fact that the policing services may have been increased by 7 

per cent, positions have been cut. There have been cuts in 

positions. 

 

And we have a fatal accidents record up 11.9 per cent from ’85 to 

’86. And I'm suggesting to you, Mr. Minister, that by cutting back 

on positions is not going to help this increase in fatal accidents — 

this record. And I realize there has been an increase to policing 

services, but positions have been cut. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Fifteen positions in the RCMP, as I 

understand, were cut out of in excess of 800. And now that's 15 

more officers. Most of those officers were cut from some very 

small areas where there's very low crime rate. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the subvote containing the 

estimates for the Crimes Compensation Board estimate, there was 

a reduction by 25 per cent. Since, Mr. Minister, this is not a matter 

you have any discretion about, but it's simply an amount that was 

spent depending on how much is awarded, I wonder how you 

arrived at the remarkable conclusion that whereas last year you 

needed 446,00, this year you are only going to need 334,500. It 

strikes me, Mr. Minister, that there's a bit of creative accounting 

gone into that figure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What happened there is that whatever they 

award is what we are going to have to pay, and the figure that we 

have down here is the average of the last two years. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — What was spent last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The ’84-85 total payment was $356,084; 

1985-86, actual was $302,920; 1986-87, $340,948. 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Item 2 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, can you advise me whether 

maintenance enforcement comes under 2 or 3 before we move off 

2? — 2 and 3? Okay. Then I will ask my questions under 2. 

 

I wonder if the minister could tell me what the total allocated 

budget and total final expenditure of the maintenance enforcement 

office was for the previous fiscal year, and what is its budget for 

this fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We'll undertake to get that information for 

you. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you. Can you also advise me what the 

Saskatoon family law office lawyers were being paid. Can you 

advise me now, or will you undertake to get it? You'll undertake to 

get me that information within the next week, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — All the information that I undertook to get 

for you, I will deliver to you within a week's time. And if it's 

impossible — because there is one question about going through a 

variety of prosecutor's bills on interpreters; that might take a little 

longer — I'll advise you accordingly. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Okay. I don't believe I asked you this afternoon 

what the lawyers in the Saskatoon family law office were being 

paid. I'd like to know that, Mr. Minister. I also want to know what 

the private lawyers are now being paid to perform the same 

services. And that information will be forthcoming, Mr. Minister? 

You're nodding your head, so I'm assuming it will be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I will forward that information to you. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Item 3 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — On item 3, Mr. Minister, I notice the number of 

positions have been cut by six positions, but the salary allocation 

is approximately $1.5 million more — that is the money 

allocation. And, Minister, can you tell us in general terms how this 

increase is accounted for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that over the last several 

number of years that this particular number was never ever 

accurate in the budget estimates, and what we've done this year is 

to take the actuals from last year and bring it in and correct it, if 

you like, in the budget cycle. Very often this was not done in this 

particular subvote, and it was not a very good estimate for a long 

period of time in this subvote. We have corrected it this time, 

based on actuals and reports. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, either tonight or within a week 

as you have promised, could you tell us what the six positions 

which were . . . the 5.7 positions which were  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1871 

 

deleted — it did not strike me that the courts were overstaffed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'll undertake to give you this. It's 

somewhat complicated, and I'll get that information for you. 

 

Item 3 agreed to. 

 

Item 4 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Why are we cutting one judicial position, one 

judge's position, in light of the conversation we've had all day 

today about the pressures on the court system and the need to 

catch up on the backlog and keep the system running effectively 

and efficiently? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that's simply a carrying of an 

empty position off and on and I'm not — if there's an empty 

position now, we're about to appoint one — it's the best I can give 

you right now. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Item 5 agreed to. 

 

Item 6 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I have the same question with respect to 

public prosecutions. Again it's an area which has scarcely been 

overstaffed and I see we're cutting four positions. I'd like to know 

where those positions are being cut. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — One in Moose Jaw, one in Saskatoon, two 

in Regina. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — What's the rationale for cutting prosecutors. 

As I say, it's hardly an area where you're overstaffed, Mr. Minister. 

Indeed, the prosecutors we have are run off their feet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It was our view that we could absorb the 

work and handle it with fewer people. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, my question is to the Minister of Justice. I 

would be interested in him explaining to the House the procedure 

that his department used in firing one Bob Caldwell, the 

prosecutor — senior prosecutor — in the Saskatoon office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We are advised that there could be a legal 

challenge to this, or a court case involved with this, and at this 

point in time I've been instructed that it would not be proper for 

me to answer that question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can assure you, based on 

the information that I have, that you certainly didn't use ethical 

procedures in getting rid of Mr. Caldwell when you decided to 

terminate his employment — some 32 years employment with the 

civil service of this province. And I would be interested in 

knowing why you chose to get rid of a senior prosecutor in this 

province — a senior prosecutor — over some other junior 

prosecutors, if, in fact, you had to get rid of prosecutors. 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — My answer is still the same. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, is it a fair assumption that with 

fewer prosecutors you're going to be sending more prosecutions to 

the private bar? Is that a fair assumption? That's really what we're 

doing, is privatizing by degree prosecutions in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that we will use whatever 

arrangements we will need in view of what the case-load might or 

might not be. So we're going to use that flexibility; to say that 

we're going to put all prosecutions out to the private bar is not true. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I never said that, Mr. Minister, nor did you 

answer my question. Mr. Minister, my question is: is it a fair 

assumption that with fewer prosecutors in the public service there 

are going to be more prosecutions sent to the private bar? I never 

suggested that in the next six months you're going to privatize all 

prosecutions. I did suggest to you that with fewer prosecutors 

you're almost certain to send more prosecutions to the private bar. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Minister, that I, for one, stand four-square 

against sending prosecutions to the private bar. I do not believe 

that the private bar are as expert on it as the people who work in 

the public service and do nothing else. I believe, Mr. Minister, that 

the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well I see the member from 

Weyburn is giving us the benefit of his long experience with 

public prosecutions. 

 

Mr. Minister, if lawyers who are employed by the Crown do 

nothing else, they develop an expertise in an area of the law which 

is quite different than most others. In my experience, the 

prosecutors which are employed by the Crown do a better job of it 

than private bar. They are almost certainly — it's almost certainly 

less expensive. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Minister, why you are decreasing the number 

of prosecutions — when that almost certainly means there's going 

to be more going to the private bar — where I think they'll be done 

less efficiently at a higher cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — One of the answers is, there's four 

positions cut, and what we're doing is deploying some of the 

lawyers that would spend a great deal of their time in head office. 

They're being deployed out to actually be involved in the 

prosecutions in the court. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Can you be more specific? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Yes, could you be a little more specific about 

who you're deploying? I had the notion that your prosecutors are 

fairly well deployed as it was. The ones I had experience with 

were fairly busy. 

 

I was unaware that there were prosecutors in — apparently at the 

head office who are sitting with their feet on the desk with nothing 

better to do than to run around and fill up the slack with the four 

you fired. I find that answer very difficult to believe, Mr. Minister, 

and I suspect that that is not the answer at all. 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1872 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I'll concede to the minister to 

respond to the statement made by the member first of all, if he'd 

like to respond. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Is it not accurate that it costs more per case to 

use the private bar than it does to use a Crown prosecutor? Is that 

not an accurate statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It can be accurate in one location and one 

particular type of circumstance. It can be not accurate in other 

situations. I mean, I think if you use the rural versus the urban, the 

private prosecutor does a lot more work in the rural area than in 

the urban area. 

 

What I indicated to you, that we were deploying the prosecutors in 

some of the head office work out into the field, it is our view that 

you will now see the amount of the dollars spent on private 

prosecutions increase. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, if we 

may then talk about a specific, would you please tell me how 

many Crown prosecutors were employed in Moose Jaw in 

1986-87, and how many will be employed in 1987-88? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — There was two and there is now one. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And the rationale for cutting the Crown 

prosecutors in half in the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I am advised that with the one in Moose 

Jaw, we can deploy some out of head office from Regina, which is 

reasonably close, to do some prosecutions in Moose Jaw. And 

number two, that we've always used some private prosecutions in 

Moose Jaw, and we have that flexibility to do it, and we believe in 

so doing we can do it cheaper than before. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, are you suggesting that there wasn't 

enough work to occupy two Crown prosecutors in the city of 

Moose Jaw? Is that what you're suggesting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I indicated to you that the one prosecutor 

working full time can be supplemented by people from Regina 

head office going to Moose Jaw to do some prosecutions, which is 

still fairly close to travel. That will take up the bulk of it. And if 

you have the odd case where you get a heavy work-load, you can 

get the private bar to do it at a fraction of the cost of having a 

second lawyer. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — But will you answer my question, Mr. Minister? Is 

it your view then that the office was overstaffed, there wasn't a 

sufficient amount of work for the Crown prosecutors in Moose 

Jaw to occupy two people up till this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, I think what I would indicate is that 

when you looked at controlling cost — that's one area that you 

looked at —and we felt that we could find a savings there and are 

so pursuing it so that we believe we can find a savings. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And how, Mr. Minister, will you make this  

decision then as to which private law firms or individuals you're 

going to use to carry out Crown prosecutions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We'll probably make it on an ad hoc basis. 

 

Item 6 agreed to. 

 

Items 7 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 27 

 

Mr. Shillington: — What's going on here, Mr. Minister? The 

amount spent on the Saskatchewan Securities Commission has 

increased by about 60 per cent; there has been a 25 per cent 

increase in staff, and I am wondering, Mr. Minister, why the rather 

dramatic increase in this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The reasons are, one, a transfer of the 

Department of Co-ops, the co-op security board goes into that. All 

right? We have a position of vice-chairman now as well as 

chairman; and some computer service and printing costs increased 

with computer installation. 

 

I can advise the hon. member that when you look at the Securities 

Commission, you see an expenditure line here. And traditionally 

we've suggested the Securities Commission should operate on a 

break even budget. In other words, their fees go up according to 

their expense. And so the volume of work goes up, and they still 

are in a break even position or slightly profit . . . making a slight 

amount of money. That money flows into the Consolidated Fund 

and back here. But it's based on a break even mandate by the 

Securities Commission. In other words, the people that use the 

Securities Commission are the people that have to pay for it. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — If this represented any increase in the 

protection given to the Saskatchewan public in dealing and 

purchasing securities, I'd be delighted. Given the growling that's 

gone on from the Minister of Consumer Affairs whenever the 

issue . . . whenever Principal Trust is raised with her, I doubt that's 

the case. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you'd give us a specific description in 

writing — I don't need it tonight — of where the increase has 

come from. It seems it's a tad unlikely that one can ascribe a 60 

per cent increase to the absorption of the co-op guarantee board. 

That sounds a little unlikely. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What I will undertake to give you is a 

breakdown of the way the Securities Commission . . . various cost 

items in the Securities Commission. 

 

Item 27 agreed to. 

 

Item 28 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there is yet another reduction in 

the Provincial Mediation Board. Mr. Minister, this follows a 

pattern of reducing those services which are used by people in our 

society which are most helpless and least able to protect 

themselves. This is a service which by and large is used by the 

little guy. this is  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1873 

 

a service which is used by people who are having financial 

problems. When operating properly it provides a means by which 

people can come to terms with debts which often appear 

unmanageable and often staves off bankruptcy. Mr. Minister, I'm 

distressed to see that the funding for this is being cut. 

 

Don't stand up and tell me that the existing work-load is being 

absorbed by fewer staff. It just cannot be, Mr. Minister; that staff 

is busy. And if you've cut three staff, that means you're just going 

to do that much poorer a job of assisting ordinary people who try 

to come to terms with their debts. As I say, the alternative is 

obvious and not very attractive — it's bankruptcy. This often 

staves that off. And I think it's most unfortunate, Mr. Minister, that 

this is getting less staff in times such as this when so many are 

having financial problems. It ought to get more staff, not less. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well this particular subvote is three early 

retirements. We'll explain the numbers. And what we intend to do, 

as I explained to the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview, is 

that this will be looked in conjunction with a series of other things 

in the whole area of mediation and arbitration which I would 

intend to use as a main focus of justice over the next couple of 

years. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I would have thought it would have made 

more sense to have the new solution present at the same time as 

you phased out the staff. If you've got a new idea, that's all well 

and good, but I wouldn't have reduced the staff until the new idea 

was in place. 

 

Mr. Minister, am I correct in saying that this does not include the 

Office of the Rentalsman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that it does include the Office 

of the Rentalsman. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you please give me a 

breakdown of the money that will be going to the Provincial 

Mediation Board, the money to the Office of the Rentalsman, and 

the money to the Rent Appeal Commission. Can you give us that 

breakdown today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that that is not set, and hasn't 

been set for some time. Now this particular thing just came over 

— this particular branch just came over to Justice from Consumer 

Affairs, and we don't have that information for you. I can 

undertake to get it for you, or to try to answer your question, but 

I'm advised you would have to break that type of information out. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well obviously you must break it each year for 

the annual report, so the information should be available. Is that 

not correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I simply advised that we can get it for you. 

I'm advised that they don't have that here, but I would undertake to 

get it for you. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I'd also ask your officials to give 

us a breakdown of the salary for the Rentalsman and the salaries 

for the two Deputy Rentalsmen in Saskatoon and Regina. 

I would also be interested in having a breakdown of the number of 

orders that have been issued by the various rentalsmen and their 

helpers in the last year; I'd be interested in having that information. 

I'd be interested in knowing how many orders were issued by the 

Deputy Rentalsman in Saskatoon, how many in Regina, how 

many orders issued by the Rentalsman, and I understand there's 

some other people on a contractual basis that are also issuing 

orders, and I'd be interested in having that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'll provide that to you. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I would ask the minister to provide that within a 

week. Is that appropriate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As indicated to a previous question, I will 

provide all the information that has been requested today, within a 

week. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I'd also be interested in having the salaries for 

the employees of the Office of the Rentalsman in each of the 

offices in Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince Albert, and I'd also be 

interested in having the names of the people that are working in 

those various positions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'll get that for you. 

 

Item 28 agreed to. 

 

Item 29 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, could you give us a breakdown 

of how the figure of $14,555,700 was arrived at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that the accommodation 

charges come to $13,967,600; mail and postage, 583,100. 

 

Item 29 agreed to. 

 

Item 30 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, there are two boards with 

similar sounding names. This is the Farm Land Security Board. In 

an era when the farm financial problems are multiplying, I wonder 

how it is that this board . . . that less money is . . . fewer resources 

are being allocated to this board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The Federal Farm Debt Review Board also 

does similar jobs. They take part of the cases; we take part of the 

cases. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The notes in the blue 

book, Mr. Minister, with respect to item 30, the Farm Land 

Security Board, indicate that this year there's a transfer of this item 

from the Department of Agriculture to the Department of Justice. 

Could you indicate the rationale for that transfer? Why is it this 

year more of a Justice item where it was an Agricultural item 

previously? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think the answer to that is in the new 

thrust to try to get into more mediation and arbitration, to bring 

many of the things that are involved  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1874 

 

in mediation and arbitration into one department and try to create a 

thrust that we could perhaps co-ordinate them all in both training 

people to arbitrate questions and to mediate questions. And there 

could be some benefits in looking at that whole thing as a thrust, 

particularly if you're going to look at that issue as an area that we 

might move the justice system towards. 

 

Item 30 agreed to. 

 

Item 31 agreed to. 

 

Item 32 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don't need the 

information tonight, but will you provide me with a list of 

agencies receiving grants, and the amount of each grant in 

1986-87 and in 1987-88? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I note 

that item 32, grants to justice organizations and for justice related 

activities, has been cut from 897,000 to 222,000, and it is my 

assumption, Mr. Minister, that those are cuts that are 

predominantly, if not entirely, to non-government organizations 

that work with and on behalf of people who have come in conflict 

with the law. 

 

I think it is indicative of the priorities of your government, Mr. 

Minister, that you've made cuts in this area. And I would welcome 

from you, sir, an explanation as to how you justify cutting, in less 

than a quarter, the funding to non-government organizations who 

do good work for needy people — oftentimes, I would add, poor 

people of Saskatchewan — from the funding to non-government 

organizations here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The largest cut here, and it makes up most 

of the cut, is the native court worker program that we've talked 

about before. 

 

Item 32 agreed to. 

 

Item 33 agreed to. 

 

Item 34 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, did we get an undertaking from 

you to provide a list of your office staff and the salaries which they 

have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You didn't, but I'll get that for you. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Could we also have a list of the trips, the 

out-of-province trips taken by yourself, and the cost of each? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes. 

 

Item 34 agreed to. 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Carried. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditures 

Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 

 

Items 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would like to thank the minister's officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would like to thank my officials as well, 

and I would like to thank the questioning from the hon. members 

opposite. Perhaps it is a reflection that lawyers have traditionally 

served in this institution, and perhaps others should take lessons 

from them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I can hardly resist responding to that, but 

I will. In the interests of time, I move we rise, report progress and 

ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:42 p.m. 


