













































September 21, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 21, 1987 

 

 

2715 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have 

just one or two items I’d like to pursue with the minister this 

evening and I hope he can provide me with some information 

on a couple of subjects. 

 

First of all, Mr. Minister, I have a technical question about a 

publication produced by your department called Saskatchewan 

Hunting and Trapping Guide for 1987. I’m sure your officials 

have a copy of that. 

 

And I have received a number of inquiries from people in 

different locations in southern Saskatchewan having to do with 

the new licence fees that have been imposed for 1987. And I 

would draw your attention particularly to page 26 of this 

publication where the licence fee schedule is laid out, and I just 

would, first of all, Mr. Minister, ask for your confirmation that 

I’m reading this chart accurately. 

 

And I want to take for example the average case in southern 

Saskatchewan of a farm family where, say, a son in the family 

wants to get a licence for hunting gophers or rabbits or 

whatever, and . . . or weasels, or so on. And this chart would 

seem to indicate that first he would have to acquire a 

Saskatchewan wildlife habitat certificate for $10, and a further, 

southern Saskatchewan fur licence fee of $30, and that would 

result in the total cost to this young person, for example, of $40. 

I think, Mr. Minister, if I’m correct, that that’s a three or 

fourfold increase from the fee that used to be in place. 

 

In wonder, first of all, can you tell me if I’m reading that chart 

correctly. And secondly, is it an increase of that magnitude? 

And could you explain why your department felt it necessary to 

increase that particular fee for a very normal, common practice 

which young farm people have pursued for years at relatively 

little cost; why that kind of a fee increase was considered to be 

necessary for this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d be really happy 

to respond to that. First of all, the hon. member used the 

example of gophers and rabbits. I think you’re just throwing 

one out. There is no fee for that; there is no licence fee 

whatsoever. However, there is a $10 habitat certificate, first of 

all. Then any other hunting that the individual would want to 

do, you’d purchase your licence in the normal fashion. 

 

There is no requirement to purchase a fur trapping licence 

unless the individual is going to be engaged in that. And yes, 

that went up, but it reflects the increase in the cost of fur. For 

example, if you trap a mink this year, it’s worth about $80. And 

people who are looking for mink would be looking for more 

than one at a time, or some of  

the other fur. So the fur licence did go up. 

 

Now specifically, I think you referred to the habitat certificate 

and you want to know about that one. Mr. Chairman, the major 

problem facing our wildlife today is habitat, or more precisely 

the lack thereof. We are losing habitat at a tremendously 

alarming rate in Saskatchewan. We’re losing habitat for 

white-tailed deer, moose, elk, as bush is being cleared. And we 

can’t blame the farmers for wanting to clear bush because given 

the economic times, they have to make every dollar they 

possibly can out of every acre they have so they’re clearing 

bush. Well right away, we’re destroying habitat for the large 

ungulates. 

 

We’re also losing habitat for our water-fowl populations at a 

tremendous rate. In southern Saskatchewan, sloughs are being 

drained off and pot-holes are being drained off so we don’t have 

the breeding ground for the ducks. In fact, our duck population 

is down 25 per cent over what it was just a very few years ago. 

So we have gone very strongly into habitat protection programs. 

 

We have the habitat protection Act, The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, which we introduced a couple of years 

ago. We’re adding more acres again this year. It did go, I may 

say, as a non-controversial Bill last year when I added 1.2 

million acres to that Act. I would hope it would go 

non-controversial again this year because it did seem to have 

the support of all members in the House at that particular time. 

We have to be concerned about a habitat. 

 

We have the figures of the loss per constituency. In some areas 

it’s 3 to 4 per cent per year, Mr. Chairman, where we’re losing 

habitat for wildlife. Habitat is the single most important 

problem facing our wildlife populations not only in 

Saskatchewan but right across the continent, and in 

Saskatchewan we are taking measures to address it. 

 

On the fishing licence we have an impost there where one-third 

goes straight into fish development programs, breeding ponds, 

stocking of lakes. We’re doing the same thing on the hunting 

licences and we’re doing the same thing with the habitat 

certificate, and that in a nutshell is the reason behind it. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, as a rather ironic aside I might 

note that some of what you have just said could well fit into the 

many briefs that were presented this afternoon at the Rafferty 

Hearings where the issue of habitat was very, very prominent. 

I’m sure those who presented briefs in opposition to that 

proposal on the basis of the habitat considerations might take 

some encouragement from what you’ve said in indicating your 

concern about habitat as well. 

 

Just to clarify the point about the licences, Mr. Minister, in 

relation to the $30 southern Saskatchewan fur licence, could 

you indicate to me what sort of game and animals and 

fur-bearing animals would be covered by that $30 fee? You’ve 

indicated some who are not, which I fully understand. I wonder 

if you could indicate to me what is covered by that $30 fee, and 

how does it compare to the fee for last year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the royalties  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2716 

 

 

structure can be found on page 36. It’s based on a three-year 

average. The fee had been $10; it’s increased to 30. It also 

reflects the increase in the price of fur which can be expected to 

be returned to the trapper, and all of the different animals are 

listed there with the royalties structure on page 36. 

 

I think you’ll find, and all members would find, Mr. Chairman, 

that this really is a very comprehensive brochure. We’ve had a 

few compliments on it about the content and just how much 

information is available in it. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I appreciate that information, Mr. Minister. 

Your explanation with respect to the increase seems to be 

directly relevant to those who are in commercial kinds of 

operation. And I wonder if you have given any consideration to 

the type of hunting that occurs in many farm areas that really is 

not of a commercial nature. And is there any room in your 

structure for an exemption, perhaps, for a young person on a 

farm with a very casual limited amount of hunting involved. Is 

there a possibility that that could be given some special 

consideration because the level of fee taken together in total, 

$40, might well turn out to be prohibitive for the kind of 

practice that young farm people have carried on in southern 

Saskatchewan for many years at relatively little cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, it’s rather difficult to 

make a distinction between the, may I say, casual trapper, to the 

hon. member, as compared to someone who belongs to a 

trappers’ association in northern Saskatchewan and is making a 

living, because they realize the same profit from the pelt. For 

example, the northern trapper could expect to realize between 

$450 and $500 for a wolf pelt. A coyote right now would be 

worth about $150. So really, when you take the cost of the 

trapper’s licence which everyone must have - they must have 

the fur licence - one coyote pays ten, twelvefold the cost of that 

licence. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Well, I thank the minister for that 

information. I hope he will at least take my concern under 

consideration. I’ve had a number of people contact me on this 

point in the last little while, I gather, as this booklet has gained 

some broad distribution in Saskatchewan. And in some parts of 

the province it does seem to be raising concern, and I would 

hope the minister might look at it and determine whether, in all 

the circumstances, that is a reasonable fee in especially the 

southern parts of the province. I’ll just leave that point with the 

minister for his consideration. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to move to an entirely different area. 

Probably as different as you can get . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . If the minister would like to respond, yes, please if you 

would. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I thank the hon. member for the 

opportunity to respond. I think one of the things that we’ve 

been trying to do as a department is to tie the fees to the value 

of the resource, and that is reflected in this year’s increase. Now 

I know that the increase looked fairly . . . it didn’t look fairly 

significant, it is an significant increase, but the profit realized to 

the trapper is also extremely significant right now, and so we’ve 

tied it to the  

value of the resource. 

 

And I may also say that what we have offered in the last two 

years, and especially in southern communities where perhaps 

trapping is not quite as prevalent, we are offering training 

schools to anybody who’s interested. All they have to do is 

contact the department. We’ll put on the training school and 

assist them to increase their skills, improve their skills, and I’m 

sure for the cost of the licence, which we’re asking them to pay, 

they are really going to realize a profit on that. So I offer that 

for your information. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Well I thank the minister for that answer. 

 

I would like to turn to another area, Mr. Chairman. It’s about as 

different as you can get from the one we’ve just been 

discussing, and that has to do with the very hotly debated topic 

in Regina with respect to the building and, in particular, the 

location of a new art gallery in Regina. 

 

To most people in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the great fight that 

seems to be going on in Regina about the art gallery is a little 

bewildering, and I would like to get this evening some specific 

clarification from the minister about the status of the project 

and, in particular, the government’s involvement in it. 

 

I wonder if the minister could first of all, just to set the stage, if 

the minister could indicate what actually is being proposed, 

where precisely it is to be located as the plans presently stand, 

and who in detail is going to be paying for the total project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, if I may I’ll just 

quote from a little briefing note that I have here to give you 

some chronology of the events leading up to the current status. 

If you prefer and if other members prefer, I can have a 

chronology of the outline of events prepared for you and have it 

sent to you in the next couple of days so you know exactly how 

we got to the current, situation, if that would be of any use to 

you in answering constituency inquiries. 

 

Very briefly, in October 1984, a study was commissioned by 

the gallery and it identified eight sites, and the preferred site 

being in the Wascana Centre adjacent to the museum. That was 

one of the sites studied. A 1984 study was also commissioned 

by the city of Regina, and they identified four locations with the 

museum site, the natural history museum site being the 

preferred site by that city’s parks and recreation department. 

 

In February of 1985, Mr. Chairman, the Mackenzie Art Gallery 

placed advertisements in the Leader-Post requesting interested 

parties to submit proposals regarding site preference for a new 

gallery. I may say to all hon. members, not one reply was 

received to that ad that was placed in the newspaper. 

 

In September 1985, Regina market Square agreed to the 

Wascana Centre site also; September 30, 1985, the city council 

adopted a recommendation endorsing locating the gallery on the 

Wascana Centre site located at Albert Street via the Museum of 

Natural History. 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2717 

 

 

(1915) 

 

And on April 1, 1986, following all of these consultations, 

following all of these proposals, following all of the 

recommendations, including a motion passed by the city 

council, the Premier announced a co-operative funding 

agreement to construct a gallery adjacent to the museum. That 

co-operative agreement called for $3 million contributed by the 

provincial government, $3 million contributed by the federal 

government, $1 million — approximately, slightly over 1 

million — by the city of Regina, who also wanted to include a 

performing arts theatre in that location attached to the Museum 

of Natural History, with local fund raising in the order of $2 

million. So there we have an approximate $9 million structure, 

a new art gallery attached to the upgraded, renovated, 

refurbished museum, together with a theatre for performing 

arts. 

 

On four different occasions city council passed a motion saying 

that was the site, that was their preferred site. There had been no 

arguments until after the final step was taken which was to have 

an architectural competition, and the selected jury members 

picked what they thought was the best plan, and certainly was a 

beautiful plan, and everything was supposed to move ahead. It 

was about that time I became minister of the department, and 

shortly after that there was some controversy saying, perhaps 

some citizens of Regina did not like this site, notwithstanding 

the fact that city council had approved that site on four separate 

occasions by motion of city council. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister, he has 

indicated that the Government of Saskatchewan has made a 

commitment of some $3 million to this project. Could I ask, just 

as a technical matter, to whom was that commitment made and 

precisely under what authority, and could the minister indicate 

where that item appears in the Estimates, just so I can be clear 

of where to find it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — A precise dollar figure would be found 

under the property management corporation because they will 

be spearheading any construction. They have to this point in 

time, I may say, Mr. Chairman, taken on the lead role in terms 

of supervising what work has been done so far. There’s been, 

oh, close to $300,000 worth of work been done — architecture, 

project design, that type of thing . . . management. It has come 

to that much, which would be from the provincial government’s 

commitment. 

 

It was a commitment signed and agreed to. Notwithstanding the 

current arguments about site and moving, I think it may be very 

difficult, given that there was a written agreement between the 

three levels of government — the municipal level, the 

provincial level, the federal level — together with the board 

members of the Mackenzie Art Gallery, and it was with that 

corporate body that the agreement was struck and reached. 

 

It may well be a binding agreement. I don’t know that. We have 

said, as a provincial government, that the $3 million that we’re 

contributing is not site specific. We haven’t said, you have to 

build on that site or you may have to build on another site. 

All along what I have said is, I would like to see the project go 

ahead. I would like to see it built. It is a good project for the city 

of Regina. It is a good project for the people of Saskatchewan. I 

think it’s good for the University of Regina, who will be able to 

get out from under a financial burden which they currently have 

by looking after the Mackenzie Art Gallery out of their own 

funding. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, do I take it then, from what 

the minister says, that the Government of Saskatchewan does 

not have any direct control over the project? If that is true, and 

it’s a part of a four-way agreement, where would the control lie, 

Mr. Minister, in terms of final decision making, and if a 

decision is to be made at this stage to make some changes, who 

would actually be in a position to make those decisions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe, Mr. Chairman, that any 

determination on a change of site or confirmation of site would 

take place between the city council of Regina on behalf of the 

residents of Regina and the board of the Mackenzie Art Gallery. 

 

I hasten to point out that the provincial government is just one 

funding vehicle to make this project work. The project had been 

talked about for a number of years. There was no real dispute as 

to the need for a new gallery or as to the desirability of a new 

gallery. It was a question of when and where. And our Premier, 

in conjunction with the other bodies mentioned, agreed that we 

would be part of the funding vehicle to bring about this museum 

to reality. It’s only subsequent to the agreement being struck, 

having already advertised and said: here’s a site; are we going 

to go ahead; do you have any alternative proposals? None was 

received. So everybody went ahead in good faith, including the 

board of the art gallery, the provincial government, the federal 

government representatives, and to the best of my knowledge, 

city council — who are now somewhat vacillating in their 

position and the level of their commitment to the project 

because, as I understand it, they have received some heat from a 

number of residents of the city of Regina. 

 

I don’t think the provincial government should be placed in a 

position of being a referee in some kind of argument between 

city council and the people whom they purport to represent, the 

citizens of Regina. I’d rather see that settled between them at 

that level, in conjunction with discussions with the board of the 

Mackenzie Art Gallery, and then come back to us. 

 

The provincial government obviously has no particular axe to 

grind in this issue. We are flexible. We’re certainly not 

intransigent on the subject of a site, but we have gone ahead, 

absolutely in good faith, assuming that was a preferred site, that 

was a chosen site, and that was the logical site. 

 

I personally from day one have supported this project, and I can 

say without fear of being contradicted, I do support that 

particular site. I realize some residents would not be happy to 

hear that, but I think what we would have in there, especially 

with the design the way it is, which is an absolutely beautiful 

piece of work, we would have a tremendous cultural cloister on 

that particular corner that  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2718 

 

 

could become a very major tourist attraction for the city of 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has indicated over 

a period of two or three years that from time to time public 

input was sought with respect to the project and, in particular, 

the location of the project. Could I ask the minister if he feels 

the advertising of that call for public input was adequate. Does 

he feel that there has been ample opportunity for people, 

perhaps with reservations or other points of view, to express 

their opinion? 

 

I ask the minister the question because there does seem to be 

some body of opinion in Regina that there has not been an 

adequate opportunity to this point for the public to be informed 

and to have their say. And I wonder if the minister could 

indicate his view on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I thank the member for raising that 

particular question because I think that’s crux to the whole 

matter that we’re discussing right now, and he makes a very 

valid comment in saying that perhaps we should reflect back in 

retrospect on the steps that were taken and was it adequate 

consultation. 

 

Obviously I was not the minister at the time when this had gone 

on. I hadn’t paid an awful lot of attention, I confess, to the 

issue. It wasn’t relevant, either to my portfolio or to my 

constituency, which are my two all-consuming interests. It is 

now part of my portfolio, and obviously I’ve got myself 

involved in it and tried to become as familiar as possible with 

the situation. 

 

As I understand the events leading up to the final decision 

which culminated in the decision to build on that particular site, 

I am assured certainly by the people on the Mackenzie gallery 

board that there was ample opportunity for consultation, for 

input. In fact, the very day last December when we announced 

the result of the jurying and who would, in fact, be the winning 

architect and go ahead with the particular design that was 

chosen, was the first time I heard a negative. And I heard it 

from one reporter who came up to me and said, this is not going 

to be an easy interview; do you realize that an awful lot of 

people don’t like the site for the art gallery? And I had to 

confess it was the first I’d ever heard of it being in any way a 

controversial subject. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — The minister will know that some steps have 

been taken in Regina to trigger a public referendum on at least 

some aspects of this issue, and I wonder if the minister could 

tell me, in terms of the agreement that he has referred to 

involving four parties and so forth, what would be the legal or 

the practical impact of that referendum, which I understand is to 

be taken in Regina next week, I believe. What are the 

consequences that flow from that referendum as far as the 

Saskatchewan government is concerned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The understanding and the perception I 

have of the situation, Mr. Chairman, is that should the plebiscite 

come out in a negative fashion, then the city would not be 

obliged to put up their $1.05 million which they had previously 

committed. 

I’ve discussed this with several of the councillors informally, 

not at a council meeting and certainly not at the delegation 

when city council met with the cabinet delegation of 

approximately one week ago — it wasn’t discussed then — but 

I have discussed it with several councillors who told me that 

what they wanted to do was take the 1.05 million, put it in trust, 

and hold it for the gallery people because they did want to go 

ahead and they were interested in seeing the project come 

about. 

 

Should the plebiscite, as I understand it, should the plebiscite 

come out, nay — come out negative — all it means is the city 

would not be contributing $1.05 million. I have to be perfectly 

frank with the hon. member and all members in the House. I 

really feel that two questions should have been asked on the 

plebiscite. The plebiscite question, if I may paraphrase, says: do 

you support spending $1.05 million of city money, municipal 

money, on a Mackenzie Art Gallery to be build adjacent to the 

Museum of Natural History. 

 

I really feel, Mr. Chairman, it should have been two questions 

asked if they were going to ask any at all: 1) Do you favour 

spending over $1 million of city money on an art gallery, and; 

2) Do you favour the site being the Museum of Natural History. 

Then I think we would have had a much more clear indication 

of precisely what the citizens of Regina want. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, further to the minister, just to 

clarify one previous answer he gave to me with respect to the 

provincial share of some $3 million, could the minister say 

whether there are any strings whatsoever attached to that 

commitment on the part of the Government of Saskatchewan? 

Are there any conditions or limitations on the Saskatchewan 

government grant that affect the issue of where the gallery 

ought to be finally located? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there is one very 

significant string attached to this. You know, I can’t help 

thinking, when the hon. member started out discussing trapping 

and hunting, it’s almost like we’re into another blood sport 

here, looking at this issue of the Mackenzie Art Gallery. The 

one string, if one could call it a string, was a condition that 

should the art gallery be built on the site, attached to the 

Museum of Natural History, then because it’s attached to an 

existing government building where we pay the maintenance, 

we pay the power bills, we pay the security, we pay for 

landscaping, and we pay for snow removal and parking, that we 

would continue to absorb that cost on behalf of the gallery, 

which has been estimated to be approximately $400,000 per 

year. 

 

Now if the board of the gallery should decide that they will in 

fact build elsewhere or become part of an existing building - 

most of which have been ruled out, namely the Centre of the 

Arts, the T.C. Douglas Building, where space could have been 

made available in either one of those, have been ruled out by 

the board; should they in fact decide to relocate to one of those 

places, then it’s a government building. We would pick up the 

maintenance cost. Should they go with a free-standing structure 

of their own on their own property, that belongs to them and we 

wouldn’t be involved in any ongoing  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2719 

 

 

maintenance. So I guess the main incentive from that point of 

view would be that we would be picking up about $400,000 per 

year of maintenance and operating costs that we would not pick 

up if it’s free-standing and independent. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, could we just review again, for 

the interests of clarity, the exact financial commitments that 

have been made. I think I heard you say earlier: $3 million from 

the Government of Canada; about $1 million from the city of 

Regina; $3 million from the Government of Saskatchewan, of 

which some 300,000 has been spent, roughly in those terms; 

and another 2 million raised from local fund raising sources. Is 

that the total package? And of the expenditures that have been 

made to date, is it only the $300,000 out of the provincial 3 

million that has been spent? Has any other money to your 

knowledge been spent to this point? Are all of those 

commitments firm, I gather with the one exception being of 

what may happen in respect to the plebiscite in the city of 

Regina? When and how are the moneys to be released out of 

this package? And do you feel, apart from the city of Regina, 

are any of the commitments in any jeopardy of lapsing or 

perhaps diminishing over time? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There are two or three parts, Mr. 

Chairman, to the hon. member’s question. The 300,000 

approximately — I believe is a little less than has been 

expended today — was expended by the provincial government 

through the property management corporation. To the best of 

my knowledge that’s the only money that has been spent on the 

project. It was for design, architectural fees, project 

management, that type of thing. And that came from the 

provincial share; no other funds have been expended as far as 

I’m aware. 

 

How would the disbursement be made? It would be made when 

construction started; it would be paid as it went along. 

 

Is any of the funding in jeopardy? I believe that was the third 

part of the question. Funding would be in jeopardy because the 

federal and the provincial is a matching arrangement. If one or 

other should withdraw, the other is automatically out. So if 3 

million goes from one source, it’s actually 6 million that would 

be gone altogether. 

 

We don’t want to withdraw ours. I’ve had representation from 

groups, I’ve had calls, I’ve had letters from people saying to 

me, if they’re going ahead with that site, don’t give them your 

$3 million. That’s a very difficult situation for me, and really 

one that I don’t find at all tenuous or viable because if we said 

we were not going with our 3 million, the federal government 

would not be there with their 3 million, and we’d be looking at 

. . . Well, it would be the death of the project. I don’t want to 

see the project die. I firmly believe it’s a good project. For 

Regina, for Saskatchewan, I’d like to see it go. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I gather what you’ve said, Mr. Minister, with 

respect to the two contributions from the senior levels of 

government: 3 million from the Government of Canada and 3 

million from the Government of Saskatchewan, that that money 

is essentially paid out  

simultaneously. Is that a correct understanding, or is it the 

situation where the province will put in its 3 million first and 

then the federal 3 million will come along? 

 

I’m just wondering whether this all goes into one global pot all 

at once and the money is disbursed from that pot as expenses 

are incurred, or does somebody pay first and somebody else 

comes along after the first commitment has been completely 

satisfied and so forth. I wonder if there’s an order of spending 

here or whether it’s all lumped together. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it would be global 

in the sense that it’s managed, if it’s on the site of the Museum 

of Natural History, by the property management corporation, 

and that would be global in the sense once it’s started we’re 

already in, and everybody else would kick in their funding, 

including the approximate figure of $2 million which has to be 

raised by the Mackenzie Art Gallery board — and I may say 

they are very close to that figure right now; they’re in excess of 

1.5 million, s they’ve done remarkably well. I think they have 

demonstrated that there is a commitment and there is a desire to 

see that art gallery built here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — One final question, Mr. Chairman, for the 

minister on this subject. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if I could refer 

back to your very first answer on this subject where you 

indicated some briefing information was generally available. 

I’m wondering if you could indicate what information about 

this project is public now, or has been made public and is 

generally available for examination, and I wonder if the 

minister could provide a listing of all the public documents and 

information relating to the gallery. And I wonder if he would be 

good enough to table that information in the House so that it 

can be generally available to all who may be interested. 

 

And secondly, in that documentation, I would be grateful if the 

minister could indicate if any of it relates to the issue of public 

input into this decision making process; number two, any 

conditions upon the Saskatchewan government grant with 

respect to the gallery; number three, what there might be in the 

documentation that would relate to the issue of location and 

siting; and number four, the details and the firmness of all of the 

financial commitments that have been made to date by all of the 

participating parties. 

 

There seems to be so much fault surrounding this issue, Mr. 

Minister, and so many questions that have been asked, that I 

think it would be useful if that sort of information could be put 

on the public record and then people could make their own 

judgements about it. That information need not be submitted 

instantly at this moment, but if it could be done within the next 

day or two, I think that would be helpful. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to say that I 

appreciate the line of questioning the hon. member has put 

forward. I’ve already made myself available to the media, 

including yesterday when I was phoned in my constituency, 

about this particular issue. They don’t always carry a full 

half-hour interview, obviously, when they put into a synopsis of 

something like 20 seconds, but all of the information relating to 

this project has been  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2720 

 

 

readily available to the public, to the media, to anybody who 

has requested it. 

 

I’ll table right now a particular document that outlines almost 

all of the things that you have asked for. Some of the other 

things you’ve asked for, I can find for you. I think it would be 

somewhat instructive to get some of the details on the 

competition, the architectural competition, and costs related to 

that, put that on the table so that you can see how it was done; 

also the chronology of the events whereby the main players in 

the game, one by one, endorse not only the project but the 

chosen site. It seems vacillation is coming about now because 

some residents have become very vocal about the particular site 

and are complaining about destroyed the site, saving the park. A 

couple of people that are the most vocal are people from the 

CBC who weren’t particularly vocal when the CBC built a 

great, huge, conglomerate new building in that particular park, 

and didn’t seem to be very concerned about it at that time. Now 

those people are very excited that any corner of the park could 

be altered in any way. I find that an extremely difficult situation 

to accept. 

 

So anything that I can lay on the Table, I’d be pleased to do it 

for you. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, can I infer from your remarks then that you’re 

satisfied that the whole process that the Mackenzie board has 

gone through is above-board or has been above-board? And 

with particular reference to this site selection, are you satisfied, 

Mr. Minister, that the whole question of site selection has been 

dealt with fairly, honestly, scrupulously attentive to all of the 

options available to the Mackenzie board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I have absolutely 

no hesitation, standing here staking my reputation, putting my 

seat on the line by saying that everything — everything — was 

done completely above-board. I know the hon. member is not 

inferring that there was any hanky-panky by the board 

members, by the board chairperson, Peggy Wakeling, or any 

other who’ve been concerned with that. I think he’s referring to 

the site selection. That was before I became the minister. 

 

I can safely stand by anything I have said and done since I 

became responsible for this particular department and the 

project fell under my purview and under my administration. I 

have absolute faith and confidence in the honesty and integrity 

of all of the people on the board, of Andrew Oko, who’s the 

curator at the gallery, and anybody who’s been in any way 

involved with the project. It has been above-board; it has been 

public; they have held news conferences; they have never, at 

any time, as a board withheld any information whatsoever that 

has been requested from them either by me or anybody else I 

know of. So I’m perfectly satisfied that all dealings are 

absolutely above-board. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can I deduce from the minister’s 

defensive posturing that the site selection process in particular, 

that with respect to that process, that you are satisfied that it 

was completely fair? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The site selection, Mr. Chairman,  

took place before I became minister of the department, and as a 

matter of fact, as I’ve admitted earlier, I didn’t really care about 

the site selection. Number one, it’s not in my constituency; 

number two, it wasn’t within my area of jurisdiction or 

administration when I was minister of parks and renewable 

resources, and I’ve paid very little attention to it. As far as I was 

concerned, it was strictly a Regina city issue and nothing else. 

 

Now I live in Regina city by virtue of my cabinet position. I 

still count Spiritwood, Saskatchewan, my home. I still think of 

that area, the area in which I vote, as the area where I live and 

the area of the most paramount importance to me. So I’d never 

considered this as anything other than a Regina city issue. 

 

The information I had prior to taking on this portfolio was that 

the site selection was done in a very fair manner, and nothing 

has been presented to me to indicate otherwise, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, if I might, a further 

question to the minister. The minister finally conceded that, in 

his opinion, the site selection had been conducted in a very fair 

manner. Can I ask the minister then . . . or perhaps I should 

point out that the site selection, and some of your officials will 

be familiar with this, the site selection purported to evaluate a 

number of sites in the city of Regina according to certain 

criteria and then gave a certain rating to each of the sites 

depending on to what extent they met the criteria, and there was 

waiting for some of these criteria. 

 

The minister will know from his official that one of those 

criteria was that the gallery be located in a park-like setting. 

Now that is one criterion that weighed very heavily against any 

potential site in downtown Regina, and you might say, well 

that’s natural, but my question to you, sir, is: do you feel that 

that’s an appropriate criterion, given the museums or galleries 

in this respect are primarily or mostly a series of windowless 

rooms? And I ask you why it’s important then for a gallery to 

be located in a park-like setting, and I ask you also, in view of 

the fact that most provincial galleries or major galleries in other 

provinces are located by and large in the downtown centres of 

cities, why you would feel that this has been a very fair 

process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — As I understand it, Mr. Chairman, the 

downtown-type of location has presented problems for other 

cities and other regions, parking being one of the prime 

problems. 

 

If I may relate back again to the on. member to the chronology 

of events, and I’m sorry if I seem to be taking a defensive 

posture. I don’t feel particularly defensive about the project. I 

think it can stand on its own merits. But first of all we had the 

gallery study, having a commission studying this particular 

issue, coming up with a recommendation for that site; then we 

have a study commissioned by the city of Regina 

recommending that site; then we have advertising in the 

newspaper say, do you have any other sites — no replies were 

received — then we have the Wascana Centre Authority 

agreeing to that site. 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2721 

 

 

I became the minister some time after all of this happened. Am 

I to say, Regina city council, you’re wrong; Mackenzie gallery 

board, you’re wrong; Regina Market Square, you’re wrong? 

Certainly note. I don’t have that kind of arrogance and certainly 

wouldn’t even get involved in that kind of argument. I have to 

accept that these are the choices made by all of those 

independent bodies. Who am I to overturn them? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not suggesting 

that you dictate to the people of Regina where the gallery 

should be built, but I would think that given the heavy 

involvement of provincial dollars that you might have some 

questions about the process, that you might ask a simple 

question such as: in view of the fact that an art gallery is a 

series of windowless rooms for the viewing of art, why is it that 

one of the most important criteria that you have for selecting the 

gallery is that it be located in a park-like setting. Have you 

asked that question, Mr. Minister, and if you’ve asked it, what 

answer do you have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, it was never my place to 

ask why it was advertised as being in a park-like setting. If 

that’s what Regina city council wants, if that’s what market 

square wants, if that’s what the Wascana Centre Authority 

wants, if that’s what the board of the Mackenzie Art Gallery 

wants, who’s Colin Maxwell to stand up and say, I question 

your judgement on this, in a particular Regina issue? 

 

In any event, when it was advertised to go to competition for 

the architects, it was clearly advertised where it was going to 

be. There was no subterfuge about this whatsoever, no 

clandestine operation. It was always right up front, and there’s 

no question about that. And anybody who didn’t know that it 

was that particular site obviously doesn’t read the newspapers 

and had no contact with any media whatsoever. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’m 

wondering if the province of Saskatchewan, under your 

department, has a policy concerning private wood lot operators, 

and if so, could you tell us just briefly what that policy is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have, as such, 

a policy but it’s one of the things that our resource caucus 

committee has been examining, as you’d well know because 

you sit on that caucus yourself, and there have been proposals 

as to how to promote the private wood lot operation. And it is 

something under the FRDA (Forest Renewal Development 

Agreement) that the federal government has been looking at and 

has been promoting. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — So there’s no licensing procedure right now 

for wood lot operators in the province? If someone wanted to 

start a half-section or a two-section wood lot, there’d be no 

licensing requirement by the provincial government? 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, they would be 

doing this presumably on their own land, and what they did 

with their own land would be their business. They wouldn’t 

have to have a permit to do it. 

 

I had the honour, two years ago, of meeting a gentleman who 

donated a Christmas tree to the legislature, out front, who has 

been running a small private wood lot for a number of years, 

intensive tree farming, and making an excellent living at that. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — You mention that the FRDA has policies, 

towards this end, of getting small operators into private wood 

lots. I’m wondering if your department has had any 

consultations with ERDA (Economic and Regional 

Development Agreement) or one of the federal government 

programs to determine what type of funding is available for 

Saskatchewan residents who wish to enter such a venture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m advised that the Canadian Forestry 

Service has a staff member who has been doing liaison work 

with people interested in pilot projects as wood lot operators, 

but it has been expertise, advice, assistance, guidance, and it 

hasn’t been in the form of direct funding. In any event, the 

FRDA, the agreement would be cost shared between the 

province and the federal government. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well if, Mr. Minister, with all due respect, if 

you have no policy and someone came to you with a proposal, 

how would you make a decision to cost share that if you have 

no policy or promotion? Granted it is fine to have consultation 

with FRDA, but if the province has no mechanism, would it be 

on a piecemeal basis as to whether myself, or my neighbour, or 

someone else came to you with a proposal? Would it be on an 

individual by individual basis as to whether or not the decision 

be made to fund, and then you would cost-share that with the 

federal government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The pilot projects to which I referred 

earlier, Mr. Chairman, were federal direct delivered through one 

of their staff people from Canadian Forestry Service. The 

FRDA programs which we’re talking about which would be 

cost shared would not in any event, as I understand it, be grant 

oriented; grant money to someone to do something with a 

private wood lot. In any event, anybody with a private wood lot, 

and there are some operators like that around the province — 

there are one or two in my own constituency — they are at 

liberty to do whatever they want with their private land and sell 

the wood to whomever they please, be it industry, or a local saw 

mill, or anybody else. 

 

And I’m sorry if I’m not understanding the thrust of your 

questioning. I’m not sure that’s where you wanted to go with 

this one. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — If someone wanted to start a wood lot 

operation . . . I understand you can’t operate something, in fact 

it’s not a good idea to operate on a business that’s fully funded 

by someone else because the incentive isn’t there to work very 

hard at the business in most cases. What I’m asking is that: 

where is there money available? You’re telling me, if I 

understand, Mr. Minister, that  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2722 

 

 

there’s no funding available within the provincial system. It’s 

my understanding that there is money available in the federal 

system. Can you confirm that? And if so, who would someone 

contact in the federal government to determine what funding 

they’re eligible for, or whether or not they could put in a 

proposal to that specific agency or department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We’re not aware . . . My officials aren’t 

aware, hon. member, of any funding that is available. What they 

could do, if they wanted to pursue it further, would be to 

contact the Canadian Forestry Service in Prince Albert. We do 

make some stock available to CFS Prince Albert, who in turn 

make it available to a private wood lot operator. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — If a wood lot operator got into the business, 

Mr. Minister, are there any restrictions on whether or not that 

individual wood lot operator can sell, either to Weyerhaeuser or 

Sask Forest Products or to you as a Christmas tree? What 

licensing is necessary to then sell the product? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There is no licensing necessary through 

our department, Mr. Chairman, and just like any private 

operator, private farmer, growing whatever particular crop — in 

this case it’s trees — they’re at liberty to sell it anywhere they 

wish. So they could do it as a Christmas tree operation or sell to 

Weyerhaeuser or MacMillan Bloedel or Simpson Timber or 

L&M Wood Products in Glaslyn. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, some time ago a group of 

entrepreneurs, I believe in your particular riding, were 

promoting a wood-fired electrical generator with by-product, 

using cellulose for cattle feed and possibly some use for the 

burn material that came out of the operation. And I’m 

wondering whether or not the provincial government has done 

any studies on wood-fired electrical generators, and if so, could 

you make those studies available to the members of this 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — For the information of the hon. 

member, the Deputy Premier is in charge of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation, and if you care to raise that with him, he’s 

done a lot of work on this particular area. I know the people, the 

group who are involved in my constituency, the department 

really walked a mile with them. It just wasn’t financial viable at 

that particular time. 

 

There were studies available. You’ll probably want to discuss 

this with the Deputy Premier during Sask Power, during Crown 

corporations, but the studies that were available, as I understand 

it, were not generated by Sask Power but by private companies. 

I still have copies of those particular reports and studies that 

were done in my office if you’re interested in them. I have no 

problem shares those with you. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I would think that something like a 

wood-fired electrical generator would be important to the 

resource management of forests within the area where the 

particular generator would be set up or the burning system 

would be set up. And I would hope that the  

department would undertake, at least if they haven’t done so, to 

conduct their own study. 

 

I don’t know how you can say it’s not economically viable to 

do that. There are many other places in the north-eastern United 

States, there’s a wood-fire electrical generator going up at Lac 

la Biche. And Mr. Minister, I appreciate you saying that I 

should maybe talk to the Deputy Premier, and I hope that we 

have an opportunity to do that in Crown corporations when the 

minister appears before there. 

 

But I understand one of the major problems is that Sask Power 

doesn’t wish to buy the electrical output — and I’m not saying 

this in any political sense — but of course it would be not 

economically feasible as long as the provincial Crown 

corporation refuses to buy electrical generated power from 

wood-fired generators as opposed to building more and more 

megaprojects in the southern part of the province. 

 

So anyone who would want to go ahead, Mr. Minister, of 

course, wouldn’t be able to do that. I would have a hard time 

believing that entrepreneurs would want to invest in such a 

large project if they didn’t think and had grounds to believe that 

it was economically viable to do so . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . 

 

Well, the Deputy Premier seems to be giving you lots of 

information. I don’t know whether he’s comparing Shand and 

Rafferty to a little 20 megawatt plant up in your constituency or 

in the member from Athabasca or the member from 

Cumberland, but I want to know if the department has done any 

studies, at least in terms of resource management, that would 

surround a wood-fired electrical generator. And if you haven’t 

done any such studies, would you be undertaking to do so some 

time in the near future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now first of all, Mr. Chairman, the 

advice I received — and I remember having numerous meetings 

with the group from Big River and other officials — was that in 

actual fact, using this particular system in Vermont, they’re 

paying 13 times the cost for power that we’re paying here in 

Saskatchewan, which right off the top makes it something less 

than a viable project. 

 

We had offered at that time — and I do recall the meetings and 

the conversations with power officials and some elected people 

too — that we would buy whatever power they produced at 

avoided cost and they just couldn’t come close to it. It would be 

a very expensive project to do that. 

 

If you want to get into the technical details and the avoided 

costs, it’s not my area of expertise because I don’t deal with 

Sask Power, but I understand it to be related to what we would 

have to pay in terms of construction and how we generate our 

own power. They would be doing it in at what we would call 

our avoided costs. They would pick it up, and they’d be looking 

at something in the order of a billion dollars to do it, which it 

just isn’t feasible. But we can find those numbers for you when 

you discuss it with Sask Power. 

 

In any event, if we’re going to be using wood and setting  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2723 

 

 

off a whole series of this particular type of generating plant, I 

don’t know that would be the best management of the resource 

side, given the conversation I had earlier with the members 

from Prince Albert . . . P.A.-Duck Lake. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, I wouldn’t want the minister to close 

his mind to this and make that kind of value judgement: that 

wouldn’t be the best use of forestry management. I know that 

Weyerhaeuser currently has an application in to spray for 

defoliage of trees in northern Saskatchewan. And it would seem 

to me that if you used the aspen stands that are within the 

province, at least if you’re putting someone to work to cut them 

down and use a cellulose for cattle feed and burn to make 

electricity and use the charcoal for a charcoal process, it would 

be better management of that resource than sending people 

around to spray to do away with the broad-leaf trees in our 

forests. So I wouldn’t want you to make that kind of a value 

judgement, Mr. Minister, until you’re convinced in your own 

mind that there’s adequate information there to base it on. 

 

My question that I’d like you to answer, Mr. Minister, is: I’m 

wondering if anyone from your department has been over to the 

operation at Lac la Biche, or been in consultation with the 

company who is building the plant, and if so, is there a person 

in charge of gathering information on that type of resource 

management. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, we haven’t been 

involved and we hadn’t looked at, but I can take the advice of 

the hon. member and certainly have somebody look at. My 

mind’s not closed, but I do recall the extensive meetings that we 

had in the past and the long hours looking at the studies, and the 

Sask Power officials had assured me — and it was my 

constituency involved; it wasn’t my portfolio at that particular 

time — that this just wasn’t viable. We walked the extra mile 

with the folks up there. We did our best to accommodate them. 

We came in with all kinds of alternative plans, and it just didn’t 

work out. 

 

And I should point out, by the way, that Weyerhaeuser has not 

applied to do any spraying of trees in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, you should be talking to 

the hon. member from Rosetown-Elrose, the Minister of 

Environment, during questioning when his department was in 

this Chamber before estimates. There had been an application 

come in from Weyerhaeuser to do some spraying around 

Christopher Lake . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Candle Lake, 

around Candle Lake, and he said that it was in your hands. So 

are you telling us now there is no application or has not been an 

application by Weyerhaeuser to do spraying? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, there is no 

application from Weyerhaeuser. The test spraying that they had 

proposed was withdrawn: it never went ahead. The applications 

are currently on the books: one from a chemical company for a 

test site — a very, very small site — and the other one from the 

Canadian Forestry Service; and those are the only two. There’s 

nothing from a private  

forest company. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I thank the minister for that information. The 

last time we had questioning in this House on that topic there 

was in fact an application. I’m glad to hear it has been 

withdrawn because I think there are better ways of managing 

our forest resources rather than spraying them to kill off the 

broad-leaf species. However, the member from Athabasca does 

acknowledge there are two other application, even though they 

aren’t from private sector firms. They are in fact applying to do 

some spraying in test plots in our forestry belt in Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m wondering if the minister could give me a commitment on 

two things today. One is, will you have someone look at the 

operation of Lac la Biche with the view of doing a viability 

study on that particular project? And secondly, I understand that 

you have assured me that Sask Power was willing to buy any 

electricity produced from smaller plants in the province of 

Saskatchewan, whether they be vertical-access water turbines or 

whether they be wood-fired electrical generators, that Sask 

Power will in fact buy that surplus electricity they could 

produce. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, with reference to Lac la 

Biche, given the structure of government, that more property 

falls under the portfolio of Economic Development and Trade, 

given their mandate. I can certainly have one of my senior 

officials take a look at this project and talk to the people there. 

But I think what I would also do is talk to the Department of 

Economic Development and Trade and try and interest 

somebody from there in taking a look at the project. Don’t get 

me wrong. We’re not close minded about the thing at all. Like I 

say, we’ve walked a mile on this one before and it didn’t work 

out. So if there’s something happening there that’s worthwhile 

and it’s feasible and it’s viable, we’d be foolish not to take a 

look at it. So obviously, you know, if you’re recommending that 

it’s something to look at, we’ll take a look at it. 

 

On the business of Sask Power buying power from other 

sources, yes, they’re willing to buy it, but at their avoided cost 

and I can’t remember all the details that constitute avoided cost. 

I’m sorry, it’s not in my area of expertise. You’d have to ask the 

Deputy Premier on that one. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you walked a mile 

before, it must have all been going to meetings because I think 

that if you had walked a mile, you should have at least had 

someone within the provincial government do a very extensive 

survey and feasibility study on it instead of taking bits of 

information from Vermont and bits of information from Sask 

Power and bits of information from the entrepreneurs who 

wanted to develop the project. I would think someone within 

the provincial government should have taken the project on and 

looked at it with a view of, how do we make this viable; not just 

to say that, this is not viable. 

 

I think you should take a look at it in terms of, how do we make 

a project like this viable in places like Buffalo Narrows, Green 

Lake, and Big River in your own constituency? Those people 

are all starving for employment. They’d like more employment 

than what’s  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2724 

 

 

there at the current time. And I think it’s a very labour-intensive 

type of operation. If you could fuel, say, a 10-megawatt or 

20-megawatt electrical generator from burning aspen wood and 

you could do that with a radius of 20 miles of aspen, I think that 

you should be looking at it not with a view of saying, these 

entrepreneurs couldn’t make it viable. I think you have 

resources within government to take a project like that and say: 

how is it we could make this viable — if you look at the 

employment, what Sask Power will buy the energy for that 

they’re creating, whether or not you can produce enough cattle 

feed out of there to have a cattle lot operation. So I don’t think 

the mile was walked necessarily in the way that you described 

it, Mr. Minister, with all due respect. 

 

I would hope that when you have someone go to talk to the 

people that are putting the plant together at Lac la Biche, that 

they look at it with the view of what you’re responsible for in 

terms of your forestry management. And I hope that you will 

talk to the department of industry and trade, or whatever the 

department was that you mentioned, Mr. Minister, so that at 

least somebody can take on the project and determine whether 

it’s viable — not the political viability of it, necessarily, or 

whether it gets into the politics of you versus us, but I think it’s 

very valuable to look at that type of a project. So I do look 

forward to the minister delving into this a little deeper than 

what has been done in the past. 

 

I would like to, just before I close off — and I don’t want to 

keep you unduly long — I’d like to ask the minister whether or 

not the department, your department, has any funding put into 

roads to be developed for Weyerhaeuser to access the 7 million 

acres of forest that were given to them by lease agreement 

earlier this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t put any money 

into roads for Weyerhaeuser. As I understand it, in fact, we 

don’t put any money into roads for any companies in terms of 

forestry. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well then I would have to assume that the 

Department of Highways is doing that and we’ll deal with that 

during estimates, but I’m glad the minister is very clear that you 

have nothing to do with any of the roads that are being built for 

Weyerhaeuser corporation. And that’s the last time I’ll ask the 

minister and if you’re certain of that, then that’s fine with me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I can assure the 

hon. member that we’re not involved in road building with 

Weyerhaeuser. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we’re going to 

take another leap in these estimates again and ask you to put on 

yet another hat. And I want to talk now about what I think is 

something very exciting that’s happened in our province over 

the last number of years and that’s the development of 

multiculturalism groups — local, regional, and provincial. It’s 

my understanding that some 900 groups now exist in our 

province. And I can give you and this House an example of the 

work that multiculturalism groups are doing in this province 

from as recent as Saturday evening in the city of Moose Jaw, 

where the Moose Jaw multicultural group put on its  

annual program called Motif. And those of us, those 600 of us 

who were there, enjoyed literally a banquet of ethnic delights 

and a program and a dance that brought every ethnic 

community in Moose Jaw together. 

 

When I was at that event, Mr. Minister, people were saying to 

me that the cuts in your budget this year threaten the good work 

that’s happening in the city of Moose Jaw and threaten that 

good work that’s happening in communities across this 

province, and that’s primarily smaller communities across this 

province. The Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan have 

calculated that more than $105,000 has been cut from their 

budget from multicultural programs this year — from a 

budgeted amount of $293,000 last year, cut to $105,000 this 

year. So, Mr. Minister, I ask you, how do you explain, how do 

you justify this kind of massive cut in funding to 

multiculturalism? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, if I could respond 

to the last questioning. I should point out, first of all, that this 

morning I met with the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan 

in Saskatoon. I met with the president, Hamid Javed, and the 

vice-president, Marge Nainaar. It was an excellent meeting. We 

discussed funding. We discussed some of the things that were 

cut from the budget, and there was not a great deal of argument 

that some of the things that were cut out — the grants that were 

cut out — don’t have a great deal of detrimental effect upon that 

organization because we’ve maintained the funding levels and 

what they see as the most significant aspect of the work they do, 

namely heritage language retention. 

 

We continue to provide consulting services, development of 

resource materials, and financial assistance, and a variety of 

other areas. Some were cut; some were not. The council 

themselves realized that we’re facing some difficult economic 

times, that everybody’s been asked to tighten their belts 

somewhat. They have co-operated. They still go ahead with the 

zone festivals, at their own expense, instead of depending on 

some government assistance, and that is not carved in stone. 

 

I would like to tell the hon. member that we are, in fact, looking 

at some of the festivals coming up and some of the things that 

we want to do; that we may have to make some money 

available and do some juggling there. 

 

We’ve increased our capabilities to provide consulting services 

in several areas to the multicultural groups in Saskatchewan. By 

and large, they find it very positive. We’ve also formed a 

ministers’ committee on multiculturalism as another sign of our 

commitment. I believe the multicultural groups are finding that 

they’re getting a sympathetic ear when they call on this 

government and certainly an open door policy. 

 

So I don’t think by any means it’s all doom and gloom or 

negative, the things that are happening in the area of 

multiculturalism. 

 

Some of the discussions we’ve had is that we have to look at 

multiculturalism as more than holding a festival and saying 

we’re going to have, for example, Scottish  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2725 

 

 

highland dancing and eating haggis, you know; there’s more to 

multiculturalism than that. We have to look at the whole of 

Saskatchewan and what do we encompass all of the many facets 

of multiculturalism. Almost everybody in this province, and 

obviously I am an example, come from some place else and we 

have maintained, for instance, our immigrant settlement 

programs, and that also sits well with the council. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I very much appreciate the 

statement that you just made. I would like to see that statement 

and that avowed commitment to multiculturalism backed up 

with some funding in your budget. 

 

Will you confirm for me that, in fact, the budgeted amounts for 

multicultural programs in Saskatchewan, tax-based funding, has 

gone from $293,000 last year to $105,000 this year? Are those 

figures accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The only direct cut, Mr. Chairman, that 

was made that could be clearly identified as multiculturalism, 

was a program called ethnic studies, which was $35,000. 

They’re within the arts and multicultural grants, the whole 

facade, the whole array of programs. There have been some 

other changes but I would point out, immigrant settlement is at 

$86,000, and heritage language is at $390,000. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, then in your budget is there 

money budgeted for, let’s say for instance, the festival grants? 

Have you set aside a figure for the festival grants? You said a 

few moments ago that you may have to adjust that. Have you 

set a figure, and what is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There is money, Mr. Chairman, within 

the budget for festivals and grants to those, but they will 

encompass more than multiculturalism. 

 

(2015) 

 

In any event, and this will come as a surprise to the officials 

sitting around here tonight, I don’t happen to like that particular 

program, and I’ve met with various groups like OSAC 

(Organization of Saskatchewan Arts Councils) and SCCO 

(Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations) and they 

pretty well have me convinced that we’re on the wrong track, 

putting on these zone festivals is somehow duplicating as if this 

was a sporting event and taking it to a contest in culture, and I 

don’t like it. 

 

And I know the officials are finding this as a surprise because I 

didn’t discuss it with them earlier today, but I can tell you we’re 

going to be changing that particular policy and we are going to 

be reacting more to what OSAC and SCCO want us to see do 

with the money that’s in that budget. And that also came about 

as a result of the meeting I had this morning with the 

Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you’re going to shorten these 

estimates right up because that was the very next line of 

questioning I had. I am glad to hear that you are reconsidering 

these zone arts festivals. I certainly have heard some of the 

same reaction that you’ve heard. I  

didn’t hear it being suggested in the community that we needed 

these, and so therefore I would hope that some of that money, 

and I think it was 200,000 budgeted, will then find its way to 

the work of multiculturalism. 

 

May I ask, Mr. Minister . . . You raised the matter of your 

committee, the ministers’ committee or the cabinet committee 

on multiculturalism. Can I ask you tonight when the committee 

was established, who is involved in that committee from 

cabinet, and how often that committee has met since its 

establishment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it was formed in 

July of 1986. It consists not specifically of ministers by name 

but rather than by the portfolio they hold. So it’s comprised of 

the Minister of Education, the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade, Minister of Human Resources, Labour 

and Employment, Minister of Justice. I chair the committee. 

There was one meeting since the election. There have been two 

or three officials’ working meetings, and there is a meeting 

scheduled this fall with the multicultural community of 

Saskatchewan with that committee. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, can you identify for this House 

tonight and for the province some tangible results that you’ve 

seen because of this committee and some directions that you’ve 

seen because of this committee and some directions that we 

might look forward to in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, when we talk about 

multiculturalism, we’re talking about a topic that’s rather near 

and dear to my heart, given my own ethnic origins and the fact 

that I, too, am an immigrant, as one or two others are around 

here as I believe. 

 

What we’re doing with the committee is getting an awareness 

of issues as they transcend different departments. Now 

obviously when we look at the Department of Labour and 

Employment, and we look at immigration, and we look at 

English as a second language, and we’re looking at the 

settlement of Vietnamese people coming into Saskatchewan, 

this is bigger than one department. It involves the Department 

of Education. It also involves Tourism and Small Business. It 

involves Economic Development and Trade; it involves a whole 

host of people, and what we’re trying to do is make sure that all 

the players in this game are aware of all facets of the problems 

connected to multiculturalism. 

 

I also think we have to look at the field from more than one 

point of view, and look at the total picture of what 

multiculturalism is, and what it means to this province, and 

what it also means in terms of economic development to this 

province and the part it can play in economic diversification in 

the province. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Minister, I share that position, and 

I appreciate the fact that a cabinet committee has been 

established. What we on this side of the House, and I know the 

community, is interested in, is seeing this committee be at work 

and produce some tangible result, and so we’ll want to be 

watching that committee over the course of its life. 

 

Another issue that does concern the multicultural groups in 

Saskatchewan, because they too receive funding from  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2726 

 

 

the lottery structure . . . And you will be aware of a letter that 

was addressed to the Hon. Mr. Devine, Premier, from the 

Saskatoon Multicultural Council, with a copy to yourself. If I 

may just quote this letter from the Saskatoon Multicultural 

Council. They say: 

 

We also are strongly opposed to the government capping 

of Sask trust and the possibility of using lottery funds for 

government programs. The lotteries, which represent a 

major fund-raising activity for non-profit groups, are only 

licensed by the government, and the profits rightfully 

belong to the sport, culture, and recreation sector, 

non-profit groups. 

 

And so multicultural groups and other, many other volunteer 

groups in this province, are raising the questions having to do 

with the lottery, and so I’d like us maybe to move there. I’m 

asking you in the House tonight: have you capped Sask trust? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — What has happened, Mr. Chairman, is 

that we decided that the net profit over $100 million should 

accrue to the government — net profit over $100 million. Now 

it may well be we don’t sell that much this year in tickets. 

We’ve seen a phenomenal growth in lotteries over the last few 

years. In one year we went from $65 million of sales to $95 

million of sales, and the projection this year is probably about 

98 million. If it does go over the $100 million mark, we’re 

saying we’d like to see the net profit — not the gross; expenses 

have to come off there, obviously — net profit would accrue 

back to the treasury of Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact of the matter is, the province of Saskatchewan is a 

member of the Western Canada Lottery Corporation. Funds 

generated through that are the property of the government. 

What has happened in the past is government has decided that 

funding arising from that source should be spent in the areas of 

arts, culture, sports, recreation, and I happen to subscribe to 

that; I think that’s a very worthwhile way to spend the money. 

 

There are others who say, well why don’t you take lotteries and 

roll it into education, or roll it into health care. That wasn’t the 

function, that was not the way lotteries were envisaged, that 

was not the way it was set up. I like the way it was set up. I 

agree with it. The cap is for this year; it may never well kick in 

because the sales may not hit $100 million, but I’m certainly, 

certainly willing to sit down with the groups over this coming 

winter and decide the future of the lotteries, and the whole issue 

of capping would have to be on the table as well. I’m not sure 

it’s the best move that was made; it was kind of a compromise 

move, but I’m certainly willing to discuss that with them. And 

they know this; we’ve had a couple of meetings already. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — In essence then, Mr. Minister, we’re agreed 

that, in fact, the cap has been put on the lottery even if it is over 

the $100 million net. 

 

I have in front of me the lottery allocations for this year as 

they’ve been set out, and I have some specific questions about 

some of those allocations. I note, Mr. Minister, that the 

non-profit group commissions which last year were  

$3,499,000 this year are down to $3,200,000 - about $300,000 

less. Mr. Minister, I want to know why that decrease exists in 

the allocations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, some of the groups have 

not spent all of their money. Some of them spend them in 

different ways. There were complaints, frankly, that some 

groups would receive an allocation, and at the end of year, if it 

was a sporting team, the money would be used for a party. Now 

I don’t know if all of this is accurate. I had officials looking at 

it. 

 

What we are going to do . . . well, with negotiations with Sask 

Sport Inc., we said that we’d reduce the amount that was going 

to all of those particular groups this year. I have some 

misgivings about that. I’m not sure that it was the best move, 

but it has been done. But we’re willing to look at it over the 

coming year, see what effect, what kind of ramification it has 

on those groups, and if change is necessary, change will be 

made. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I want to be sure that we’re 

talking about the same thing. I’m talking about the community 

groups, most of which are service clubs, who are provided these 

revenues in lieu of the sale of lottery tickets, which they used to 

conduct. That’s the field we’re talking about. 

 

And so, by our answer tonight then, I’m taking some assurance 

that, in fact, this isn’t the beginning of the end of this program. 

You anticipate this to be continuing for many years to come. 

This isn’t the beginning of a phase out of this program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, this is not the 

beginning of a phase out; it was a beginning of a new way of 

doing business. 

 

What happened was in return for these groups who had at one 

time been selling tickets and realizing a profit for giving up that 

particular privilege which they had, we’d agreed to give them a 

certain percentage every year. Some groups used it; some 

groups didn’t use it. There was a bit of controversy. A decision 

was made, well they’re going to be capped also with some kind 

of reduction. 

 

Again, I say I’m not sure it was . . . the figure was the best 

figure that was brought in. I don’t know it was the best figure. It 

was arrived at by officials of more than one department, I may 

say, not just my department, who are going to look at it over the 

coming year. I want to see what happens to those groups. 

 

And I realize some of them are people like a fire-fighter group 

and so on. They’re doing good work; the money’s well spent. 

The sports groups who receive an allocation, and there’s one in 

my home town of Spiritwood, don’t exist solely on that 

allocation to get through this fund. They go out and raise funds 

in addition to that to buy uniforms and pay for the cost of travel 

of their hockey team. So they’re not dependent entirely on that 

particular form of funding. They do have it augmented from 

other sources. And I’m very willing to take a good, hard look at 

the whole lottery picture this year. 

 

We’re also looking at the western Canada on the bigger  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2727 

 

 

scale. We’re looking at the Western Canada Lottery 

Corporation, we’re looking at the way they do business. We’re 

looking at the partnership we have with Manitoba and with 

Alberta. And we’re looking for ways to do business in a better 

fashion than we’re currently doing it. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Another much more significant cut, Mr. 

Minister, in the lottery allocations this year is the amount being 

paid to the exhibition associations. And the figures I have 

indicate that it’s gone from $2 million last year down to 

300,000 this year, which is somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

85 per cent cut. And I would like to hear the rationale for that 

cut. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, what happened 

there was there was a long-term agreement with exhibition 

associations and they’d wanted the money quicker up front, 

they needed it quickly. So in terms of . . . off the top of my 

heard, if I took a figure, let’s say of 1 million over three years, 

they might want to take three-quarters of it in the first year and 

the balance accruing to them thereafter. And that’s what 

happened there. It was a long-term agreement for a specific 

amount of money; they drew down on the amount of money in 

the early years; subsequently the balance of course is much 

smaller and that’s what’s accruing to them now. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, then you’re assuring this 

House that the agreements in fact have been met that were made 

with the exhibition associations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, on their specific 

request. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I see on this lottery allocation 

sheet a category entitled museum funding. Is that new to the 

lottery allocations, and is that category saying then to me that 

funding that used to be undertaken by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, in terms of museum funding, is now being 

moved into the lotteries? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now last year the funding that was 

being spent on museums, which is $480,000 towards operating 

our museums, was actually contained in the line called the trust 

fund, which is probably something around $14 million. So this 

year we put it as a separate item outside the trust fund and 

showed it as a true figure that was going to museum funding. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I think . . . I want to say to the 

House, and this is a personal statement, I am not particularly 

happy when we fund any valuable social program on the funds 

of gambling. I’m not particularly happy with some of the 

premises that lie behind even our lottery system — the premises 

that say that many must lose for one to win; the premiss that 

somehow we can buy our dreams. In some ways we may see the 

lottery as a tax on the poor. So I’m not entirely happy with the 

lottery and with the overall growth of gambling we’ve seen 

across our province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Have you ever bought a ticket? 

 

Mr. Calvert: — The Minister of Finance asks if I’ve won at  

bingo, and the short answer is, no. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, no. I said, have you ever bought a 

ticket? 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And the second answer to the Minister of 

Finance’s question, have I ever bought a ticket; the second 

answer is, no. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, given the fact that we know that lotteries are 

here to stay; we know that many Saskatchewan people spend a 

dollar for entertainment value; and we know the significant 

benefits that the lotteries have brought to our province, 

particularly in the areas of sport, culture and recreation; I’m 

sure we would both want to ensure the very best possible lottery 

distribution system. 

 

It seems to me that in this province we could be proud of the 

system of lottery fund distribution that we’ve had, and you well 

know, Mr. Minister, that it is unique across the country, and it 

seems to me it ought to please you that it is, in essence, a 

private enterprise system, a free enterprise system so that the 

lottery is now owned by the government, but is in fact owned 

and operated by the volunteer community in the province. It’s 

licensed by the government, yes, and it’s regulated, yes. And 

over the course of the years, arrangements have been made with 

governments to fund worthwhile projects when both parties 

have agreed, but in essence the lottery remains in the hands of 

the volunteer community. 

 

Now earlier this year I think you publicly suggested that we 

may be moving to a different system where more and more, if 

not all, of the lottery funds would be coming into the provincial 

treasury. Many in the province are concerned about that, and I 

would refer you to an article, or an editorial that I’m sure you 

saw in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, dated July 2. And if I may 

just quote from this editorial from the Star-Phoenix, just the 

conclusion of it: 

 

Provincial government programs should be funded by a 

tax system which as fairly as possible reflects ability to 

pay. Turning the lottery system into a tax collecting device 

would totally ignore that principle and might, in fact, run 

directly counter to it. The government’s insatiable appetite 

for tax revenue, once tempted with a morsel of lottery 

profits, could encourage it to expand the scope of legalized 

gambling in the province when it should probably be 

moving to constrict it. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, if we could move to some conclusion in this 

discussion, will you give the House your assurance that, in fact, 

you still believe in a free enterprise, private enterprise lottery 

system, owned and operated by the volunteer sector in 

Saskatchewan, that you will resist the temptation to expropriate 

moneys from that volunteer community to fund programs that 

ought to be tax-base funded? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, that was kind of a 

wide ranging discussion there that the hon. member initiated. I 

was interested in his comments about not really being terribly 

enamoured of a system whereby we  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2728 

 

 

depend on gambling to generate revenue for programs that 

government may wish to sponsor. I just remind the hon. 

member that the Irish sweepstakes, which supported hospitals in 

Ireland for a long, long time, was an extremely popular move, 

not just in Ireland where it wasn’t supposed to be done, but 

outside and all across North America. 

 

As a matter of fact, just so the hon. member is aware if he isn’t 

already, his own town of Moose Jaw, which he represents, is 

very anxious to get into the casino business to promote tourism 

in Moose Jaw. Frankly, I don’t have any problem with that. The 

hon. member may not be really crazy about the idea. I don’t 

really have any problem with it. I don’t gamble myself, and I 

wouldn’t buy a lottery ticket in any event, but that’s beside the 

point. 

 

Yes, we’re proud of the distribution system. Yes, we’re proud 

of the fact that it is run as a private enterprise venture, but I 

should point out to the hon. member it is not owned and 

operated by those groups. It is operated by those groups; it is 

owned by the Government of Saskatchewan as a partner in the 

Western Canada Lottery Corporation. And what we do is we 

decide who our provincial marketing organization will be, and 

that could be anybody. We could give it to the executive of the 

Kinsmen Club, the Lions Club, a rotary club. We could do it 

any way we wish. What has traditionally happened is Sask 

Sport Inc. is a PMO (provincial marketing organization) in 

charge of that. They don’t own it; they operate it on behalf of 

the provincial government, and we have no problem with that 

system. 

 

I don’t envisage any change to the system, which was the last 

question the hon. member asked. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I just have a 

few questions, Mr. Minister. I want to clean up, and then we 

can get through with your department, providing that I can get 

the answers to some of the questions that I have. 

 

First of all, Mr. Minister, you indicated you didn’t put any 

money into highways in northern Saskatchewan and roads into 

the forest. Could you indicate, do you issue any licences for any 

roads that are built into the forested area? I guess the question I 

want to know, Mr. Minister, if the road has been built up the 

west side of Cowan Lake, does that road go through Parks 

planning before the road is built by the Department of 

Highways through Cowan Lake? 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s Highway 55? 

 

Mr. Thompson: — No, Highway 55, you’ve dropped that, and 

you were starting to build on the other side of the lake now. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Department of Highways is doing 

55. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — No, nobody’s building Highway 55. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, if any company . . . In 

this case if it were to be Weyerhaeuser — and we’re not sure — 

I’m advised that they would get a work permit  

through our department to go ahead and do the clearing and 

make the right of way through there. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I didn’t get the answer, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — If any company was building a road or 

doing a right of way, they would get a clearance through our 

department and they’d get a work permit to go in there and do 

that particular road. We wouldn’t be building that road, though. 

That would be their responsibility. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — My next question is then, Mr. Minister, did 

you give a permit and authorization for the construction of the 

road from Bodmin up the west side of Cowan Lake? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We gave permission in consultation 

with Environment, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — And that has been done, then? A written 

permission has been given to Department of Highways to build 

that road up the west side of Cowan Lake. That’s right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe, Mr. Chairman, it’s 

Weyerhaeuser themselves who are building that road. I’m just 

looking over a briefing note to see how the process had come 

about. It doesn’t say anything about Highways, so I have to 

assume and my officials are assuming that’s a Weyerhaeuser 

constructed road through there. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — So what you’re saying then, Mr. Minister, 

is that Weyerhaeuser can build a road wherever he chooses 

within the forested areas that he has jurisdiction over without 

going through Parks planning. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, they would have to 

consult with the department and we look at various things. For 

example, in this particular instance, we took action to minimize 

the road’s negative impact on wildlife resource in the area. 

Certain conditions were imposed to control access and 

restrictions that would apply in there. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I’ll just close that off with a comment, Mr. 

Minister. That road is opening up a completely new area 

through a forested area where wildlife did have access to and 

were isolated. This is going to be the first road up there. It’s a 

major artery going from Bodmin right up to the south shore of 

Green Lake. And that is a Weyerhaeuser road, and I most 

certainly give notice that my colleague from The Battlefords 

will be following that up when we get into the Highways 

estimates. 

 

But when we talk about protecting the habitat for our wildlife, 

what you have just done, Mr. Minister, or which Weyerhaeuser 

has just done, they have taken a large forested area and are 

putting a major artery right through the centre of it, and I think 

that that is a step backwards. 

 

I want to . . . When we closed our estimates, Mr. Minister, 

about a month ago . . . And I guess this is why the estimates are 

going to go on so long this year is because in  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2729 

 

 

your government’s wisdom you decided to sit in the summer 

months and to not finish your departments, and as a result, more 

and more information keeps coming in so we can continue on 

with the estimates that we’re in. 

 

At that time, I guess what we could say, on behalf of all the 

members of the legislature and the legislative staff and the civil 

servants and their families, that this will go down in history as a 

summer that never was. And the Minister of Finance can take 

credit for that, for bringing in a budget in June when he should 

have brought it in on the end of February. That’s why we’re all 

sitting here, and that’s why all the civil servants and their 

families were denied holidays this year because of the former 

liberal member who is the now Minister of Finance. 

 

And let me tell you this, and let me tell you, Mr. Minister of 

Finance, yes, it will go down as a summer that never was for 

many, many families in this province. 

 

When we closed off, Mr. Minister, we were discussing the 

transportation subsidy for the commercial fishermen in northern 

Saskatchewan, and I had requested that you reconsider that. 

You cut it down to 60 per cent, and for certain species, you took 

it totally off. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, have you made a 

decision to reinstate that fish transportation subsidy or does it 

still remain the same as it was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It remains the same, and as long as fish 

prices remain high and there’s a good return for the fisherman, 

we’d be leaving it as is. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I see your logic there, Mr. Minister. It’s 

sort of like what you’re talking about . . . I see a little while ago 

you’re talking about the $400 timber wolf, and I just wonder 

how many trappers that you think that are getting $400 for the 

timber wolves, or how many of them are averaging $400. 

 

I think if you would take a serious look at that, and if you knew 

anything about trapping, you’d find out that trappers who are 

selling timber wolves, their average would probably be around 

60 to $75 range, depending on what time of year they’re caught. 

There’s a lot of variables. I’ll tell you when you start trapping 

and selling timber wolves, and as you refer to as a coyote . . . 

That’s cowboy jargon but that’s not what we call them in 

northern Saskatchewan. We don’t call them coyotes. 

 

But I see you decided, in your wisdom, because the price of fur 

goes up, that you want to increase the licence for the trappers to 

go out and catch the fur. I wonder if you’re going to use the 

same logic on the farmers. Now all of a sudden cattle prices 

seem to be coming up a bit so I suppose that the farmer can now 

expect an increase in his lease fees. And knowing the 

government, the way you operate, you’re probably going to do 

that. Because you continually take a look, you take a look at an 

individual who is making a good return and you say, well we’ve 

got to get that guy, because you’ve got to have more money for 

the Peter Pocklingtons and the Weyerhaeusers. That’s what you 

have to do. 

 

(2045) 

Mr. Minister, I want to now thank you for the study that you 

sent over on fish; it’s a large study. I have not had an 

opportunity to completely go through it, but let me tell you I’m 

surprised that you would get Deloitte Haskins & Sells, 

chartered accountants, to do a study on the feasibility of the 

commercial fishery or the commercial use of cisco, burbots, and 

mullets. Because when I read the study, I take a look at the 

study and it’s a southern oriented study and they talk about a 

project in Calgary for burbot — and why would we want to go 

to Calgary to process burbot when it should be done in northern 

Saskatchewan? But I see, in your wisdom, you got Deloitte 

Haskins & Sells, a chartered accountant group — I don’t know 

what their expertise are in burbot and cisco and mullets — but 

they’ve done the study and I will, as you indicate, comment on 

the study a little later on. I wonder if you could indicate how 

much that study cost, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, there are a few 

comments made there that beg response. First of all, there’s no 

increase in a northern trapper’s licence, and the hon. member 

should know that as one who’s trapping. Secondly, if you know 

trappers that are getting $65 for a wolf pelt, someone’s taking 

advantage of them because the best advice I get — and we 

check the market — is it’s 400 to $500 a wolf pelt. And when I 

talk about coyotes, I’m talking about coyotes in southern 

Saskatchewan and I’m certainly not confusing them with 

wolves and I certainly don’t need the help of the cowboy over 

here with the western boots from Regina Centre quipping away 

through the seat of his pants again. He had his opportunity to 

say something, he made a fool of himself like he did last year 

when he stood up here and he just rebelled on and on and on 

with things that were totally inaccurate and in the end he had to 

be sat down and embarrassed when we got into the discussion 

of Reggie Gross and his travels around the world. If you want to 

go through all that one again, I’d be pleased to do it for you. 

 

Northern trapper’s licence — no increase. Deloitte Haskins & 

Sells — they are a consulting company; they do more than 

provide chartered accountants. They are a consulting company. 

They have a very strong arm, a very strong arm in the resource 

sector — and the study was $10,000. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to 

confirm that the timber-wolves that were sold in Saskatchewan 

in the last trapping season, if they averaged $400. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’d be pleased to provide all the 

pertinent information to the hon. member as soon as we can 

look it up. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, that’s not the question I ask 

you. And you just answered the question, so I’m asking you 

again: did the trappers in Saskatchewan receive an average of 

$400 for all the timber-wolves that they pelted and sold on the 

markets? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Nobody said the average for everything 

that was sold was 400. Some are worth 400, some are worth 

500, and some of them are worth even more than that. 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2730 

 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well I’m not going to get an answer out of 

you because I don’t really believe you want to answer that 

question and I’ll tell you that there was no $400 average. And 

as I indicated before, I’ll think you’ll find out that the average 

was probably below $100. 

 

I want to, Mr. Minister, turn to a letter that was received by 

your Premier from the chief of the Canoe Lake Band, Thomas 

Iron, who indicated his dislike for the signs that have been put 

up and the corridors that you have created on the northern 

highways. 

 

I asked a couple of questions the other day in question period, 

and some of the answers I see that you gave back here were 

quite interesting. You indicate that a native conservation 

committee to discuss the precise policy, type of policy, was set 

up. Could you indicate how many individuals sit on that 

committee and the make-up of the committee, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I invited the FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) to get back 

involved with the committee. We had the committee in place 

some time ago. Some of the members did not meet the . . . for 

whatever reason, didn’t come to the meetings. There was one 

very active individual who wanted to promote the goals, the 

objectives of the committee. As I understand it, very recently, 

FSIN have again accepted my invitation, and they are interested 

in putting representatives on to that committee. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — So you are indicating then that that 

committee is . . . You’re making up the committee, but it hasn’t 

actually sat. It actually hasn’t sat then to discuss the issue of the 

corridors. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, the committee sat 

and gradually it wound down. Some of the individuals on the 

committee were disagreeing among themselves, and the 

committee didn’t sit. Latterly, now we’re in the process of 

establishing a new one. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, then I guess the question I 

want to ask you: if you are going to set up a new committee, are 

you considering asking the chiefs of the bands that are involved 

— and I speak of the Canoe Lake Band, the Patuanak Band, the 

Dillon Band, and the Waterhen Band — to sit on that 

committee, because that is where the problems, as the chief of 

the Canoe Lake Band, Thomas Iron, has indicated to the 

Premier, and a copy to yourself, that they are not going to 

honour that. They feel, and I feel strongly too, that they have 

rights under treaties to hunt and trap and fish and camp on 

unoccupied Crown land, and you now have put corridors on 

hundreds of miles of unoccupied Crown land, and you have 

eliminated the treaty Indian from hunting in those areas. 

 

Will you now take another look at that and ask the chiefs of the 

bands that are involved to sit on that committee and to discuss 

this particular issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We’ll certainly entertain nominations 

from the FSIN, Mr. Chairman. Will we eliminate road 

corridors? Definitely not. And the 400  

metres on either side of the road will exist. I heard an interview 

this morning, subsequent to our exchange in the House last 

week where we were both carried verbatim, with one native 

who said that not only would he not go 400 metres, he wouldn’t 

go 4 inches. 

 

Mr. Chairman, last year I spoke with one native who told me he 

shot 50 deer last year. I hardly think he was hunting only for 

food. And I think we have an obligation not only to the resource 

but to all of the people of Saskatchewan and to the people who 

pay habitat certificates and to the people who buy licences in 

this province to preserve the resource for future generations. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, when you talk about a racist 

statement, there we have an individual that’s got up in here and 

said that a native shot 50 deer himself last year. What a racist 

statement to make. Was he ever charged? Was it ever proven? I 

think if you’re going to bring up that kind of a statement in 

here, and use the racial overtones that you’re using against 

native people, I think that it’s time that the Deputy Premier got 

up and took you out of cabinet, and as far as I’m concerned, 

should ask for a by-election in the Turtleford constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Because that, Mr. Chairman, is . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. Allow the member 

from Athabasca to make his comments. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — On a point a personal privilege. I would ask 

the Attorney General to get up and explain what he’s talking 

about when I’m asking for personal money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — When the hon. member was asking 

about commercial fish subsidies, he forgot to mention he’s a 

commercial fisherman, and what he’s really doing is saying, 

would your government please put some more money in my 

pocket. That’s one. 

 

Secondly, I have never, ever in my life been accused of racism, 

Mr. Chairman, and I certainly don’t intend to stand here and be 

accused by the likes of him or anybody else in here of being a 

racist, Mr. Chairman, because I stood here and told the truth of 

one native who told me he shot 50 deer one year. And it’s not a 

question of whether or not he gets charged, or whether or not he 

broke the law. The point is he said he shot 50 deer. All I’m 

asking is: did he shoot them for his own personal use? Did he 

shoot them for food? I don’t know; I hardly think so. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I just think that that, Mr. Chairman, is a 

racial statement. It’s racial innuendo. And to suggest that 

because I am a commercial fisherman and I’m going to take 

advantage of a fish subsidy . . . What about all the farmers that 

are sitting over there, and what about their deficiency payment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I ask the Attorney General, where do you 

put all the farmers? They take their subsidies and  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2731 

 

 

they’re not all farmers. Some of them are lawyers and some of 

them are doctors. They’re taking the subsidy. The amount of 

money that I take . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

But I say when you can have a minister of the Crown stand up 

in here, Mr. Chairman, and say that a native of this province, a 

native Indian, has shot 50 moose and for that reason you’re not 

going to budge the corridors 1 inch because of that — and that’s 

what you said — and that you’re going to put these corridors up 

. . . You know that native Indians under their treaties have the 

right to hunt on unoccupied Crown land, and that is where your 

corridors have been put. You are taking the treaty rights 

gradually away from the native people. You’re no different than 

what happened in 1969 when they brought the white paper out 

and were suggesting that the provincial government take over 

the responsibilities of native Indians. And that’s exactly what 

you’re starting to implement. 

 

And are you saying that it’s just native people who hunt and 

break the laws as far as hunting is concerned, and taking antlers 

and shipping animals, trophy animals across the border. Are 

you suggesting that it’s only native people who are doing that? I 

suggest to you that you better take a look at the court docket — 

and there’s some of them coming up — and you’ll find out, Mr. 

Minister, that they’re not all native people, and probably none 

of them are. 

 

And I ask you again, Mr. Minister, will you set up a committee 

of the chiefs from these reserves to discuss the possibility of 

those corridors, and the rights that the treat Indians have within 

those corridors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll receive 

nominations from the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations). As it relates to the road corridors, they’re not new; 

they’ve been there for a number of years. I’m not, I am not 

going to remove the road corridors. We need them. We have to 

manage the moose; we have to manage the elk. What we’re 

doing is we’re protecting from opportunists hunting from 

vehicles down the side of the road. They can get out and they 

can walk through the bush, and then they can go hunting. Surely 

it’s not too much to ask of anyone; I don’t care if they’re 

brown, white, or green with purple stripes, to go 400 metres 

across the bush to go hunting. 

 

And I have never, ever — and you stand up and find literature 

that says otherwise to the contrary — I have never, ever said 

anybody, any specific group was poaching, was taking antlers, 

and was shipping them south, and nor did I imply it. And I’d 

invite the hare-brained lawyer from Regina Centre to show that 

in proof. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just to close this off 

because we’re not getting any place with this minister. I want 

you to answer this question: do you believe that the treaty 

Indians in this Province, under their treaties, have the right to 

hunt, trap, and fish, and camp on unoccupied Crown land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Authorities, other than I, Mr. Chairman, 

have decided in their wisdom that treaty  

Indians have the right to hunt and to trap and to fish on 

unoccupied Crown land, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, could you explain to me, 

between Green Lake and Beauval, in the 60-mile stretch, how 

you determine that that is occupied Crown land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, any challenges that have 

come up in court have supported the concept of road corridors 

in the 400 metre barrier on either side. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — You just got through saying that you 

support the treaties’ right to hunt, fish, trap, and congregate on 

unoccupied Crown land. You just said that and Hansard will 

show that tomorrow, so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And yes, 

it’s there; it’s in writing. 

 

Now all I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, is, and you don’t have to 

ask the FSIN, as . . . Get in touch with the chief; he’s the one 

who wrote you the letter, the chief from Canoe Narrows. 

They’re the ones that are having the problem. Will you agree to 

get in touch with them or have your officials get in touch with 

the chiefs and discuss this corridor in a sane way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Let me reiterate once again, Mr. 

Chairman, I am not prepared to remove the road corridors at all. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well we’ll just leave that . . . we’ll just . . . 

the minister just . . . When you have a minister that stands up 

and accuses a native person of killing 50 animals, a racist 

statement like that - gets up and says that the treaties do have 

rights and that they can hunt on unoccupied Crown land, then 

gets up and says, absolutely no way will he remove them, 

without even discussing it with the Crowns, I think, Mr. 

Chairman, that says what kind of a minister we have and what 

kind of a government we have in this province. And that’s why 

they’re not going to be around for very much longer, I can 

assure you that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, a week’s a long 

time in politics, as Winston Churchill said. And we’ve got 

members on the other side saying, they’re not going to be 

around very long. I’m sorry to disappoint you. We’ve got 4 

years if we care to exercise it. And I hasten to point out to you 

and to your colleagues over there that in that four years an 

awful lot can turn around. 

 

And you stand up and you make the kinds of comments you’ve 

made tonight outside of the House, and you make them to the 

natural history society; the Sierra Club, World Wildlife Fund, 

Habitat Trust Canada, Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, and 

let me see how long you’re going to be around, buddy. 

 

And one other thing I’d like to point out, Mr. Chairman. 

Members of the fur block around Buffalo Narrows, around 

Buffalo Narrows, formally requested extension of the road 

corridor along Highway 155. Do you know why?  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2732 

 

 

To protect the area moose and deer population from heavy 

hunting pressure. I rest my case. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. My question 

concerns Young Athletes Saskatchewan, which I’m sure and 

other members of the legislature know is a provincially 

registered non-profit organization that deals with sporting 

activities for young people, specifically basketball and soccer. 

I’m wondering what your department is doing to address the 

concern that Young Athletes Saskatchewan has with respect to 

the allocation of minor sport funds from Sask Sport funds and 

Saskatchewan culture and recreation. Presently they aren’t 

receiving these funds. They feel entitled to them, given the kind 

of important work they do with a broad base of young children. 

And I want to know what your department is doing in this 

regard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the groups, or 

specifically one group, in any event, to which the hon. member 

referred is not a provincial sport governing body; therefore, 

they haven’t been placed on the eligibility list. What we’ve told 

them is they are eligible to go, for example, to the 

Saskatchewan Basketball Association who are on the list, who 

do receive funding, and they could receive funding from them. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, as you know that’s precisely 

the problem. They cannot receive funding from the 

Saskatchewan Basketball Association, Saskatchewan Basketball 

Incorporated. Saskatchewan Basketball Incorporated is a very 

elitist organization; they control all the access to the funds. the 

YAS people have been able to get nowhere; therein is the 

problem, and I ask you what you’re department is doing to 

address that problem of the Saskatchewan Basketball 

Incorporated not sharing provincial funding with a broadly 

based participatory organization such as YAS? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well the SBA attitude has been that 

they are already running clinics, and they’re running programs, 

and they don’t want to see any duplication. Besides I’m not 

really in a position to speak on behalf of a sports body like the 

Saskatchewan Basketball Association. I respectfully suggest 

that you’d have to contact them and find out their specific 

thinking on the issue. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — You aren’t in a position to speak for the 

Saskatchewan Basketball Association, and I’m not asking you 

to do that. I’m asking you to speak for your department and tell 

us what you are doing to deal with this bottle-neck. Every 

member of this legislature has received a communication back 

in May from the people in YAS documenting this problem, 

documenting the fact that the Saskatchewan Basketball 

Incorporated claims to spend departmental funds received from 

the department on developmental programs, and does not spend 

it. That it’s a very narrowly based program, sometimes with as 

few as 15 people participating. It’s a very elitist program funded 

by the provincial government, by your department. Certainly 

you can speak to that situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well what’s funded by my department, 

Mr. Chairman, is funded through lotteries. If they have some 

problem with the SBA, why don’t they  

run for office, get on the executive, and make the changes they 

want to suit themselves? 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well if that’s the solution that you advocate, 

I’m sure they’ll be very interested to hear that from you. I just 

ask you again: is there nothing at your department that you can 

do to facilitate the development of a participatory 

community-based sports program in opposition to what we have 

in Saskatchewan Basketball Incorporated, as a very elitist 

program. Are your hands totally tied? Are you incapacitated in 

this regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t control 

basketball in this province. There are all kinds of leagues in this 

province from wee little types — and my kid plays in one of 

them right here in Regina — to what they call senior men’s that 

I played in, some of them sponsored by corporate bodies, most 

of them funded strictly by the people themselves who go out 

and play the game. 

 

I see absolutely nothing wrong if 10 of us want to form a 

basketball team and join a church league in Regina. That’s our 

responsibility; we throw 10 bucks in the pot and we go and play 

basketball. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I think one more question and 

we’ll be prepared to agree to the items. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Speak for yourself. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Some members say speak for myself. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think these estimates have illustrated one thing 

very clearly, and it’s been a long process we’ve been through 

here. You have said, yourself: I wear many hats. I’ve heard 

these estimates described as a hodgepodge. If one thing has 

been illustrated by these estimates . . . I mean, let’s look at it, 

we go from symphonies to fishing licences; we go from 

education in the arts to water levels in Lake Diefenbaker; we go 

from fire-fighting to lotteries. 

 

Mr. Minister, I suggest it’s an inappropriate combination of 

departments that’s happened here, an inappropriate combination 

of departments. My final question is this, Mr. Minister: will you 

be lobbying your cabinet colleagues, because someone’s going 

to get short-changed in this combination; someone’s got to get 

short-changed. And I fear that the culture and rec side of your 

portfolio is the area that’s going to get short-changed. And so 

will you be lobbying your cabinet colleagues to see again 

establishment of a department that is specifically involved with 

culture and creation and that area of your department now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member’s 

correct about wearing many hats, and I’ve heard comment, too, 

about hodgepodge of activity. I will say when the two 

departments were firmly merged, I did comment it was not a 

marriage made in heaven; however, I have to say I enjoy 

immensely all of the activities of the department, whether they 

be on what we call the renewable resources division or on the 

division of sports, culture, and heritage. I think it’s very 

possible that the department can work very well. 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2733 

 

 

We have a new structure in place within the department. I think 

it’s starting to relate to the problems of groups out there. As I 

say, I met with the multicultural council today, the Arts Board 

last week, and they seem to think that things are working out 

well. I’m really pleased with the way the department functions. 

I enjoy the activities of the department, and obviously, by the 

spirited debate here, I intend to enjoy it for some time to come. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 21 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, when I questioned 

you earlier about the money and the payments to the property 

management corporation regarding the rental for the Archives 

Board, you first of all told me that I would find out that answer 

in the Crown Corporations Committee, but in Hansard on page 

1923 you finally said: 

 

. . . I’m advised the rent would be paid by us. 

 

Meaning your department. 

 

The rent for the Archives Board comes out of this amount of 

money, the $11-million-plus. My question still remains then: 

how much money is the Archives Board paying for the rental of 

their property? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I don’t have a 

specific figure that the Archives Board is paying; all I have is a 

global figure that they have, and they’re paying that rent. I 

would have to undertake to find out some other way or get it 

through the property management corporation. 

 

Ms. Smart: — What do you mean by the global figure for the 

Archives Board? You’ve got 6,000-some money in here for the 

Archives Board, but that does not include the rent for their 

premises. You’re asking us to vote here on $11,492,500 

payment to the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. We will not have a chance until next year to 

question this in the Crown Corporations Committee. I believe 

that you should know — I believe that you should know how 

much money the Archives Board is paying for the rental of their 

property out of this $11 million. Surely you have some way of 

breaking that down to know how much money in your 

department is going for that rent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we paid to the property 

management Crown about $409,000, and some of that would go 

to the rent, some to the operation. It’s all taken care of by them. 

 

I can advise the hon. member that in response to a written 

request from the member from Saskatoon Westmount, I 

provided him with all of that information he asked relative to 

property management Crown and space that’s rented, and I 

think you can confirm he has all of that, and it’s a very thick 

document. 

 

Item 21 agreed to. 

Items 22 and 23 agreed to. 

 

Item 24 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, this item 24, “Grants in support 

of sport and recreation programs,” there is a significant decrease 

in the budgeted figure from 1986-87, which was at $1,810,000, 

down to $1,260,000, and I would appreciate some explanation 

of that cut. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, one or two programs 

that we had been sponsoring, we no longer are. The “best ever” 

program, being one for $100,000; youth leadership program for 

$30,000; and we’re not participating in the recreation director 

program any longer either. 

 

Item 24 agreed to. 

 

Items 25 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(2115) 

 

Item 31 

 

Mr. Calvert: — This item 31, “Grants to the Saskatchewan 

Centre of the Arts,” here in Regina, Mr. Minister, I noticed 

you’ve held the grant constant to last year. I would just like to 

get some reflection from you on the situation that the Centre of 

the Arts now finds itself in. I have a quote I took from its 

1984-85 annual report, the report from that year, quote: 

 

. . . The . . . viability of the Centre (of the Arts) depends 

(on) its ability to compete for convention and trade show 

business. (These activities account for two-thirds of the 

supporting revenue) . . . 

 

I think it’s pretty obvious that the downtown convention centre 

now under construction, once completed, and the Queensbury 

Downs are competition, direct competition to the Saskatchewan 

Centre of the Arts, which is the responsibility of your 

department. And so I would like to hear some reflection from 

you on how you feel that the Centre of the Arts can address this 

new competition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, simply put, the Centre 

of the Arts is operating a pretty healthy deficit, something like 

$450,000 per year. There are several reasons for that. 

 

We could go back and look at the history of the building of the 

thing; I don’t think it would be very useful to dwell too long on 

that, but the fact of the matter is it cannot accommodate the big 

concerts and the big shows that come in. The seating capacity is 

not enough, for instance, for rock shows. They want to go out to 

exhibition stadium where they’ve got 7,000 seats as opposed to 

1800 or 2000 seats. They just don’t have enough seating 

capacity to cover the costs of those kind of concerts, so they’re 

losing there. 

 

What we’ve been finding out in recent years, and this isn’t a 

new phenomenon, I think you’ll find this with some of your 

colleagues who’ve been around the legislature for a  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2734 

 

 

few years, that in fact conventions aren’t very keen to locate out 

there because they have to drive back and forward. Albeit the 

parking’s excellent out there, they still just can’t be bothered 

driving. They want to be downtown; they want to be close to 

shopping; they want to be close to entertainment; and they want 

to stay in the hotels. 

 

I think the future, unless some of the modus operandi changes, 

is rather bleak for the Centre of the Arts, quite frankly, and we 

are looking at some alternatives with the board and with the 

executive director that may make it a more viable operation. 

 

I should tell the hon. member we’ve talked to the University of 

Regina about using space in there; we have talked about the art 

gallery in there; and we’re looking at options like this that 

perhaps could make it a more viable operation. 

 

Item 31 agreed to. 

 

Items 32 to 34 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 39 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? Carried. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks and Renewable Resources 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

 

Items 1 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 39 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Culture and Recreation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 7 

 

Items 1 to 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 7 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I, too, would like to join 

in thanking my officials for their assistance in preparing for 

these estimates. I’d also like to thank the members of the 

opposition for the spirited discussion which we’ve encountered 

since July 17 when we started on the estimates. I’ve enjoyed the 

exchanges, sometimes a little testy, most of the time rather 

entertaining and a lot of fun. I always enjoy the estimates. 

 

In particular I thank my principal critics, the member from 

Moose Jaw South and the member from Athabasca. I think for 

the most part we conducted ourselves with a degree of civility, 

and we can always argue all we want in  

here and treat each other like gentlemen whenever we leave the 

chamber. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also 

like to take this opportunity to thank the minister and his 

officials for the good debate that we had. We didn’t get all the 

answers that we wanted, but we’ll keep working on him, and 

thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I, too, would want to add my 

thanks to the officials of the department who have endured 

these estimates. I’d also want to, through this House, thank the 

many who are employed in this department who serve the 

people of this province and, I think, serve our province very 

well. 

 

And I want to add my thanks to the minister. Throughout these 

estimates you have made a number of commitments, and I 

appreciate those commitments. You, I think, approach these 

estimates in a co-operative way and were fairly frank with your 

answers, and we on this side of the House appreciate that. I 

think only once today did we feel that perhaps we were engaged 

with a bowl of jelly, or whatever the phrase was, and perhaps 

once tonight with a plate of haggis, I might say, but I want to 

thank you, Mr. Minister, for your efforts in these estimates. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Constitution Amendment, 1987 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Devine, and the proposed amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Mitchell. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate this 

opportunity to speak in this debate about the Meech Lake 

accord and the proposed amendments to the Canadian 

constitution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very important debate on a vital subject, 

and I hope as the debate progress that all members, not just a 

few on either side, but all members will avail themselves of the 

chance to take part. I think, Mr. Speaker, that we owe our 

participation to our constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our constituents don’t have the chance to take part 

in this discussion. They have been denied any formal 

opportunity to participate in the Meech Lake debate. The 

Premier says that we in this Chamber have to participate for 

them, and so we must do that. We have a duty, Mr. Speaker, to 

do nothing less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this should be an exciting occasion for 

Saskatchewan people and for all Canadians. It should be history 

in the making. I recall my time, Mr. Speaker, in Ottawa a 

number of years ago, in the House of Commons, and also in the 

federal public service, when I had the chance then, a few years 

ago, to join personally in the  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2735 

 

 

early process that led eventually to the constitutional 

agreements of 1981 and ’82. It was, Mr. Speaker, an 

exhilarating experience, and I’m sure that the member for 

Elphinstone and the member for Riversdale felt the same sense 

of excitement in the parts that they played before 1982 on the 

provincial side on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

And I’m also sure, Mr. Speaker, that the present Premier and 

the Minister of Justice have many of the same emotions now, as 

the process of constitutional change continues. 

 

I recall, coming back from one of the constitutional conferences 

this spring, the Premier was saying that he felt like an expectant 

father — a latter day father of confederation. So it is exciting, 

Mr. Speaker. It is historic; it is constitution building; it is nation 

building, and this process is important. 

 

For my part, Mr. Speaker, I first want to express my firm 

conviction that a process of public hearings, or some process, 

Mr. Speaker, of public involvement in Saskatchewan should be 

an absolute requirement before this Assembly is finally called 

upon to vote on the Meech Lake accord. This is not just an 

ordinary provincial law that we’re considering. It’s not good 

enough to have just an ordinary debate in this House and then 

an ordinary vote. What we’re talking about is the fundamental 

law of Canada, the constitution, in which we all have a very 

large stake. And when I say we, Mr. Speaker, I don’t just mean 

the Premier and a few members of the cabinet and their senior 

advisers. I don’t just mean the few privileged Saskatchewan 

people who happen to sit in this House., When I say we, I mean 

every Canadian citizen living in Saskatchewan. 

 

(2130) 

 

It’s vital to all of us, Mr. Speaker. It can, and it will, affect all of 

us sooner or later by one means or another. We will all be 

touched by the constitution. Changes to it are rare, the process 

is slow, the consequences are large and lasting. So when that 

process of change is under way, legislators have a special 

obligation to involve the public in as broad a way as humanly 

possible, especially as has been the case with Meech Lake. If 

most of the drafting has been done in secret behind closed doors 

in a pressure-cooker kind of atmosphere by a limited view, you 

need to let the sun shine in, Mr. Speaker. You need to let 

everybody get involved. You need to explain your draft with 

precision and clarity, and you need to give everyone the 

opportunity to understand it’s impact and to grasp its 

ramifications. 

 

People need the chance to ask questions and to get their 

answers, and they need the chance to express their views. And 

the draftsmen, Mr. Speaker, the people who originally put it 

together, they need to be prepared to listen and to respond and 

to make changes, if necessary, to satisfy the public will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why I believe in public hearings in this 

process and believe that very, very strongly. And unfortunately 

that process has been denied in this province. The Government 

of Canada and several other provincial governments agree with 

the position that I have just stated. They’re holding public 

hearings in their  

respective jurisdictions, elsewhere in this country, but not the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 

wrong. Most Canadians outside of Saskatchewan have had, or 

will have, the opportunity to participate in public hearings on 

the Meech Lake accord, but not Saskatchewan people. And I 

think our citizenship, because we happen to be residents of this 

province, I think our citizenship is being diminished a bit 

because we won’t have the chance to participate in this round of 

constitutional change while most other Canadians who happen 

to live in other provinces will have that opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note that there is no 

particular rush in this process. Any legislature can take up to 

three years to ratify the Meech Lake accord, so there’s lots of 

time available. We shouldn’t need all of that time, Mr. Speaker, 

but we should take the amount of time that’s necessary to do the 

job right, to hold our own Saskatchewan hearings, to digest the 

hearings that will be held in other parts of this country, and to 

make the accord as good as it possibly can be. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, and, I think, important that today 

the special joint committee of the House of Commons and the 

Senate which reported on the Meech Lake accord filed their 

report in the House of Commons today, and at best they could 

describe the accord as “workable.” And that committee clearly 

concluded, Mr. Speaker, in the language that they used, that 

Meech Lake as it stands today is far from perfect. And all that 

being said, Mr. Speaker, I think in this House we should be 

cautious. 

 

No one — I don’t think on any side of this House, Mr. Speaker 

— no one wants to defeat the worthy and vital objective of 

bringing Quebec fully into Canada’s constitutional family. No 

one wants to see the deal unravel. But, Mr. Speaker, I think 

what many of us want is to ensure that the deal is done right, 

and that we make it just as good as it can be. And that’s all that 

any of us who express some concerns are saying. 

 

The government basically says, well there it is, take it or leave 

it. But in taking it, Mr. Speaker, I want first of all to indicate for 

the record what my concerns are; and secondly, I want to set out 

what would be the Liberal agenda for future constitutional 

progress. 

 

If it is the government’s position, Mr. Speaker, that nothing 

more can or will be done at this stage in the process, then I want 

Saskatchewan people to know that my party will be building a 

bridge to the future so the present deficiencies in the Meech 

Lake accord can be corrected at the earliest possible moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first among those deficiencies, as I see them, is 

the lack of progress toward meaningful reform of the Senate of 

Canada. In the 120 years since confederation there have, it 

seems to me, been two lasting irritants in our confederation, two 

major challenges in Canadian nation building. One has been, 

grappling with the legitimate concerns of the province of 

Quebec, and the other is that constant struggle that we have 

against regional alienation. 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2736 

 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that Meech Lake deals with the 

first of those challenges; that is, the concerns with respect to the 

province of Quebec, and it makes some considerable progress 

in dealing with those concerns. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

there is precious little progress on the other major concern over 

the past 120 years that I just mentioned, and that is the struggle 

against regional alienation. 

 

The accord, it seems to me, on this latter point of dealing with 

regional alienation and the use of Senate reform as a vehicle to 

deal with regional alienation — it seems to me that the accord 

represents one step forward and two steps back. 

 

The step forward, Mr. Speaker, is getting Senate reform on the 

official agenda for future constitutional discussions, and that’s 

good. I’m glad to see that it’s at least there as an agenda item 

for next year, or whenever the subject can come up. But, Mr. 

Speaker, what we have there is only an agreement to talk; it’s 

nothing more than that. There’s no flesh on the bones. There’s 

simply agreement that it will come up on the agenda. I’m 

pleased to see that it’s finally on the agenda, but an agreement 

to talk is by no means a guarantee that meaningful reform will 

necessarily follow. 

 

The two steps back, Mr. Speaker, that I mention in respect of 

Senate reform, is first of all the imposition of the rule of 

unanimity in relation to future constitutional amendments 

relating to the Senate. Previously we had a formula in the 

constitution from 1982 that I thought was a pretty rigid formula 

when it came to changing federal institutions, and now, as a 

result of the Meech Lake proposals, that amending formula is 

going to get even tougher in relation to changing the Senate 

because it will require unanimity before it can ever be done. 

 

And if we thought that Senate reform might be difficult to get 

under the older, more flexible amending formula, now, Mr. 

Speaker, it will be just that much tougher to achieve in the 

future. And that’s the one provision that I regard as a step 

backward. 

 

The Premier, of course, says that the veto provision, in relation 

to this particular section of the constitutional accord, is a veto 

that is placed equally across the country with every province in 

an equal position, and therefore our veto is just as good as 

Ontario’s veto, or Quebec’s veto, or any other province’s veto, 

and that we ought to be glad to have equal status in terms of a 

veto. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I suppose on the surface there may be some 

merit to that argument, but I would point out that when you are 

in the disadvantaged position, a veto really does you precious 

little good. The veto primarily works in favour of those who 

would like to sustain the status quo. If you don’t want things to 

change, then the more people who have a veto and can stop the 

process of change, the better it is. 

 

And so in respect to the constitution, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure 

that we should be too sanguine about having a veto along with 

anybody else because that veto power, in every jurisdiction 

across the country, simply makes the process of change for the 

future much more difficult to achieve. If you don’t want 

change, if you don’t want to  

make that future constitutional, that constitutional progress, 

then, Mr. Speaker, I suppose the more vetoes you can have, the 

better. 

 

And maybe there are some parts in Canada where they would 

like the status quo to remain exactly where it is, and it would be 

wonderful if everything could be vetoed. But I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, from the western point of view, from the 

Saskatchewan point of view, a veto is precious little comfort to 

us because surely we are the ones who have a vested interest in 

change, and not a vested interest in keeping things the way they 

are. And therefore I’m not all that thrilled by the broadly based 

veto, because I think it works primarily in the interests of other 

regions of the country and not necessarily in the interests of our 

region of the country where we want things to change. 

 

The second step backward, Mr. Speaker, that I would refer to in 

relation to this issue of the Senate and Senate reform, is the fact 

that the Meech Lake accord has, in relation to appointments to 

the Senate, simply in its transitional clauses substituted the tool 

of patronage at the provincial level for the tool of patronage at 

the federal level. 

 

What the Meech Lake accord says is that, pending future formal 

constitutional amendment with respect to the Senate in a broad 

way, pending the accomplishment of that, that we will have in 

the meantime a provision whereby the federal government will 

no longer appoint the Senate directly, but will instead appoint 

people who are nominated by the provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some might think that is a great accomplishment. 

Quite frankly, I don’t think that constitutes very much reform 

because, as I said a moment ago, what that section effectively 

does is substitute provincial patronage for what used to be 

federal patronage, and I’m not sure that moves us very much 

along the way toward legitimate reform of the upper Chamber 

in this country. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, it could be a clear disincentive for reform 

in the future. It could stand in the way, because if every premier 

across the country has the ability to populate the Senate instead 

of the Prime Minister having that ability, if every premier has 

that ability in every province right across the country, the 

premiers will be sorely tempted to keep that ability, to maintain 

that tool of patronage in their hands, and wouldn’t have very 

much interest in advancing the reform process where that whole 

system of appointment could be replaced by a system of 

elections which would provide legitimacy in the upper Chamber 

and really amount to genuine reform of that upper House. 

Instead, we have just one kind of patronage appointment 

substituting for another and, Mr. Speaker, I submit that that is 

not very much reform at all. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, that problem — in terms of the 

substitution of provincial patronage for what used to be federal 

patronage — that problem could be a greater road-block toward 

meaningful reform of the Senate in the future, could be a greater 

road-block standing in the way of that reform that the rule of 

unanimity which I mentioned as another concern in respect of 

this matter. 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2737 

 

 

Mr. Speaker, some may ask why there are many of us in 

western Canada who dwell upon this issue of Senate reform and 

why we think it’s so important. Some describe it in terms of the 

Triple E concept in relation to the Senate, making the Senate 

more legitimate by making it elected, making it equal in terms 

of regional and provincial balance across the country, and 

making it more effective in terms of giving it a clear mandate 

and sorting out the jurisdictional problems that presently 

beleaguer that institution and sap its credibility. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I am an advocate of Senate reform along the 

lines of the Triple E concept, not as just an academic exercise in 

some political theory, but because I believe that Senate reform 

along these lines is one useful, practical vehicle, one method of 

genuine institutional change in our country to being unstacking 

the deck that’s there today — and it’s stacked very much 

against western Canada. It’s a way to address that old painful 

malaise of western alienation. 

 

(2145) 

 

I don’t argue for Senate reform just for the sake of having an 

argument about reforming an institution. I make the argument 

for a very practical purpose, because if it’s done right, Mr. 

Speaker, along the lines of that Triple E concept, it is a way to 

enhance the legitimate clout of western Canada at the centre of 

national power in Ottawa. And that means with a properly 

reformed Senate, Mr. Speaker, that is very much linked to 

economic development for western Canada; growth for western 

Canada; jobs for western Canada; economic opportunities and 

diversification for western Canada; fulfilment in our region. 

 

If we can begin unstacking that deck, if we can enhance our 

clout at the centre of national power, if we can legitimately 

reform some of those central institutions that we in our region 

think have been holding us back; if we can increase their 

sensitivity to what’s important to us, then, Mr. Speaker, the 

proposal about Senate reform is much more than just a political 

science theory. Then, Mr. Speaker, it takes on real flesh and 

blood and bones in terms of economic development, growth, 

and jobs and progress for our region. 

 

I believe it’s a vital issue, Mr. Speaker. I believe it needs to be 

addressed in this whole process with the same passion and the 

same priority, with the same dedication and the same sense of 

urgency as we employ in addressing the important concerns of 

the province of Quebec. And sadly, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

unfortunate to say that the Meech Lake accord does not do that. 

It mentions Senate reform as an agenda item for the future, but 

it doesn’t move us very far along the process. 

 

The second deficiency, Mr. Speaker, in relation to the whole 

accord, has to do with the imprecision in much of the language 

used in at least two important sections in the accord. One is the 

distinct society clause, and the other is the federal spending 

power clause, and I’d like to deal with both of those in turn. 

 

First of all, in relation to the distinct society clause, that 

language used in that particular section, Mr. Speaker, is  

new, it’s rather vague, and to my understanding it has not been 

previously interpreted by our courts. And very much, Mr. 

Speaker, the ball in this case, because of the imprecise 

language, has been tossed to the courts for future interpretation, 

and the courts are going to have a very large role to play in 

defining what those words “distinct society” means. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s perhaps indicative of the first ministers’ 

discomfort as they got together to draft that particular language. 

It’s indicative of their discomfort with the lack of clarity of that 

phrase “distinct society” that they felt it necessary to add at 

least two non-derogation clauses to the Meech Lake accord. The 

first, which will be the new section 2(4), points out that this 

amendment does not alter the powers, rights, or privileges of 

parliament or provincial legislatures in respect of language. 

 

The second non-derogation clause, Mr. Speaker, is found at the 

back of the constitutional amendment listed as item 16. And this 

notes that the interpretation of Quebec as a distinct society 

should not affect rights pertaining to multicultural heritage or 

aboriginal peoples. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, if the first ministers 

felt that they had done a good, precise job of drafting this 

particular amendment, they would not have felt it necessary to 

put in such non-derogation clauses as these as part of the overall 

amendment. 

 

What it shows, Mr. Speaker, is that somewhere along the way 

in that pressure-cooker atmosphere of the bargaining room, 

there was at least one first minister at some point who realized 

that there might be a potential problem in using the language 

that they were using; a problem in respect of language rights, 

provincially or federally; a problem with respect to aboriginal 

rights; a problem with respect to multicultural rights; and so 

forth. 

 

In order to prevent those problems from arising, the 

non-derogation clauses were inserted; I think, Mr. Speaker, a 

product of the fact that new and vague and imprecise language 

was being used. I wonder if a little more time was taken, if a 

little more study and effort was given, whether better language 

could not have been found. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, another question arises because of the 

drafting of the overall package in respect of this point. The 

question is: once the first ministers found it necessary to insert a 

non-derogation clause about multicultural rights, and then a 

non-derogation clause about aboriginal rights — once they felt 

it necessary to insert all of those, what happens to all of the 

other rights in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms that aren’t 

specifically enumerated in non-derogation clauses? I think it 

raises a question, Mr. Speaker, as witnesses before the federal 

committee have said, it raises a question about the status of 

those other rights. 

 

I would feel far more comfortable, Mr. Speaker, if there was a 

clear provision in the Meech Lake accord — a clear provision 

indicating once and for all that the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms is in no way impaired or detracted from as a 

consequence of the Meech Lake amendments.  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2738 

 

 

And I think that would resolve the concerns that many 

Canadians have expressed on that point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the federal spending power, the 

provision in the Meech Lake accord provides the right to 

provinces to opt out of certain federal programs and receive 

monetary compensation for their opting out in respect to 

federal-provincial, cost-shared programming within a provincial 

sphere of jurisdiction. The caveat attached to that, Mr. Speaker, 

is that a province must proceed with a similar program that’s 

compatible with national objectives. 

 

And again in that particular section, Mr. Speaker, I think there 

is a problem of vagueness. I think there’s a problem of 

imprecision in the language that is used. For example, who is to 

set the objectives? If you listen to different premiers 

commenting across the country, they have a much different 

view of who it is that’s supposed to set the objectives; and in 

relation to that word “compatible” that’s used in the 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, what precisely does that mean? Does 

compatible mean similar? Does it mean equivalent? Does it 

mean parallel? Does it mean consistent? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a problem with that word in terms of 

vagueness, and I think it could be potentially troublesome in the 

future. And I think again, with a little more time and a little 

more openness on the part of some of the draftsmen, some of 

that problem of vagueness and imprecision could have been 

worked out, and we could have been heading off problems in 

the future while not defeating at all the ultimate objective of the 

Meech Lake accord. 

 

The third deficiency that I would like to make reference to, Mr. 

Speaker, is in respect of the last portion the Meech Lake accord 

which describes the future agenda for constitutional change in 

this country, and it provides for the holding of annual first 

ministers’ conferences on the constitution, and it enumerates a 

list of things that are to go onto the agenda for those future 

conferences. It’s a very short list, Mr. Speaker; it mentions 

Senate reform, and I’m happy to see that; it mentions fisheries, 

and I’m sure those who live in coastal regions of Canada will be 

happy to see that, but that’s where the list stops, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It then simply says that any other matter may potentially be 

considered on his agenda for future constitutional change. And 

I’m sure that many people in legislatures across this country 

could draft up a long list of things that they would like to see on 

that agenda. And I don’t make the argument at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, for a massive increase in that agenda. I’m glad that the 

Senate is there; I’m glad that the fisheries issue is there; but I 

think, Mr. Speaker, there is one profound and glaring error, and 

that is the fact that that agenda does not specifically include the 

rights and interests of aboriginal peoples in this country. 

 

That is a glaring failure on the part of the draftsmen, that they 

did not specifically put that into the list of things to go onto the 

agenda early in this ongoing process of constitutional change. It 

creates, naturally, on the part of aboriginal peoples in this 

country, it creates doubt; it  

creates suspicion; it creates resentment. And Mr. Speaker, it can 

be so easily resolved. I have not heard one member of a 

provincial legislature or of the Parliament of Canada, the House 

of Commons or the Senate, I haven’t heard anyone say that they 

don’t want aboriginal rights to go onto that agenda. They may 

have different views about the positions they would take to a 

table in order to begin the discussion of those rights, but I 

haven’t heard anybody say that they don’t want them on the 

agenda. Indeed, everybody said exactly the opposite, they ought 

to be on the agenda. 

 

There seems to be, Mr. Speaker, as far as I can tell, unanimous 

consent, and we could do a lot to enhance the feelings and the 

attitudes of aboriginal peoples in this country with respect to the 

constitutional process by offering them the urgent respect that 

they deserve by putting their issues, enumerated specifically, 

into that agenda for future constitutional change, and not just 

leaving it among all the other things that will eventually get 

added to the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I raise these concerns in this debate this evening 

not to stymie the worthy initiative which Meech Lake 

represents but I do so — raise these issues — to flag some 

potential pitfalls which I think are genuine and legitimate 

problems and, Mr. Speaker, to make the accord better and more 

satisfying for all Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from their seats across the way, some of the 

members of the government have asked me about the position 

that has been taken by the national Leader of the Liberal Party 

of Canada, Mr. Turner. Now Mr. Turner has indicated very 

clearly the amendments that he will be fighting for in relation to 

the Meech Lake accord when it eventually comes before the 

Parliament of Canada. He has, for example, suggested that the 

issues of Senate reform and the entry of new provinces into 

confederation ought to be removed from those sections 

requiring the binding rule of unanimous consent before they can 

be accomplished. 

 

He has also suggested that provision ought to be made 

immediately for an elected Senate pending full Senate reform, 

not just the transferring of the patronage lists from the federal 

level to the provincial level, but an election procedure pending 

the full reform of the Senate as at an early a date as possible. 

 

Thirdly, he has suggested that there ought to be the opportunity 

for territorial nominations for appointments to the Supreme 

Court of Canada. That’s one thing that is totally omitted from 

the present accord. Fourthly, he has proposed to include 

aboriginal peoples, multiculturalism, regional identities, and the 

Canadian economic union within the definition of the 

fundamental characteristics of Canada. 

 

Fifth, he has proposed to guarantee the paramountcy of the 

Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Number six, he has 

called for greater protection for minority language rights in 

Canada. 

 

Number seven, he has suggested a provision to ensure that 

provincial programs financed with federal money are not only 

compatible with national objectives but also  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

 

2739 

 

 

meet minimum national standards. And number eight, he has 

proposed specifically to add the issue of aboriginal rights to the 

list of items to be on the agenda for future constitutional talks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think you will be able to see very clearly that 

those proposals from Mr. Turner are very much in line with 

what I have said this evening and what I have been saying for 

the last three or four months about the Meech Lake accord. 

These amendments touch upon the essence of what Canadians 

are concerned about. They don’t detract from the Meech Lake 

accord, Mr. Speaker, they enhance it. They should be largely 

non-controversial and, Mr. Speaker, broadly accepted. And 

most important, they address some vital western regional 

concerns that Meech Lake otherwise omits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome this process by which Quebec will 

become an enthusiastic constitutional participant. The concerns 

that I have mentioned tonight, and the proposed amendments 

that I have endorsed, will simply give other Canadians, 

especially western and northern Canadians, some equal cause 

for celebration in our region too. 

 

And I urge the government, Mr. Speaker, to be receptive to 

these ideas and to not shut the door with a “take it or leave it” 

attitude. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if they won’t be receptive to new ideas, if 

they persist in that take it or leave it attitude, at least Canadians, 

and Saskatchewan people in particular, will know that there is 

someone else beyond this government, or the government in 

Ottawa, with a continuing agenda to bridge to the future and at 

the earliest possible date to get the full job done, of getting it 

done right in terms of enhancing our constitution in which all 

Canadians can be satisfied and proud. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 22 

 

Blakeney Prebble 

Brockelbank Shillington 

Romanow Tchorzewski 

Thompson Mitchell 

Simard Solomon 

Kowalsky Atkinson 

Anguish Goulet 

Hagel Lyons 

Calvert Trew 

Smart Van Mulligen 

Koenker Goodale 

 

Nays — 26 

 

Muller Duncan 

Andrew Berntson 

Lane Smith 

Swan Meiklejohn 

Pickering Martin 

Toth Johnson 

McLaren Hopfner 

 

 

Muirhead Hodgins 

Gerich Hepworth 

Hardy Klein 

Martens Baker 

Gleim Gardner 

Kopelchuk Britton 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:07 p.m. 

 

 


