













































July 21, 1987 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

July 21, 1987 

 

1291 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Deputy Clerk: I beg to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker 

will not be present to open this sitting. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: Pursuant to rule 11(7), I’ve examined the 

following petition and it is hereby read and received: 

 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

urge the Government of Saskatchewan to retain the 

school-based dental plan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my distinct 

pleasure to introduce two groups of individuals. Both, I believe, 

are in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

First of all, I would like to welcome delegates that are in Regina 

attending the 27th Canadian Regional Conference of the 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. We had a delightful 

dinner last night, and we had three hours of interesting debate 

today between a political scientist and a national news man and 

the Premier of the province, discussing the role of the media 

and the parliamentary system. 

 

They are here with our pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, enjoying 

Saskatchewan. They will be going across the province to visit 

people from one end of the province to the other, and I would 

like all members of the legislature to welcome them to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: And I have a unique pleasure today to 

introduce a cabinet minister from the Soviet Union. Mr. Yuri 

Melentev, Minister of Culture for the U.S.S.R. is here. And he 

celebrated with us the National Doukhobor Heritage 

celebration, the unveiling of the Leo Tolstoy statue in Veregin, 

Saskatchewan, and it was attended by 3,000 to 3,500 people. 

And we appreciate very much the possibility that the Soviet 

minister would take the time and the effort and the expense to 

come into the province of Saskatchewan, and to honour Mr. 

Tolstoy and the heritage of the Doukhobors. 

 

With the minister is Mr. Edwuard Solovyov, member of the 

presidium, and, as well, accompanying them is Mitch Ozeroff 

from Saskatoon. I would like all members of the legislature to 

extend our special welcome to the minister and his delegation. 

Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Deputy Speaker, may I add my words 

of welcome to those of the Premier. Words of 

welcome to delegates and others attending the 27th regional 

conference of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. I 

was with a good number of them last evening at the dinner to 

which the Premier referred. And we have delegates from many 

places: the distinguished President of the Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association is from Malaysia, and we have 

guests from the United Kingdom, and from the Caribbean and, 

of course, from all of the provinces and territories. 

 

We hope that they enjoy their stay with us, and that the 

discussions are fruitful. And the contacts made with other 

parliamentarians across Canada, and beyond, prove to be useful 

in the work we all do in attempting to strengthen this institution 

with which we work. 

 

I would like, too, to join with the Premier in welcoming the 

Minister of Culture from the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist 

Republic, Mr. Yuri Melentev, and with him Mr. Edwuard 

Solovyov, who are here, as the Premier has indicated, to join in 

commemorating the erection of the statue of Leo Tolstoy in 

Veregin, which is to honour the contribution made by that 

distinguished Soviet man of letters to the . . . enabling 

Doukhobors to leave Tsarist Russia and come to be citizens of 

Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

We have always welcomed people from . . . usually always 

welcomed people from other lands. And we are pleased to have 

this opportunity to honour those of our citizens who are of 

Doukhobor origin, and I welcome Mr. Melentev, Mr. Solovyov, 

and with them, Mitch Ozeroff. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 

introduce to you, and through you to members of the 

Legislative Assembly, His Excellency Joseph Tumusange, the 

High Commissioner for Uganda, who is seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. 

 

I had the opportunity just some several moments ago to have 

lunch with His Excellency. It gave us a chance to discuss the 

challenges facing resource economies, in our case ours fuelled 

by wheat, and in theirs fuelled by coffee. His Excellency has a 

number of meetings, a busy schedule with agriculture officials 

and others. 

 

I would ask His Excellency to be recognized, and ask all 

members to join with me in extending a warm welcome to His 

Excellency. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 30 

members of the Miracle Centre Choir from Regina - their ages 

10 to 20 - here with their pastor, Van Johnson, and their 

assistant pastor, Warren Cardinal, and Rev. P.M. Bourne. Also 

their bus drivers, Michael Born, Irene Dubois, and Shelly 

Desjarlais. 

 

I hope they have an interesting experience in the legislature and 

have an opportunity here to learn how democracy works. And I 

ask the members to welcome 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1292 

 

them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to, on behalf of my 

colleague, Mr. Shillington from Regina Centre, introduce to 

you, and to all members of this Assembly, 31 students from the 

Masonic Youth Conference, in the east gallery. They are age 13 

to 18 years, and they are touring the Legislative Building this 

afternoon. 

 

They are accompanied by their chaperons, Kara Bye, Dean 

Block, Jannette Wilson, Lorilee Snider, and their bus drivers, 

Paul Miller, Fred Stevens, and Dean Hoffman. 

 

I’d like to wish them an enjoyable stay this afternoon and hope 

they enjoy the question period. And I’d like to ask all members 

to join with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too 

would like to join with my colleague from Regina North West 

in welcoming the students from the Masonic delegation here 

this afternoon. We trust you’ll have an enjoyable stay and take a 

good look around the legislature. 

 

If possible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I should be very happy to meet 

with the students. There are a few members of the craft on this 

side of the House, and we’d like to have a chat with you. 

Welcome. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Justice Minister’s Trip to Calgary 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: I’d like to direct my question to the member 

from Kindersley, the Minister of Justice. It deals with the false 

information he provided in this Assembly yesterday during the 

question period. At page 1269 of Hansard, when I asked you if 

you had used a government aircraft to attend a wedding in 

Calgary with your family, you said: “that is absolutely not 

true.” Yet outside this Assembly you told reporters, and this is a 

direct quote: “the purpose of the trip was the wedding.” 

 

Can the minister tell us why he misled the House yesterday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 

the question, and perhaps is so trying to respond to his question 

I can clarify the statements made by myself in the House 

yesterday. 

 

Permit me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to set out the facts of the 

particular incident. First of all, some time ago, perhaps two or 

three months prior to the 20th of June, I received an invitation 

to my brother’s son’s wedding in Calgary, which I accepted 

very proudly, fully intending to go to 

that wedding with my family, fully intending to drive from 

Regina to Calgary on that weekend. Point number one. 

 

Point number two. About a week prior to that - 10 days, a week 

prior to that - it became apparent that there was a very senior 

Soviet delegation coming to Regina, a Mr. Murakhovsky and 

Mr. Rodionov. I’m sorry to the members if I haven’t have those 

names properly. 

 

Being the Minister of Agriculture of the Soviet Union, requiring 

the attendance of the Trade minister, I attended to that particular 

delegation. I picked them up at the airport on Friday evening at 

6 o’clock. I had dinner with them that night, along with Charlie 

Mayer. The following morning I had a breakfast meeting with 

that particular delegation, starting at 9:45. 

 

Now what happened, therefore, Mr. Speaker, is I found myself 

in somewhat of a quandary. I couldn’t be at two places at one 

time. I couldn’t be at two places at one time. Now I saw the 

solution to that particular problem. Prior to that time I had met 

with a Mr. Peter von Sass from Nortek Energy of Calgary. He 

had come here looking to make some investments in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I indicated to him, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that I would have a follow-up meeting with that 

particular individual in Calgary at some future date. 

 

Now here was my dilemma. Number one, I was required, I was 

required, and I think, importantly, Mr. Speaker, I was required 

to attend to, I was required to attend to the Soviet delegation. 

Very important. So what I proceeded to do was I set the 

meeting with Mr. von Sass in Calgary on June 20 to meet with 

him in Calgary on the 20th of June. I had moved that meeting to 

meet with that particular point in time. So, Mr. Speaker, number 

one, I could attend to that delegation in Regina, I could attend 

to my brother’s son’s wedding, and I could attend to that 

meeting - all on the same day. 

 

That is in fact what I did. My office, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then 

booked the air flight to Calgary for the purpose of attending to 

that meeting. That’s exactly what happened. I then was able to 

all in one day attend to the intergovernmental affairs issue, 

attend to a business issue, and attend to a family issue. And I 

think that’s not bad. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I look 

forward to the opportunity to respond at length, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to the minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, inside the Assembly yesterday you denied that 

this trip with your family on the government aircraft at 

taxpayers’ expense had anything to do with a wedding. Your 

words are there for all to see. 

 

That is absolutely not true . . . 

 

That was your statement, Mr. Minister of Justice. Yet outside 

the House you said - and this is interesting considering the 

member’s answer to my question: 

 

I wouldn’t have taken the airplane if it had been just to 

meet this business guy. The purpose of the trip was the 

wedding. 

 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1293 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you stand there and claim you didn’t 

mislead this Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Mr. Speaker, in answer to the previous 

question, I indicated that I wished to clarify the details of this 

particular situation. The hon. member, in posing the question, 

Mr. Speaker, if he goes to Hansard, on page 1269, did not talk 

about attending to a wedding in Calgary, he talked about, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

. . . are you aware that the trip sheet, which is the official 

government document . . . 

 

Referring to that particular trip sheet, and what I said that that 

was not true - I indicated . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. Order. Allow the minister to 

respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Mr. Speaker, I made it very clear in my 

first answer that number one . . . Number one, Mr. Speaker, I 

indicated: number one, I had a meeting with a high level 

delegation from the Soviet Union in the morning. Number one, 

it’s I had to attend to. Number two, that I wished to attend to the 

wedding in Calgary. Set number two. Number three, that I 

arranged a meeting in Calgary to meet with a Calgary business 

man interested in doing business in the province of 

Saskatchewan; that I arranged the flight to attend to that 

meeting, so I could also accommodate the wedding. Okay? I 

made it very clear I had three things I had to do - had to attend 

to the Soviet delegation. I had to attend to this meeting, and I 

was intent on attending to my brother’s son’s wedding which I 

think is perfectly proper. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Further supplementary, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. The minister, in reading the question as he portrayed 

was asked in the House the other day, misleads the House once 

more. And I want to complete the statement that the minister 

failed to read to this House. It said: 

 

Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. (And this is where I asked 

the question.) (You are) aware that the trip sheet, which is 

the official government document for billing purposes 

within the government, states that the purpose for this trip 

was to attend a wedding? Can you explain that, and can 

you tell us how this wedding qualifies as government 

business? 

 

The minister’s first statement after that said: 

 

(This) is absolutely not true. 

 

Now this is not the only occurrence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There 

is more than one misleading statement from the minister in the 

Assembly the other day. You told this House, Mr. Minister: 

 

I had clearance to travel to Calgary. 

 

And that’s a quote. But you claimed the Deputy Premier had 

cleared the trip. But outside of this Assembly the 

Deputy Premier denied that. Mr. Minister, who gave you 

official approval to use the government aircraft at taxpayers’ 

expense to fly you and your family to a wedding in Alberta? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Mr. Speaker, in my first two responses I set 

out, as accurately as I possibly can and possible know the 

situation to be, the facts of the particular case. If the statements 

from Hansard yesterday, and if the statements from the media 

seem to be in conflict, then I apologize for trying to in some 

way led different facts to the hon. member. 

 

What I indicated to you in the last two statements is exactly 

what happened. Those are the facts of the particular situation. I 

found myself in that situation. I opted to go in that particular 

way. I believed it to be consistent with government policy, and I 

believe it was the proper thing to do, to cover all three things at 

one time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister failed to 

answer my question that I asked him. Who gave you clearance 

to use the executive aircraft? He has not answered that question. 

I want to understand the minister’s position quite clearly. You 

told reporters outside this Assembly that you would have used 

the government aircraft to fly you and your family to this 

wedding in Calgary whether or not you had arranged any 

government business. You told them that you felt justified in 

using the government plan at taxpayers’ expense for this family 

business. Can you tell the taxpayers why? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: With regards to the initial question . . . I 

believe the hon. member asked two questions. One, question 

number one, the authority to use the government airplane is 

ministerial discretion, as you know. And it’s been in existence 

for some 15 times . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

If the member will allow, Mr. Speaker, for me to indicate the 

situation. Number one, the government airplanes are approved 

by ministerial discretion. I indicated to the House, number one, 

Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the House that I was advised by the 

Deputy Premier that I was to attend to the meeting with the 

Soviet delegation. because of my position as Minister of Trade, 

I was to attend to those meetings. I then arranged the meeting 

with the particular business man in Calgary. I had to have that 

meeting with him sometime in the near future, so I arranged the 

meeting to coincide with the date of the wedding so I could 

cover all three things at one time. 

 

Now that’s what I said to you earlier, and that’s what in fact 

happened, Mr. Speaker. So in response to your question, that’s 

the way the facts were. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 

Minister of Agriculture was at that time, but you said the 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1294 

 

man you were meeting with, the Soviet person, was equivalent 

to the Minister of Agriculture. And the Minister of Trade was 

meeting with him. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, let’s face facts. This job was not forced on 

you; you ran for election; you were elected; you accepted the 

responsibility to the provincial cabinet, knowing its 

responsibilities. You collect more than $65,000 a year in salary, 

plus thousands more in expenses. Why do the taxpayers owe 

you anything more? 

 

Lots of people work long hours and choose between their work 

and their family events. What I want to know, Mr. Speaker, is 

. . . They don’t have a government aircraft at their beck and call. 

And I want to know: why should the taxpayers be forced to put 

out thousands of dollars for your personal business? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: First . . . two questions there. The first one 

is that this was the Minister of Agriculture from the Soviet 

Union. It was, in fact, the Minister of Agriculture from the 

Soviet Union. I met with him on Friday evening. I met with him 

for a breakfast meeting on Saturday morning. He subsequently 

met with the Premier at lunch on Saturday. The purpose of the 

meeting with the Trade minister is the fact that the trade 

imbalance between the Soviet Union and Saskatchewan or 

Canada is very marked in our favour. The Soviets are very 

interested in obtaining some type of product from the Soviet 

Union to bring that to a balance. And that was the reason and 

the purpose why I, as Trade minister, was meeting with this 

particular delegation. 

 

Now you come to the second situation is that you ask yourself, 

are you to be at this particular point doing your government 

work and, in so doing, are you to somehow say the family 

doesn’t matter - that go to a family event doesn’t matter. 

Somehow you can’t do that, that somehow I should not do that. 

All right. Now I can’t accept that. My family is important to 

me, and I believe that I should be able to live a family life the 

same as anybody else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: So the hon. member would have me go to 

the meeting in Calgary a week later or four days later or ten 

days later; it’s still going to cost the same amount of money. I 

have to go to the meeting in Calgary; I have to stay here, and I 

have to miss the wedding. And that is not the way I approach 

my family, and if that’s the way you don’t like it, then I don’t 

apologize to anybody for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Mr. Deputy Speaker, a new question to the 

Minister of Justice. And I would like to take this opportunity to 

plead the case of my family, too. I was a cabinet minister, and I 

don’t think if the member was to examine the record he would 

find that I put my family ahead of the people of Saskatchewan’s 

business at any time. And I suggest to the minister, he’s out of 

order to get up here and attempt to plead that kind of case 

before this Assembly. 

 

I’ve heard from the minister a number of tortured explanations 

about why he misled this Assembly yesterday in question 

period. This is not an isolated case. This has happened before. 

In November 1985 the minister of Highways misled this 

Assembly about his use of the government aircraft. He did the 

honourable thing. He tendered his resignation. I want to know, 

sir, if you are going to do the honourable thing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Mr. Deputy Speaker, I indicated to the 

member opposite, and to this House, what the facts were as they 

unfolded. I attended to the Soviet delegation; I attended to a 

meeting in Calgary that I was going to have to meet too, on 

some point in time; and I attended to the wedding. All right. 

And I did those three things in one day. 

 

I believe I have told exactly what happened. I have told the 

truth. I have no intention of resigning my seat in cabinet, or in 

this House, or anything else. And I believe my people stand 

behind me in the work that I do for this province, and the way I 

stand behind my family, and I intend to stay in my place and be 

very proud of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier. I would like to understand the position of your 

government with respect to the use of government aircraft by 

cabinet ministers. 

 

You, sir, and your government, have during the last several 

months made a point of this being a period of economic 

restraint. To use your phrase you have been saying, “every 

dollar counts”. Now in the light of calls for restraint, and in the 

light of the actions which you have taken, which have blighted 

the lives of thousands of families in this province, is it your 

position that cabinet ministers should be able to use the 

government aircraft on family business, however, pressing, at 

public expense? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hon. member 

knows that cabinet ministers can use government aircraft at 

their discretion. If they are to make business arrangements with 

international delegations or others, then they can use the planes 

to go to Edmonton or Calgary or Craik or the United States, or 

various other places. 

 

You heard the minister just respond. He cannot set the date of a 

wedding any different than it is. He knows, Mr. Speaker . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, he knows that 

he can set a business meeting on Monday or Tuesday or 

Saturday. Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, the hon. member 

knows, as well as I do, that if the minister goes on Monday to 

meet . . . the members of the opposition, I would think, would 

give me the courtesy to respond. 

 

The member knows that if the minister goes there on Monday, 

he goes at government expense, but he can’t attend the meeting 

and the wedding at the same time. If 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1295 

 

he goes on Saturday at government expense, he can attend the 

business meeting for the government, and he can attend the 

wedding. 

 

And you’re telling me that he can’t do three things. He 

shouldn’t attend the Soviet delegation here in the morning, he 

shouldn’t go to the meeting in Calgary, and he shouldn’t go to 

the wedding all the same day. Well he went to the three events 

on one day. He went here on Saturday, in the morning; he went 

to Calgary on Saturday at noon to attend the business meeting 

which he set because he could change that; and at the same 

time, he went to his brother’s son’s wedding. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, it seems to me that it 

makes sense, if this man can look after his family and still 

attend government business, that he should be doing it on 

Saturday as opposed to Monday because, quite clearly, he could 

go on Monday or Tuesday, and you wouldn’t argue with the 

expense. But you’re saying because he went on Saturday it’s 

unfair. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I respectfully say he can set the meetings 

with the business man any time he wants, but he can’t change 

the wedding date. He put the three together because he was 

working for the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Premier, my question was of a more general nature, asking: is it 

your position that a cabinet minister can use the aircraft for 

family purposes, however pressing? I take it your answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Premier, following the resignation of the minister of 

Highways in 1985 in not dissimilar circumstances, you claimed, 

as I recall your statement, that you were personally going to 

crack down on the use of government aircraft by cabinet 

ministers. And we are entitled to wonder what you did, and 

when, because yesterday the Deputy Premier said that he: 

 

. . . to be completely honest, (I) don’t know what the 

policy is relative to the use of government aircraft . . . 

 

And that’s the quote attributed to him. And that is the Deputy 

Premier. I ask you Mr. Premier: if you had laid down the law 

with respect to travel on government aircraft, why would your 

second-in-command, the Deputy Premier, claim blissful 

ignorance of any rules you may have laid down? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 

absolutely true in terms of cutting back in travel; it has been the 

case. And in my last set of estimates I noticed and pointed out 

the reduction of travel. I’m sure we get into the estimates this 

time, we will do the same. 

 

With respect to rules and regulations, they’re published. And 

the hon. member knows it’s Executive Council that makes them 

and use them at their discretion. And this is 

the discretion of the ministers and their judgement. And he 

knows that, and I know that. 

 

What I’m advising the ministers, and particularly when we have 

a smaller cabinet, is to use it at your discretion, and where you 

can combine meetings, for heaven’s sakes, do that; or where 

there are more than one cabinet minister can attend in the same 

plane, do that. Make the most efficient and effective use if they 

can. Now if you’re telling me that if a minister can take 

advantage of a particular business operation at the same time he 

wants to attend a wedding, that he shouldn’t be doing that 

because his family doesn’t matter, that’s maybe your point of 

view. 

 

But he knows he has to go to the meeting. He can set one 

meeting, but he can’t reset the other. So he puts the two 

together and he’s already attended one meeting on behalf of the 

government that day. So if he can work here and he can work in 

Calgary and he can also defend and be part of his family, I think 

that’s pretty reasonable request from a cabinet minister who’s 

been here and worked for the government for several years 

already. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Two 

questions I have asked about government policy. Two questions 

have been answered in relation to the member for Kindersley, 

and not a government policy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Another Speaker in the House? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question to the Premier now is this: in 

the light of the facts revealed by Hansard and by the clear 

report of statements which the minister made outside the House, 

particularly with respect to the purpose of this trip, are you 

proposing either to ask the minister for his resignation, or 

alternatively, are you even examining into what the minister 

said in this House and outside the House to see whether he was 

frank with this House yesterday - as we say he was not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: Mr. Speaker, a couple of points. I certainly 

expect my cabinet ministers to follow the rules that have been 

laid down and the rules that have been published with respect to 

executive air travel. And Mr. Speaker, I expect them to follow 

that. And I will watch and I will scrutinize that very carefully in 

response. 

 

Secondly, I can certainly understand why the opposition would 

attack the minister when somebody says, well, at the same time 

he went to a business function he has a wedding. And I can 

appreciate that. All I’m saying at this time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that the facts that are presented . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the members opposite 

want to know what happened on Saturday, I’ll tell them what 

happened on Saturday. If they don’t want to know . . . Well, Mr. 

Speaker, they evidently don’t want to know. 

 

Three things happened on Saturday . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. Order! Order. Order. The Leader 

of the Opposition asked a question; allow the 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1296 

 

Premier to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: The Leader of the Opposition said, have I 

examined the record? I said to the minister, I want you to put 

everything on the record today in the House, in the legislature, 

and he did. Okay. He said three things happened on Saturday: I 

was here in a meeting; I was in Calgary in a meeting; and I was 

in Calgary at a wedding. That’s what happened, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That’s the record. He was at all three places and 

confirmed that he was at all three places. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if in fact he was here, and if in fact 

he was at a business meeting in Calgary, and if in fact he was at 

the wedding of his family, he did all three in one day. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’ve asked him to cover that, and he did in 

some detail in the legislature, and that’s exactly what he’s done. 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule number 6 of this 

Assembly to raise a question of privilege. In accordance with 

the rules, I’ve provided you with a written notice earlier today 

of my intention to raise such a question. 

 

I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that parliamentary authorities 

are unanimous in their view that a breach of privilege is a grave 

and serious matter and should be dealt with firmly. 

 

In order to preserve and protect the ability of our parliamentary 

institutions and our ability as legislators to fulfil our 

responsibilities in a parliamentary democracy, I raise this 

question of privilege with respect to the responses made by the 

Minister of Justice during the oral question period yesterday. I 

submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that his remarks constituted a 

deliberate attempt to mislead this Assembly, and thus constitute 

a clear breach of privilege. 

 

Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, 

article 16, and Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 

Nineteenth Edition, Chapter V, define privilege. In Chapter X, 

May sets out the relationship between breach of privilege and 

contempt of parliament, and states at page 142: 

 

The House may treat the making of a deliberately 

misleading statement as a contempt. 

 

Yesterday in the oral question period the Minister of Justice 

was asked about the trip he took with his wife and children on a 

government executive aircraft to attend a wedding in Calgary 

on June 20. The minister flatly denied that the purpose of the 

trip was to attend the wedding. He said: “That is absolutely not 

true.” Unquote. That is recorded at page 1269 of Hansard. 

 

Later, however, outside the Assembly the minister changed his 

story. He admitted publicly to the news media that he and his 

family flew to Calgary on the executive aircraft in order to 

attend a wedding. I refer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to a Canadian 

Press story in which the 

ministers is quoted as saying the following to the reporters: “I 

wouldn’t have taken the airplane if I had been just to meet with 

this business guy. The purpose of the trip was the wedding.” 

End of quote. I submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in his remarks 

in the Assembly the minister was deliberately misleading this 

Assembly. 

 

I note that the former minister of mineral resources, Mr. Colin 

Thatcher, was found to have deliberately misled the Assembly 

in July, 1982, and dealt with accordingly. I also note that when 

the former minister of Highways, Mr. Garner, was found to 

have deliberately misled the Assembly regarding improper 

personal use of the executive aircraft in November of 1985, he 

resigned his cabinet post. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I respectfully submit that 

the parliamentary authorities specify the appropriate role of the 

Chair in such cases. Beauchesne specifies in article 84 that: 

 

. . . the speaker’s function in ruling on a claim of breach of 

privilege is limited to deciding the formal question . . . and 

does not extend to deciding the question of substance, 

whether a breach of privilege has in fact been 

committed - a question which can only be decided by the 

House itself. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask you to rule on the issue I 

have raised here today. If you rule that, indeed, a prima facie 

case of breach of privilege, I shall then move the appropriate 

motion permitting the Assembly to take the appropriate action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Mr. Speaker, speaking to the privilege . . . 

moving . . . speaking to the hon. member’s application for 

privilege, can I indicate . . . can I indicate, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

. . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. Order. It’s perfectly in order for 

me to hear an opinion from the other side of the House. It’s 

customary . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 

Quill Lakes repeatedly talks from his seat while the Speaker is 

on his feet. I would ask him to refrain from that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 

member’s privilege application, let me indicate to you, as I did 

in the House today, as clearly and as distinctly as possible, the 

facts as they unfolded on that date, on the 20th of June, 1987. 

Now if . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I set that out today. If 

there was some confusion, and clearly there was some 

confusion from yesterday, I indicated to the House - I believe in 

my first or second statement - that I would openly acknowledge 

that there was that confusion, and I would be apologetic to this 

House for any confusion I created by that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. Order. I’ve heard both sides of 

the issue. I only received this at 11:50 today, and I will certainly 

review the record, and I will bring back a ruling at a later time. 

 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1297 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Mr. Speaker, you said you only received it 

at 11:50. Are you suggesting that somehow the question of 

identifying the point of privilege with you and getting it to your 

office in time was not met? Or was it fully met? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It was there prior two hours to sitting 

time, but I reserve the right to bring back a ruling at a later time. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 7 - Implementation of the Principle of 

Pay Equity in the Public Service 

 

Mr. Mitchell: Mr. Deputy Speaker, this resolution, no. 3, 

dealing with pay equity is based upon three principles which I 

believe will be recognized and accepted by all members of the 

House. The first principle is that men and women in our society 

are equal and are entitled to enjoy equal rights. I don’t think that 

there is any member in this House that will quarrel with that 

principle. 

 

The second principle is that men and women are capable of 

performing any job for which they’re qualified. Again, I don’t 

think there’s any question that that principle will be accepted. 

You can get into an argument about whether all women can do 

all jobs, or whether all men can do all jobs. And I don’t think 

that’s a serious argument. Obviously, everybody can’t do every 

job. But everybody, regardless of sex, can do every job for 

which they’re qualified. And that is the second principle upon 

which this resolution is based. 

 

The third principle underlying the resolution is that 

discrimination on the basis of sex is wrong and illegal, and that 

has been recognized by the legislation, by the legislature of this 

province and this country and, indeed, by our constitution. And 

I don’t think again that there would be any question from any 

corner of this House that that is a sound and universally 

accepted principle in Canada. 

 

(1445) 

 

So on the basis of those three principles, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

lies the resolution that I have the honour to bring before the 

House today concerning pay equity. 

 

Now the reason why it is necessary to bring that resolution to 

this House is because the three principles that I have described 

to you have not resulted in men and women being treated 

equally at the work place. There are still many forms of 

discrimination that continue to exist at the work place 

regardless - regardless of all of the legislation that we have in 

place, regardless of the clear wording of the Canadian Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms, and regardless of the broad consensus 

that exists in this Assembly and outside this Assembly with 

respect to the principles that I described a few minutes ago. 

 

The sad fact is that, in particular, men and women are not 

earning the same amount of money for the work that they do. 

The sad fact is that women continue to earn 

substantially less than men for the work that they do. 

 

Now I want to turn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to some of the 

statistics that bear out the proposition that I’ve put. The 

statistics tell us that in Saskatchewan, with respect to full-time 

employees, women earn 65 per cent of the wages that men earn. 

If you take all kinds of employment - full time, part time, and 

piece work - you find that women earn only 57 per cent of the 

wages of men. 

 

Another way of examining the question is to look at the people 

who work at the minimum wage in our province. And there are 

a very high number of people, a very high proportion of our 

work force, who are working at the minimum wage. And we 

find that fully 70 per cent of the people who are receiving the 

minimum wage are women. 

 

It goes even deeper than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because on 

examining the employment situation in Saskatchewan very 

carefully, we even find that when men and women are doing 

exactly the same job, that women are earning 15 per cent less 

than men on the average for doing that job—and there I’m 

talking about exactly the same job—a situation which out law 

has covered for over 35 years and has made illegal for that 

period of time. 

 

Now a lot of time and study and effort has gone into the 

question of how that situation can be corrected. And we’ve had 

affirmative action programs; we’ve had special employment 

programs; we’ve had a variety of policy initiatives designed to 

cure that problem. They haven’t worked, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 

saying they haven’t improved the situation because obviously 

they have, but they haven’t worked fully. 

 

For example, with respect to education, we know from studies 

that have been done that if a man and a woman have not 

reached the level of their grade 12, have not graduated from 

high school, the woman will earn on average less than half of 

what the man earns. If that woman goes back to school and 

completes her university education, you’d think that would 

solve the problem, but it doesn’t. 

 

We find there that as between the woman university graduate 

and her male counterpart, who is also a graduate, she can expect 

to earn something like two-thirds the salary of the man. As a 

matter of fact, if that woman graduates from university and 

takes a job in the work-force she will on average earn slightly 

less than the man who has a high school diploma. So as I said, 

education, while it’s improved the situation, has not been a 

complete answer. 

 

We have also thought about this problem in terms of promoting 

women into positions of greater responsibility. But there again 

we find, on examining the salaries of people with supervisory 

responsibilities, that the situation is pretty much the same as it 

is in the general work-force. In other words, female supervisors 

are discriminated against to the same extent as their 

counterparts in the general work-force. 

 

Now, part of the problem is that a very large number of  

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1298 

 

women in the work-force are employed in low-paying, 

low-status jobs. Altogether too large a proportion of women are 

employed in jobs which our society has traditionally seen as 

being “women’s work”, “female work”. And I think here of 

secretaries; I think of clerical people; I think of nurses. 

 

And at the same time there exists a group of jobs that we 

consider to be traditionally “men’s work”. And here I have in 

mind tradesmen, like plumbers, electricians. I have in mind 

certain of the professions, and such jobs as pilots and that sort 

of thing. And for a long time our society has seen these male 

jobs as having a high value, and therefore attached to them a 

high wage. 

 

At the same time our society has looked at these female jobs 

that I talk about and has seen them as having not as high a 

value, and therefore the wages that have attached to them have 

been, and continue to be, low wages. 

 

Now the governments over the years, and right across this 

country, have taken policy and legislative steps in an effort to 

get at this problem and eradicate it. Every legislature in Canada, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, has agreed that this situation is wrong, and 

that it deserves to be resolved, and they’ve taken steps to try to 

resolve it. 

 

And to briefly describe that evolution, I have to go back to the 

1950s, when legislatures and the Parliament of Canada adopted 

legislation requiring equal pay for equal work. The expectation 

was that this would solve the problem I’ve described, and to 

some extent it helped. But the legislators quickly understood 

that it was not a complete answer to the problem, for the very 

simple reason that the legislation applied only to work which 

was exactly the same. 

 

And so if a man and woman were sitting at a typewriter typing 

letters all day and their jobs did not differ from each other, then 

the legislation applied, and they had to pay equally . . . they had 

to be paid equally. But if, in their job, there was any element 

that was different at all, then the legislation was held not to 

apply. And so that legislative approach was considered by all of 

the legislatures in Canada, and the Parliament of Canada, to be 

deficient. 

 

And the governments went back to the drawing board, and they 

came up with another concept, and that was the concept of 

equal pay for similar work. And the effect of that legislation 

was that if a man and a woman were doing similar work, which 

required similar skill and effort, and which involved similar 

responsibility, and which was done under similar working 

conditions, then they had to be paid the same wages. 

 

Now that was a good law, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it did a lot 

towards the resolution of this problem, and it resulted in a large 

number of women being paid at a higher and fairer level of 

wages - fairer because it brought them up to the wages that were 

being paid to the males. 

 

But again, it has become quite clear that the standard of equal 

pay for similar work falls short of what is required to properly 

address this type of discrimination, because 

there remains no way in which you can compare dissimilar jobs. 

There is no way, under that law, that you can compare the work 

being done, for example, by a secretary with the work being 

done by a plumber. You can compare the work being done by 

two secretaries. You can compare the work being done by two 

plumbers. But you can’t compare one to the other. 

 

And so the law, while it was and remains a good law, is a law 

that had within it some limitations and shortcomings that 

resulted in the law falling short of the expectations of the 

various governments that passed that law. 

 

And I want to reiterate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that every 

legislature in this country looked at this problem and decided 

that these measures were necessary in order to cure a social ill 

which all of them agreed existed. And my point today, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is simply that this social ill continues to exist 

and continues to deserve our attention. 

 

That brings me to the resolution itself which asks the 

government to implement the principle of pay equity in all of 

the departments, the Crown corporations, and the provincial 

agencies. In my submission, Mr. Speaker, that is the next 

logical step which ought to be taken in respect of this form of 

discrimination. What pay equity would do would be to 

introduce into this system of determining compensation the 

principles of job evaluation. 

 

Now the principles of job evaluation are well-known, they’re 

well-recognized, and they’re well-tested by countless examples 

across this country, including examples within our own 

province. What is done when a system of job evaluation is 

being put into effect is that jobs are evaluated against certain 

long-established and universally-accepted criteria. 

 

The skill that is required to a job is assessed and evaluated, and 

a point level is attached to it. The amount of effort that is 

required to do a job is similarly evaluated and a point total 

attributed to it. The level of responsibility is then considered, 

and again a number of points are allocated on the basis of that 

item. And finally, the conditions under which the work has to 

be performed are taken into account and evaluated, and again 

points are attached. And then it’s simply a matter of adding up 

the points written down opposite each of those four heads and 

coming up with a total. 

 

In effect, it is comparing apples and oranges in a way in which 

they can be compared. And I have no hesitation in saying, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because we have across this country countless 

examples of where that has been done, and where the system 

has been put into effect, and the pay structure within that 

undertaking, within that business, has been altered to reflect 

those evaluations. We have, in Saskatchewan, the best example, 

the example of the Saskatchewan hospitals who went through a 

very comprehensive exercise in evaluating all of the jobs in the 

hospitals in the province, and assessing their point value on a 

job evaluation scheme, and then superimposing on that a 

structure of wages which actually took into account the value of 

jobs. 

 

The system is not inflexible, and I hope that today we 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1299 

 

don’t hear any argument that it is, because every job evaluation 

scheme of which I have knowledge takes into account the 

market. And if the market requires that there be adjustments, or 

a different approach, or a different salary level in order to 

enable the employer to compete for employees, then the job 

evaluation system will take that into account. But it is the only 

way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have yet conceived where 

dissimilar jobs can be compared to each other, where their value 

in the work place can be computed, and where the salary 

structure can be adjusted in order to reflect the value of the 

work that is being done. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now in my mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is at stake? In the 

question of pay equity is exactly what was at stake in the 1950s 

when we were debating the prospect of equal pay for equal 

work. It is exactly the same principle that was accepted in all of 

the legislatures in this country at the time that equal pay for 

similar work was accepted in the 1970s. And that is a simple 

matter of fairness and human justice - that’s what’s at stake 

here. 

 

What kind of a province do we want? That’s the question in 

which we in this Assembly have to ask ourself. And I suggest 

that it is not a province where 52 per cent of our population are 

handicapped in employment simply because they’re women. 

We don’t want a province where a young girl is doomed for the 

rest of her life to earn only a fraction of what her brother may 

expect to earn. Indeed, I want a Saskatchewan where women 

are treated fairly and equally in the work world. I want a 

Saskatchewan where a woman may have an equal chance to get 

any job for which she is qualified, a chance equal to that of a 

man who is similarly qualified. And I want a Saskatchewan 

where women are paid fairly and equally for the work that they 

do without any discrimination whatsoever. 

 

And I suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all members of the 

Assembly want that kind of a Saskatchewan too. All members 

of this Assembly accept the principles upon which the idea of 

pay equity rests. And indeed, it is a principle that ought to be 

adopted by this province. In my submission, it will contribute 

. . . the adoption of the principle of pay equity will contribute to 

the kind of a Saskatchewan that I’ve described. 

 

Now the resolution limits the application of the principle to the 

departments of the provincial government, and to the 

government agencies, and that it be effective in this fiscal year. 

Now the resolution was cast in those terms because there are 

many logical reasons why the government should be the 

trail-blazer with respect to the matter of pay equity. After all, 

government employment ought to be non-discriminatory. 

Government employment should treat women fairly and on the 

same basis as it treats men. And in my view, there is simply no 

logical reason why the government cannot accept the principle 

of job evaluation in its departments and Crown corporations as 

it has already accepted that principle so far as its application in 

the hospitals are concerned. 

 

There’s another reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for taking 

this approach - that is the approach that it be tried in the 

government first - and that is so that the private sector will have 

an opportunity of seeing how the principle can be applied in 

practice, how it works, and what the outcomes are; how much 

money is involved; what sorts of dislocations, if any, are there? 

And it would give us, in this Assembly, an opportunity to 

demonstrate to the private sector that the principles of pay 

equity can, in fact, be adopted and implemented without 

dislocation at the work place. I would respectfully ask members 

of the Assembly to support the resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: Mr. Speaker, I have the resolution for the Clerk, 

and the resolution is seconded by the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

I’ll read the resolution, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly call on the Government of 

Saskatchewan to implement the principal of pay equity in 

all provincial government departments, Crown 

corporations and agencies, beginning in the 1987-88 fiscal 

year. 

 

That’s seconded by the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Ms. Simard: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the motion 

in effect requests the immediate implementation of a pay equity 

system in the public service in Saskatchewan. And because we 

believe that it’s essential that we move in the direction of pay 

equity in the province of Saskatchewan, I would urge the 

government members to listen to the arguments we make today, 

to vote in favour of the motion, and to take immediate action to 

implement pay equity in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Pay equity, Mr. Speaker, means recognizing the relative value 

of the work performed, irrespective of the gender of the 

employees. It means that employers do not pay different 

salaries and benefits to male and female employees who are 

performing work of equal value. What we’re really talking 

about here is social justice - social justice for women. The 

question of pay equity is as much a moral issues as it is an 

economic issue for women. As you know, women earn 

approximately 57 per cent of what men earn. And 34 per cent of 

women are single and depend on their income - 34 per cent. 

And many women who are single have dependants for whom 

they are responsible, and yet they’re earning approximately 57 

per cent of what men earn. 

 

And I might point out also, Mr. Speaker, that groceries don’t 

cost 40 per cent less for women, nor does housing 

accommodation, nor do clothes. But they earn approximately 

only 60 per cent of what men earn - 57, I think, is probably 

more accurate. 

 

The argument, Mr. Speaker, that it’s too expensive and that the 

cost is prohibitive is just not acceptable; it’s not at all 

acceptable. It’s not acceptable, Mr. Speaker, because what that 

argument says is that it’s okay to discriminate against women 

because we can’t afford not to discriminate against them. 

 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1300 

 

And if it’s necessary, Mr. Speaker, for our government to 

exploit women in order to keep costs down, then we have to 

look at our priorities. We have to re-examine our priorities; we 

have to re-examine our policies, because that’s simply not right. 

It’s wrong. 

 

And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, the government doesn’t want to do 

that. Government doesn’t want to do that. And I know the 

opposition certainly doesn’t want our government to be 

exploiting women for the purpose of keeping costs down. 

 

So we really have to take a very serious look at this whole 

question of pay equity and start moving on it and doing 

something concrete with respect to resolving the problem. The 

failure to implement it would be a condonation of 

discrimination against women. So it’s imperative that we begin 

to move on this question of pay equity. 

 

And I suspect, also, that a hard-pressed study in Saskatchewan 

would show that there are inequities in the system, as such 

studies have shown in other jurisdictions in North America and 

in Canada. And in particular, I might refer to the Minnesota 

study, which I’ll deal with in further detail a little later on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As I said earlier, women earn approximately 60 cents for every 

dollar a man earns. This also affects their unemployment 

insurance benefits, and it affects their pensions, if they have 

any. So the discrepancy continues after they are on pension and 

are seniors. 

 

Why is this the case? Why do women earn less? Some people 

say they don’t have to take those jobs; they can take some other 

jobs. Well that, Mr. Speaker, is unrealistic, and it’s unfair to 

women. 

 

Women do not choose to go into low-paying jobs freely. It is 

not a free choice. There is social conditioning from a very early 

age which entrenches the notion of division of labour with 

respect to women. Women see themselves as occupying 

traditionally female jobs and, therefore, those are the jobs that 

they pursue. 

 

Women are streamed into so-called pink-collar jobs, such as 

sales, service, clerical work. And in these jobs, they receive low 

wages, and there is very little opportunity for advancement. 

Women are often forced to take part-time work. And, as you 

know, part-time work pays them little if no benefits. And there 

is a trend in society towards part-time work because it’s less 

expensive for the employer. 

 

And training and educational programs to upgrade the skills of 

women, so that they can go into higher paying jobs, are often 

inaccessible to women. They’re costly, the hours are inflexible, 

and when women have small dependants and young children at 

home, it is sometimes impossible for them to afford or attend 

these classes because of the inflexible hours. The classes pose 

an unreasonable demand on them, trying to meet their family 

demands and upgrade their skills. So we have to look at support 

services if we’re going to ask women to take educational 

upgrading. But presently many of these programs are not 

designed to accommodate women who 

wish to upgrade their skills. 

 

The tight labour market that exists in Saskatchewan today 

presents another problem for women attempting to upgrade 

their skills and get into higher paying jobs. It’s only natural, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s only natural that when there is a tight labour 

market, that women will attempt . . . will look for those jobs 

that women have easy accessibility to as opposed to attempting 

to go for something that may be more difficult. 

 

Women’s jobs have been traditionally low paying, not because 

they’re menial and worthless - au contraire, Mr. Speaker, many 

of the jobs that women perform are very valuable jobs to our 

economy and to society. But they’ve been traditionally low 

paying because employers and societies place too little worth, 

too little value, on women’s work and so it has become easy to 

underpay. 

 

Equal pay for work of equal value will not solve everything. 

There is no way that that’s going to solve everything, and we 

don’t pretend to suggest that, Mr. Speaker. But it is a key 

element in reaching the ultimate goal of economic justice for 

women. It’s a basic, bottom line demand for women. And not 

only do we have to continue the fight for pay equity, but we 

also have to be looking at affirmative action in conjunction with 

that: quality child care; more flexible working hours and, of 

course, accessible upgrading programs as I referred to earlier. 

 

But women have been moving towards the goal of equal pay for 

many, many years. This isn’t something that’s new in the 1980s 

or the 1970s. We have been striving for this since back in the 

1800s, because the women’s suffrage movement was asking for 

equal pay as well as the right to vote. In 1952, in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan passed legislation requiring employers 

to pay equal wages to women and men doing identical work. 

And in 1956 the federal government passed equal pay laws. The 

problems, however, with these laws were that it didn’t address 

the real problem, not because there wasn’t the will to address it, 

but the real problem hadn’t been properly identified at that time, 

the real problem being that there are female jobs and there are 

male jobs, and these jobs aren’t necessarily identical. And 

because they’re not identical, the laws didn’t apply, and the 

female jobs were lower paid. 

 

(1515) 

 

In 1978 Saskatchewan amended The Labour Standards Act to 

include equal pay for similar work. And my colleague, who 

moved the motion, had spoken to that. And that law did help, 

but it was still not completely effective because of the division 

of labour, because we still ran into the situation where the male 

job may not be similar, as opposed to the traditional female job. 

So the wage gap, even though it helped in some situations, the 

wage gap was not substantially reduced. 

 

In 1977 the federal government passed equal pay for equal 

work, and it applied to all federal public service employees and 

to employees of federal Crown corporations, agencies, and 

boards; and Quebec took a similar approach about the same 

time. The problem with 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1301 

 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker, was that it was complaint based. 

And by that I mean that if the law was to be enforced, the 

woman or the group of women who were complaining had to 

take an action to either the Human Rights Commission or the 

courts, whatever the case might be, to prove their case and to 

complain about not being paid equal pay. 

 

That’s not effective. That’s not as effective as it should be, and 

it’s not as effective as it should be because it’s putting the onus 

on the complainant to make the complaint and prove her case. It 

was not an employer-initiated program. The onus was not on 

the employer to make sure that there was equal pay for equal 

work and to enforce this. The employer became involved only 

after a complaint had been made. 

 

In July of 1985, however, Manitoba became the first province 

to put in a pay equity system that was proactive, mandatory, and 

the responsibility - by that I mean, Mr. Speaker, the 

responsibility was on management to ensure that pay equity was 

installed and that the system was implemented in his or her 

department. 

 

And we have seen recent developments in this area in Ontario 

in the last several months. Well, it’s been going on longer than 

that, Mr. Speaker, but there have been bills tabled in Ontario in 

the last several months . . . And the information I’ve been able 

to acquire is that in Ontario there has been a pay equity bill with 

respect to the public service that has received assent, and a pay 

equity bill with respect to the private sector which, I believe, 

has not been given third reading. At least that’s the most recent 

information I have. It may have been given third reading since 

then, but I’m not sure exactly what the status of that is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, staunch opponents to pay equity will say that such 

a program is unworkable and overly complex, but success in 

places such as Minnesota indicate it is an achievable goal. 

Minnesota took a co-operative, common sense approach, and 

they have positive results to show for it. 

 

A hard-pressed data study showed after job evaluations were 

done there was obvious inequities in Minnesota. And I would 

just like to point to some of those to illustrate the sort of 

inequities that job studies have shown across the country. 

 

An administrative secretary, for example, an administrative 

secretary’s job was evaluated at 173 points; a senior 

groundskeeper’s job was allotted 160 points. But the 

administrative secretary earned only $1,343 compared to the 

$1,423 a month earned by the senior groundskeeper. 

 

Other discrepancies were, for example, a registered nurse - and 

these jobs are valued with the same points - a registered nurse 

earning $1,723, whereas a male vocational education teacher 

would earn 2,260. A typing pool supervisor, being a 

traditionally female job, was earning 1,373 as opposed to a job 

of equal value, a painter, earning, 1,707. A senior legal 

secretary, being a traditionally female job, was earning $665 as 

opposed to a senior carpenter, being a traditionally male job, 

earning 

1,040. Jobs of equal value, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A secretary, being a traditionally female job, earning 1,122 as 

opposed to a traditionally male job of maintenance carpenter, a 

job accredited with the same points, a job of equal value, at 

$1.707. That’s $500-and-some a month more. Mental health 

technician, traditionally female job, earning 1,135, as opposed 

to an automotive mechanic male job earning 1,681 - assessed at 

being jobs of equal value. 

 

And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. But I believe that these sorts 

of discrepancies will be found right here in Saskatchewan in 

this government if a similar study was done. 

 

And the thing about Minnesota, because they took a common 

sense approach - and I’m referring to Minnesota because this 

program has been ongoing for some time, and they’ve got some 

experience that we can look at - no wages were frozen, no 

wages were reduced, there were no lay-offs, no strikes, no 

lawsuits, no elaborate bureaucracy. The staff turnover was 

reduced as a result of fairer pay practices, and then the 

employees’ morale improved, and this has created a more 

productive and a more stable work environment. 

 

Opponents of the pay equity system will often say, Mr. Speaker, 

that women work for pin money only. But that’s not true; it’s 

not at all true. Two-thirds of women who work, work because 

of financial necessity; 60 per cent of Canadians living in 

poverty are women, and 85 per cent of single parent families are 

headed by women. And out of those 85 per cent of single parent 

families headed by women, 47 per cent live in poverty - 47 per 

cent. 

 

Now that’s very important, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not just 

women we’re talking about. We’re also talking about children 

here, the dependants of these women, and children are our 

future. And yet some 47 per cent of all minimum wage earners 

are women. And even when jobs are the same, we find out that 

women are paid less. 

 

Labour Canada statistics show that educational upgrading does 

not guarantee higher incomes for women. Of those who didn’t 

have a high school education, women earn an average of 9,500 

compared to an average of 19,100 for men. Women with 

university degrees earn an average 21,400 - significantly less 

than the average 32,000 for male university graduates. 

 

In fact, the average high school male graduate earns more than 

the average female university graduate, at 22,200 for men as 

opposed to 21,400 for female university graduates. And I can 

cite many more statistics on this, Mr. Speaker, but I believe I 

have made my point. 

 

Some opponents, Mr. Speaker, some opponents of pay equity 

will argue that equal pay will upset the balance between supply 

and demand. Oh, we’ve heard that argument often, but that’s 

simply not logical, Mr. Speaker, because supply and demand 

does not affect the wage of nurses, for example. When there’s a 

shortage of women workers, such as nurses, the employer goes 

outside of the jurisdiction to hire more workers; he 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1302 

 

doesn’t pay nurses more. So that argument just doesn’t wash. 

 

Some argue that it’s too difficult to evaluate the jobs, but this 

has not been the experience in other jurisdictions. Of course 

we’ll never have absolute perfection in evaluating jobs, but 

absolute perfection is an unreasonable goal. The fact of the 

matter is, it’s being done in other jurisdictions, and it’s working. 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s time for Saskatchewan to get on with 

the job. 

 

Some opponents will say that the free market system will be 

interfered with if we start insisting that women be paid equally 

for work of equal value. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s ridiculous. 

Right now we already legislate labour laws in the so-called free 

market system. We have holidays, vacations, we have minimum 

wage, and so on. And legislating equal pay for work of equal 

value isn’t going to interfere with the free market system any 

more than we already interfere with the free market system. 

And business, of course, is always anxious to get a government 

hand-out, and is totally unconcerned about the free market 

system when it’s being offered a government hand-out. So I 

think that argument does not wash either. 

 

Another myth that’s out there is that pay equity will destroy 

collective bargaining. And that’s simply not true, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not at all true. Labour laws provide minimum standards 

now. We have minimum standards, minimum wage; we have 

holidays set, working hours set, and collective bargaining 

improves upon those minimum standards. 

 

It’s not true that pay equity will interfere with collective 

bargaining. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if women are paid better it will 

put more money back into the economy, and there will be a 

beneficial effect on businesses that deal with women. There will 

be a beneficial effect on small businesses across Saskatchewan 

where women buy their groceries and buy their clothes. But 

more importantly, Mr. Speaker, more importantly than the 

beneficial effect on business, is the fact that this is the only 

fair - the only fair and just way for Saskatchewan society to be 

moving. 

 

Women should not have to move into traditional male jobs in 

order to be paid a decent wage. No, Mr. Speaker, they shouldn’t 

have to do that. The jobs that women do are fundamental to the 

economy and invaluable to society. And it’s time for 

Saskatchewan to get on with the job of making sure that 

women, at least in our public service, are being paid equally for 

work of equal value. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: Some people may say, well, we have to bring in 

some high paying consultants and do a major study. And I say, 

Mr. Speaker, that we should just use some common sense and 

keep it as simple as possible. And I think what we have to do is 

simply ask ourselves, first of all: is there a dual wage system 

based on sex? And I believe firmly that the response will be 

yes. Secondly, what is the size of the wage gap? And thirdly, 

what will it cost us to correct it? And lastly, what is the 

timetable for implementing it? 

 

And when we know all those things, and we’ve set 

ourselves a timetable for proceeding upon this just path, then 

we get on with it and we implement it in the public sector. 

 

And I want to say something about the pay equity division in 

the Public Service Commission. There were reports in the 

media before the legislature was opened that the pay equity 

division in the Public Service Commission was going to be 

dismantled. And there was some argument about whether or not 

it was dismantled or moved or whatever. The fact of the matter 

is, is that even if it wasn’t dismantled and it was moved to the 

human resources department, there were a number of 

employees from that division who had been working in the area 

of pay equity for a substantially . . . a fairly long time, who 

were dismissed and their employment terminated. 

 

(1530) 

 

So I have questions to ask. I want to know whether this 

government considers pay equity a priority, and why the pay 

equity division was moved to human resources, and what it 

intends to do about pay equity in the future. 

 

And as I indicated earlier, we can’t look at pay equity in 

isolation. Pay equity has to be looked at hand in hand with 

affirmative action. And by affirmative action we mean a 

program specially designed for the purpose of making sure that 

the target groups, being women, natives, and the physically 

disabled - but I’m speaking to women right now because that’s 

what we’re primarily talking about, although it does apply to 

the other two groups just as equally and they will also be a part 

of this pay equity system - but affirmative action ensures that 

these individuals, that these groups of people will rise to 

higher-paying jobs and to senior and management level jobs in 

the public service. 

 

And I don’t have any recent statistics at this point in time as to 

what the government’s been doing about it. But the last time I 

looked, Mr. Speaker, it was very dismal. And I urge the 

government and I want to see the government move towards a 

system where pay equity and affirmative action become a 

priority. 

 

And along with the affirmative action program, we also need 

support programs that will help these individuals to achieve the 

higher level of employment, if you like. It’s not good enough to 

say we need equality in management positions with women 

when we don’t provide them with the training programs or the 

support services to make sure that we achieve this goal. So we 

need the support services with that as well, Mr. Speaker. We 

need support services to ensure that women can take over and 

properly function in management positions. 

 

And only after we make pay equity, affirmative action, and 

other support services such as quality accessible child care 

available in Saskatchewan, can we stand up and say to the 

people of Saskatchewan that we believe in a society where men 

and women are equal, where we stand on an equal footing, 

where we believe in the equality of people across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And for that reason, I speak in favour of this motion, and I urge 

the government - I urge the government - to take a serious look 

at what we’ve been saying, to take a 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1303 

 

serious look at the statistics, and to move in that direction; not 

tomorrow, but today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: Well, I have some agreement with the 

members opposite in that I’ve observed and studied the point, 

and the situation is this: it’s certainly not easy to be a woman in 

Saskatchewan or any part of the world. And there have to be 

some changes made to improve the lives of women. 

 

With respect to the topic at hand here, the equality of pay in the 

Government of Saskatchewan, we believe that we have equality 

of pay in the Government of Saskatchewan. We will look into it 

further, but we clearly agree with the principle of equal pay for 

similar work, and that is the law in Saskatchewan, both in the 

private sector and in the public sector. 

 

With respect to the Government of Saskatchewan, we do have a 

unionized public service that has a negotiated contract. And I 

would hope that in that contract . . . Nobody has yet pointed out 

a specific example of inequality in pay between men and 

women in the Government of Saskatchewan. And if there is 

such an inequality, I would like it to be pointed out to me. I 

look forward to it, if it’s there. I certainly hope there is none 

there. 

 

The situation that we have, though, is that the SGEU 

(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) bargains this 

contract in the Government of Saskatchewan. And what the 

members opposite are asking is that we overrule the collective 

agreement with respect to what’s happening in the government 

civil service. 

 

And I’m more inclined to go to SGEU, and I will be writing 

them a letter asking them if they have identified any specific 

instances of inequality in pay between men and women in the 

government. And if they can identify any, we would try to 

address them, and we would welcome them to put them on the 

bargaining table. 

 

And I will ask my colleagues certainly not to oppose equality 

should this principle be raised at the bargaining table. But we 

have a complicated situation here in that we have a union 

contract, and if there is inequality, then it has been negotiated in 

the collective bargaining process. And I will look into this 

further with respect to SGEU, and we’ll be contacting them to 

see if they have any instances. 

 

As the minister responsible for these issues, I take it upon 

myself to check with the union. I further invite any citizen in 

Saskatchewan to point out to me, or bring to my attention, 

examples of inequality in government pay, and we would have 

a look at that situation. We may be amending certain laws in 

this province, and I would like to remedy any equality there is 

in pay between men and women in the public service in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There are some interesting developments taking place in 

Manitoba and Ontario. They are going through some 

experimental procedures, and we will be studying that and 

watching those procedures very closely. We clearly, 

on behalf of the government - and I speak on behalf of all of my 

colleagues, male and female - believe in equality for men and 

women in economic equality and, even more so, in the equality 

of opportunity. And that is an area that we have to do a lot more 

in, and can do a lot more in - the area of equality of opportunity 

for women and for men. 

 

And we clearly believe in equal pay for equal work, equal pay 

for similar work. However, we also agree in the principle of fair 

pay and pay equity for both men and women. And it’s a 

complex issue because does this issue - and that’s the question 

in an equal world - does this issue also apply to equal pay for 

men? And I’m referring to individual men, not men as a group. 

And I think that members opposite have been referring to 

women as a group and men as a group. But does . . . The 

question then also arises: does it apply to equal pay for 

individual men? And does it also apply for equal pay to 

identifiable minority groups in society? 

 

There’s a very complex issue . . . And we’re watching very 

closely what is happening in other provinces, and even in 

Minnesota. We do watch Minnesota, although it’s the only state 

to vote Democrat in the United States, but we do watch 

Minnesota. And we will be studying the issue closely and, as 

indicated, I will check into the matter further with respect to a 

situation in the provincial government, in the Public Service 

Commission, to see if there are any instances of a female in a 

particular job being paid less than a man in another job where 

the jobs are equal or similar or of equal value as we can 

ascertain it. And we will have to see what can be discovered in 

that area. 

 

Because we will be studying this matter further, I move leave to 

adjourn the debate. And I’d like to say more on this topic once 

I’ve investigated it a little further. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 11 - Provision of Jobs and  

Opportunities for those Entering the Work-Force 

 

Mr. Lyons: Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, fellow 

members on this side and on the other side of the House. I 

notice, with somewhat glee today, that I picked up the 

Leader-Post, and saw on the front page of the Leader-Post a 

headline which says: “NDP sweeps byelections; Conservatives 

fare poorly.” And it relates directly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

headline and the events that are going on in the political life of 

the country relate very directly to the topic of Resolution No. 11 

which is before the House. That is, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 

to adopt a long-term economic development strategy 

which will provide new jobs and opportunities for all 

Saskatchewan people, particularly young people 

struggling to enter the work-force, and further, that this 

Assembly express concern with the fact the number of 

unemployed in Saskatchewan has doubled since 1982. 

 

And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the headlines in 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1304 

 

today’s papers relate directly to that, because in 1984 the now 

Prime Minister of this country, Mr. Brian Mulroney, stumped 

from one end of the land, from St. John’s East to the Yukon, 

saying jobs, jobs, jobs - jobs, jobs, jobs. 

 

And now, three years later, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see that 

once again the Conservative Party, both federally and here 

provincially, have disappointed the people of Canada and of 

this province when it comes to the question of the creation of 

jobs, and the question of employment, and the question of 

long-term development of employment for people in this 

province, particularly young people. 

 

And I predict, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the kind of results 

echoed today in the newspapers will be echoed again several 

years hence when the Prime Minister screws up his courage to 

call the federal election. 

 

And let me tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the reasons 

that I’m sitting here, and that a large number of my colleagues 

are sitting here today, were because that prior . . . between 1982 

and 1986 the provincial government, the government of the 

members opposite, did not deal with the question of jobs, did 

not deal with the long-term economic strategy. 

 

It’s not just me saying that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You can turn 

to any newspaper in this province and see headlines like this: 

“High school students find jobs scarce.” High school students 

find scarce. And not only high school students - students from 

technical universities and . . . from the technical institutes and at 

the universities are finding jobs scarce. In fact, all 

Saskatchewan working people are finding jobs scarce, and it’s 

reflected in the unemployment statistics which we will get to in 

a few minutes. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion deals with the question of the 

development of a long-term economic strategy to create jobs 

and to provide employment in this province and to stimulate 

and get economic activity going in this province. 

 

And it does that deliberately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s 

evident from the record of the government opposite that they do 

not have a long-term economic strategy - despite what they 

themselves have said in some of their own written 

materials - that they do not have a strategy to deal with the 

question of unemployment and those things that are causing 

unemployment in Saskatchewan. 

 

Because if they do have a strategy, to paraphrase the words of 

the Premier, it’s the best kept secret in Canada. It’s the best kept 

secret in Canada because the facts dealing with unemployment 

reveal that this government has not been able to deal with 

unemployment; it’s not been able to provide the kind of 

economic opportunities for young people. 

 

What are those facts? Well, I think if we look at, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, some of the record of this government, you will see 

that the facts pretty well speak for themselves when it comes to 

unemployment. 

 

The first fact that members should be acquainted with is the fact 

that unemployment has doubled in this province. It has doubted 

in the last 10 years. And that increase in the unemployment rate 

has come directly during the years when this government took 

power from 1982 onward. 

 

I just want to refer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to some of those 

statistics. And we’ll use May as the base month. In May of 

1977, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the unemployment rate in 

Saskatchewan was 4.2 per cent - 4.2 per cent. And that was 

divided - and I’ll get into this a little later - between those 

workers under the age of 25 and those workers over the age of 

25. We’ll get into the division of that because there’s certain 

facts in here that don’t bring any gladness to my heart. 

 

(1545) 

 

But we see in 1977 the unemployment rate was 4.2 per cent; in 

May of ‘78 it was 4.9 per cent; in May of ‘79 it was 4.2 per 

cent; in May of ‘80 it was 4.2 per cent; in May of 1981 it was 4 

per cent. Then May of 1986 we see a slight jump, 5.6 per cent, 

and we began to have a little economic difficulty in this 

province. But then we come to May of 1983, May of 1983, with 

the present Conservative government in power for one year. We 

see unemployment going from 5.6 per cent to 7.1 per cent. 

 

But let’s just go back to the last full year when the New 

Democratic Party was in power, and that’s the statistic for May 

of 1981 - 4 per cent. Four per cent in May of ‘81 and that was 

the last full year in which the government of the former New 

Democratic Party government would take responsibility for. 

Between May of 1981 and May of 1983 it has gone from 4 to 

7.1. And then in May of 1984 it’s gone to 7.7 per cent; in May 

of ‘85, 7.9 per cent. May of ‘86, 7.6; May of ‘87, 7.5. 

 

And I use May, Mr. Assistant Deputy Speaker, I use May 

because it fairly reflects, I figure, a month that doesn’t involve 

the winter doldrums when in fact everyone in the province 

knows that the construction industry is dead. And it also doesn’t 

deal with the June and July’s when there is a large number of 

students who are out on the work force and may be able to 

distort the economic activities, the figures of employment in 

this province. So I picked the month of May. And these 

statistics were derived from the government’s own figures and 

Statistics Canada labour force surveys. 

 

So what we see in May of ‘77 to May of ‘87, 10 years, just 

about a 25 or 50 per cent jump in unemployment rates. And if 

you look at those figures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a little more 

closely, you will see that the figures are somewhat misleading 

in the sense that they don’t tell who is unemployed. But if 

you’re looking to see who is unemployed, we’ll get a little 

better picture of the kind of hardship that this unemployment is 

wreaking on this province, and the kind of destruction it’s doing 

to the future of the people of this province, and why, in fact, 

we’re seeing a massive migration out of Saskatchewan to other 

provinces in Canada. 

 

In May of ‘77, workers between the ages of 15 and 84, 8.5 per 

cent of those workers were unemployed. Only 2.7 of workers 

over the age of 25 were unemployed - only 2.7 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1305 

 

per cent. Now 8.5 per cent isn’t anything to boast about, but if 

we jump ahead 10 years . . . If we jump ahead 10 years, or not 

even 10 years, if we jump ahead to May of ‘84, which is only 

seven years, we will see that in fact those workers between the 

ages of 15 and 24, under the age of 25, the 8.5 per cent has 

jumped up to 15.3 per cent - almost doubled. The number of 

young people who are out of work in this province almost 

doubled in that seven-year period. And those who are 25 years 

of age and over, their unemployment rate rose from 2.7 per cent 

in 1977 to 5 per cent. And that just about doubled as well. 

 

And the statistics carry on, and the statistics go forward in that 

manner till today we have an unemployment rate in this 

province - May of ‘87, using Statistics Canada’s own figures 

and their seasonally adjusted rates - of 13.8 per cent for young 

workers under the age of 25, and 5.6 per cent for older workers, 

workers over the age of 25. I think that any reasonable and fair 

interpretation on the statistics, Mr. Assistant Deputy Speaker, 

will point out the fact that when we say that the unemployment 

rate has increased and shown a steady increase, the facts speak 

for themselves. 

 

Now I’m not going to put the blame for that on the . . . all the 

direct blame for that on the government of the members 

opposite. I don’t think that the unemployment that we’re seeing 

here in Saskatchewan is totally the direct fault, and I say direct 

fault, of the government. I think there’s a number of factors that 

have entered into the situation, and I want to deal with that for a 

few minutes. 

 

I think the primary factor beyond the control, the direct control, 

and I won’t speak here of what the government can do in terms 

of controlling it directly, but in terms of the indirect control or 

the indirect problems that the government faces, is the question 

of technological change, and what that’s done to employment in 

Canada, and what’s that done to employment particularly in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I have friends who live and work at the chicken plant up at 

Plains Poultry plant in Wynyard, and I always use this as the 

kind of example of technological change and the effect it has on 

communities when I deal with that phenomena. And it used to 

be that there was over 300, over 300 people who worked at the 

Plains Poultry plant in Wynyard, and they did this chicken 

eviscerating, went through the poultry kill line, went through 

the eviscerating line, the packing line, and it was a plant that 

was in some ways . . . form of the plant used to be an outmoded 

plant in terms of the meat packing industry. And it was highly 

labour intensive and required people to do those jobs - the kill 

on the kill line, and on the eviscerating floor, in the freezer 

storage used to require manpower to do the jobs. 

 

However, Plains Poultry undertook a modernization program 

over the last, say last five years, and are still in that process, so 

what we’ve seen is a drop in employment at Plains Poultry from 

over 300 down to their present complement of somewhere - and 

it depends on the season of the year, whether it’s chicken and 

they’ve got a big . . . or it’s Christmas and they’ve got a big 

turkey kill, or what have you - that the complement has almost 

been 

cut in half. And it’s been cut in half, not because of the lack of 

capital investment in the industry. It was cut in half because of 

technological change. And this is happening throughout the 

meat-packing industry. 

 

It’s happening throughout all industries here in Saskatchewan. 

That technological change is in fact changing the nature of the 

work force and is also changing the kind of jobs that people are 

doing and, quite frankly, is throwing people out of work. I say 

that the government is not directly responsible for this in the 

sense that they can’t control the technological change. But they 

are indirectly responsible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the sense that 

they haven’t dealt with technological change, and they haven’t 

dealt with the kinds of technological change that is going on in 

this province, and they haven’t responded to that technological 

change within a long-term economic program which will 

provide jobs and provide economic opportunities. 

 

As well, we’ve seen this record of this government fail to 

respond to unemployment directly by their refusal to use the 

instruments of public ownership to pour money into the 

economy, to create jobs, and create long-term economic activity 

which provides jobs. 

 

And that has to do with their ideology. They don’t believe that 

the public sector has a role to play in job creation. They don’t 

believe that the government should take the role in job creation. 

They’re blinded by their ideological blinkers. They say: we’ll 

let the Peter Pocklingtons and the Weyerhaeusers and all that 

crew - they’re the ones that we’ll provide . . . let them provide 

jobs for Saskatchewan people. And you know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it hasn’t worked. 

 

The facts, as I’ve outlined, speak for themselves. Their extreme 

right-wing views when it comes to job creation in this province 

haven’t worked. They’ve got records going back to 1982 which 

shows that it hasn’t worked. It’s not working now, and it’s not 

working in the future. And if you don’t believe me, as the 

400-and-some dental technicians who provided a valuable 

service to the people of this province. Ask them. Ask them, 

because they’re out of work now, joining the ranks of the 

thousands and thousands of other people in this province that 

this government has put out of work directly. 

 

So they’re directly responsible for a great part of the high 

unemployment rate in this province. High in regards using 

Saskatchewan standards, and I want to deal . . . make it 

perfectly clear I’m dealing with the potential of Saskatchewan 

and not some place else. But it’s a high unemployment rate 

when it comes to Saskatchewan, and this government has failed 

to respond to that. 

 

But I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they haven’t responded to it 

on the one hand because they’re guided by their . . . blinded by 

their ideological blinkers, guided by their greed, guided by the 

dictates of their corporate masters in the boardrooms of Toronto 

and New York and Dallas, and Weyerhaeuser - wherever they 

happen to come from - Tacoma, Washington, and so on. But 

that’s who tells the members opposite what they should be 

doing, what they shouldn’t be doing. 

 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1306 

 

But in dealing with this issue, because it is a serious issue, 

because it affects and is going to affect the very social fabric of 

this province in the long term and in the short term, that we 

believe that we need some new approaches, and that we believe 

that we need some new ideas and some creativity when it comes 

to job creation. And I think the first - I think the first, first thing 

that we need is to redefine in some ways what constitutes work 

and the whole notion of what is work. The members opposite 

have a definition of work that says: if it ain’t producing goods 

and services which are producing profits for our corporate 

friends, then it’s not work. 

 

And they’ve shown that - they’ve shown that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker - in their approach to the dental technicians. They’ve 

shown that approach. They say that’s not socially useful work 

and government money shouldn’t be used to go in employing 

people in that. And that it’s much better . . . it’s much better if 

we pour money into Pocklington’s pockets or into 

Weyerhaeuser’s pockets than, in fact, to employ 400 people on 

the dental plan. 

 

Well, first of all, our party takes the view that socially useful 

work is work that’s just as valuable. And if you’re a dental 

technician, your work is just as valuable as a logger or a miner 

in northern Saskatchewan, or a wheat farmer across their 

province. That it’s socially useful work, and that it certainly has 

got a strong place to play in this province, and we will defend it. 

 

But we think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we should go beyond 

that. We think that socially useful work can include work like 

community service work, including community service work 

for . . . perhaps in the recreational field, whether it’s coaching 

soccer teams or coaching baseball teams or what have you. That 

that, in fact, constitutes socially useful work because it deals 

with the lives of our children and the reproduction of the values 

of our society. And we think that that’s socially useful work, 

and we as a society have got to begin to take a look at defining 

work in that manner. 

 

There’s also the question of so-called women’s work. The 

member from Regina Lakeview eloquently outlined what 

happens to women when they’re in the work-force. There’s also 

the question of what happens to women outside the work-force. 

Women in the home and the kind of work that they do, and the 

lack of rewards that women in the home have gotten, and the 

lack of recognition that they have gotten from this government. 

 

The lack of recognition, for example, around day care . . . 

around child care. The lack of recognition they’ve got for 

building up a network of support services, particularly for those 

women who are on the lower end of the economic scale. 

Particularly for those women who are on the lower end of the 

economic scale, this government has failed miserably - has 

failed miserably, Mr. Assistant Deputy Speaker. So despite all 

the rhetoric about the family, we think that work done around 

the home in terms of maintenance of the home and the caring of 

children is valuable work, and we should begin to, in fact, look 

at that kind of work within the framework of providing a basic 

and adequate income for women who do that work in the home. 

 

And we say that that’s one way that we can, in fact, define what 

work is and how we can, in fact, make what occurs in our 

community socially useful and give it that kind of legitimacy. 

 

Now also, Mr. Speaker, in terms of approaches to job 

creation - and it’s certainly a new approach in this province, at 

least new from 1982 - is that in terms of dealing with 

employment and the creation of employment opportunities, you 

need an integrated and you need a long-term approach. It can’t 

be holus-bolus. It can’t be solely at the whims of the 

international market-place. It can’t be primarily at the whims of 

the international market-place. In fact it is our view that the role 

of government in provinces like Saskatchewan, with a small 

internal market, and that has a large export and resource base, 

that to rely solely on the terms of the international market-place 

is to leave us totally at the whims of what happens in the 

Singapores, the Bangkoks, and Atlantas, and the Tacomas, and 

the Japans, and everywhere else. 

 

And that that is not necessarily the path of development that we 

want to pursue in Saskatchewan. We don’t think . . . the 

members on this side of the House don’t think that we should 

be at the mercy of the bond dealers of Bay Street, or Wall 

Street, or the Tokyo Stock Exchange, or the London Stock 

Exchange and that, in fact, we can develop an integrated and 

long-term approach to economic development, here in 

Saskatchewan, which doesn’t rely on the forces of the 

international market. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that is one of the 

fundamental dividing lines between my party and their party. 

We don’t think that the rule of international capital should 

determine how people in Craik, and how people in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, and how people in Bankend live. We think that 

it’s a responsibility of the Government of Saskatchewan to, in 

fact, help those people, to protect them from the kinds of storms 

of international finance which are occurring now, and which are 

gathering speed, and which are going to crash down on this 

province. And they’re going to crash down on this province in a 

major way within the next several years. 

 

You think that we’ve got it bad now. You think that you’ve got 

it bad now, given their economic or lack of economic approach, 

just wait. Just wait to see what long-term low prices in 

agricultural commodities do to this province. Just wait - just 

wait to see what long-term low prices in potash does to this 

province. Just wait to see what long-term low prices in our 

other exports do to this province. But the members opposite 

say, well, that’s part of the game; we’re all part of the 

international market-place. And we say, we can do things here 

in Saskatchewan to create jobs and to protect people from that 

international market-place that they love so well. 

 

What are some of those things? Well, let’s look at what . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Wascana asked, 

what would we do? Well, let’s deal with some of the things that 

what we’d do. 

 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1307 

 

First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, between 1971 and 1982, 

Saskatchewan had consistently the lowest rate of 

unemployment in the province. It had the highest number of 

people who were working in this country - consistently. It also 

consistently had the highest, the highest level of capital 

investment of any province in Canada. Those facts speak well 

for themselves because there was a strategy, a long-term, 

integrated strategy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to deal with that. 

 

What are the keystones of such a strategy? As it was, ‘71, ‘82, 

the primary keystone of our economic strategy is this: we 

believe that the resources of this province should be utilized in 

this province to develop this province for the benefit of the 

people of this province. That is in marked contrast - that is in 

marked contrast with the government of the members opposite 

who believe that the resources of this province should be ripped 

off from this province by the Pocklingtons of the world and the 

Weyerhaeusers of the world and the Hees International of the 

world and the other oil giants of the world, to siphon off the 

resource benefits which should belong to Saskatchewan people. 

They believe it should be ripped off and taken out of the 

province to line the pockets and develop the profits and the 

bottom lines of large international corporations; large 

international banks; large international, vertically-integrated 

multinationals which have no interest in developing 

Saskatchewan, but have only one interest and that is making 

sure they’ve got a black bottom line, that their profits in fact 

increase. 

 

And let me tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen that 

approach. We have seen that approach at work. And what it has 

led to is a doubling of the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan 

and a lessening, a halving, of the benefits of resource 

development to the people of this province. To put it in simple 

terms, while the Peter Pocklingtons and the Weyerhaeusers and 

the North Canadian Oils of the world are benefiting, utilizing 

Saskatchewan resources, the government opposite is cutting 

back on dental programs to children, is increasing drug fees for 

senior citizens, is putting people out of work because they say 

there is an economic restraint. 

 

Well, they haven’t practised that kind of economic restraint 

with the multinationals. In fact, what they’ve done is fed them, 

that giant insatiable maw of capitalism - they have shovelled 

dollar after dollars, millions after millions. And as we’ve seen 

in the Energy estimates, despite the fact that the price of oil 

between ‘82 and ‘86 is almost three times what it was between 

‘71 and ‘82, despite the fact that the production of oil in this 

province has doubled - has doubled between ‘82 and ‘86 

compared to ‘71/’82 - we have seen that the resources coming 

to the people of Saskatchewan have been halved. 

 

So, if people want to know why they’re throwing dental 

technicians out of work, and why they’re raising drug fees, and 

why they’re putting the gas tax back on, you better go down and 

ask the oil companies of this province because that’s where our 

money’s gone. And that’s where jobs have gone, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That’s where they’ve gone; they’ve gone south; 

they’ve gone into the maws of the corporate barons of this 

world. 

 

So as I said before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the key - the key 

- to job creation in Saskatchewan will be to utilize the resources 

of this province for the benefits of the people of this province, 

and not to give it away. That’s point no. 1. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: Secondly, Mr. Assistant Deputy Speaker, what 

we’re going to . . . what we would advocate is that we develop 

and utilize some innovative forms of production. If you look 

next door at the province of Manitoba, a have-not province, a 

province poor in resources compared with Saskatchewan, you 

see that they have been forced to do the same thing. And not 

only forced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have realized that there 

is certain economic advantages and benefits to developing new 

forms of economic production in Manitoba. 

 

Primary among these are the concept of the worker co-op, in 

which the workers who work in an enterprise own that 

enterprise. Or, the workers who work in an enterprise own that 

enterprise in conjunction with the community, or own that 

enterprise in conjunction with the province. 

 

And we have seen a number of examples in Manitoba, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, where this has worked, and which has 

provided jobs - which has provided jobs of a scale which is 

suitable for the Manitoba economy, and which is why 

Manitoba, the have-not province of the West, the ones without 

the resources, month after month after month challenge 

Saskatchewan when it comes to who’s got the lowest rate of 

unemployment. 

 

So we have a have-not province who’s able to utilize those 

innovative forms of production, providing jobs for its people. 

And the net result is that people from Saskatchewan are moving 

to Manitoba, and they are leaving. And they are part of the 

out-migration that’s occurring in this province. They are part of 

the tens of thousands of people which have left Saskatchewan 

to go other places looking for work. 

 

And there’s . . . As I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the worker 

co-operative form of production is a method, and it’s a 

cost-efficient and cost-effective method of creating jobs. 

 

There’s also the method of using community-owned 

enterprises. Again, it’s a concept that is not new to the world 

but it certainly alien to the government, the members opposite, 

because it’s not based on bottom line, feeding some 

multinational. But it’s based on, in fact, providing useful 

services or useful goods to the members of a community. And 

the members of the community participate in that through share 

ownership, which is limited to that members of the community. 

 

And one of the advantages of that particular economic 

initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that community-owned 

enterprises tend to last a long longer that so-called economic 

developments like venture capital corporations, which the 

members of that government are very well acquainted with. 

And we’ll get in with that a little bit later. 

 

There’s also the question of the private and public mix -  

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1308 

 

production based on money that comes in from both the public 

sector and private sector, with directed benefits which are 

regulated, where they have a certain number of jobs assigned to 

them and a certain number of units of production that’s base 

goes into the community. And that’s another way that we can 

create jobs in the province. 

 

And again, those are locally based type of operations. And a 

good example which presently exists in Saskatchewan is the 

Plains Poultry, which I had mentioned earlier, which is a private 

and public mix, and which provides jobs in the community of 

Wynyard, and which services the internal market, and is in fact 

a successful and viable enterprise in this province. 

 

There are the traditional forms of small-scale private 

ownership - the local entrepreneur who plays an important part 

in this province. You see him up and down the main streets of 

small town Saskatchewan - people who use their initiative. And 

whether or not their money was inherited, or whether they were 

able to gain their money through their own work, is irrelevant. 

The fact is . . . the fact of the matter is that they do provide jobs 

in the local area in Saskatchewan. And of course that’s going to 

be an important and long-term part of any integrated plan for 

economic development in the province. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a whole question of what 

we produce, and the question of production based on use. Like I 

said, Plains Poultry, and I’ll use that as an example. Here we 

have a market in Saskatchewan. People like eating Kentucky 

Fried Chicken, like eating that particular fast food, and we all 

know that people . . . While it may not be the most nutritious 

form of food, at least it’s quick and it’s readily available. 

 

It’s production that’s based on use. Food, the most useful of all 

products, is the kind of production that we’ve got to move 

towards, whether we deal with exports or whether we deal with 

products which are produced internally within Saskatchewan. 

It’s the Plains Poultry example, and we can replicate that 

example throughout the province provided that we have the 

local initiative and local input into that kind of operation. 

 

So we’ve seen that the member from Wascana asked, what 

would we do? We would utilize innovative forms of production, 

for example, the worker co-ops; we would use the resources of 

Saskatchewan for the benefit of Saskatchewan. And the key to 

that of course is through public ownership - not through private 

ownership, not through the Pocklingtons, not through the 

Weyerhaeusers, but through public ownership. Because the 

issue, when it comes to the question of the utilization of 

resources in this province, is the issue of public profit versus 

private profit. 

 

And I don’t think there is any clearer dividing line between the 

two parties that sit in this legislature than that issue - public 

profit versus private profit. The other members opposite say, 

you’d better believe it, because they stand for private profit. 

They stand for the profits of the Weyerhaeusers; they stand for 

the profits of the Pocklingtons; they stand for the profits of the 

banks; they stand for the profits of all those people who have 

sucked  

the resources of Saskatchewan since 1982. 

 

We, on the other hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, stand for public 

profit. We think that resources in Saskatchewan, and the profit 

from those resources, should be going to the use and should be 

directed towards the public good. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

see here the Minister of Finance is yapping from his seat once 

again. Here we have the great statistician, the prince of 

darkness, the man who is only $500 million or thereabouts out, 

and who goes, whoops, when it comes to making a deficit. Here 

he is trying to lecture us on what constitutes good economic 

management. 

 

You know, you’d like to see that the Finance minister who has 

presided over record deficit after record deficit, who’s presided 

over the spoilage and spillage, the pillage of resources out of 

this province, who’s seen Weyerhaeuser given away . . . 

PAPCO given away to Weyerhaeuser, who’s seen Pocklington 

given tens of thousands of dollars, who’s seen out-of-province 

multinationals fed with our resources, this is the minister who is 

trying to lecture us on what constitutes good economic 

management. 

 

I challenged that member once before during the budget debate, 

if he thinks he’s right and his vision of economic management 

is right, to put up his seat and I’ll put up mine. That challenge 

still stands, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that challenge still stands. But 

I doubt very much it’s going to be taken up. I doubt very much 

it’s going to be taken up, because she’s a little lonely out in 

Lumsden. It’s a little lonely out in Lumsden, and it’s going to 

be a lot lonelier. “NDP sweeps byelections; Conservatives fare 

poorly”. Let me tell you. That headline can be written for 

Canada; that headline is being written for Saskatchewan, and 

it’s being written by the hon. member from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. He is one of the key architects of your 

defeat, gentlemen. He is one of the key architects of your 

defeat. He’s one of the key architects of your non-economic 

strategy - a strategy of nothingness, a strategy of feed the 

multinationals, the strategy of pouring our resources out of 

province. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll resign my seat if the 

member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden resigns his seat. We put it up. 

It’s either a put up or shut up situation here, and it’s obviously, 

judging from the silence on the side there from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, that it’s a much rather shut up on his 

point of view, from his point of view. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have done is outline, what we 

have done is in the broadest possible terms outline what we 

think would be the key elements for the economic development 

strategy for this province, and for the question of building jobs 

and long-term jobs for the young people of this province, so 

that they stay here in Saskatchewan as opposed to having to 

immigrate out to Ontario, or immigrate to British Columbia, or 

immigrate to Manitoba. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the last . . . since the 

election, since the election 250 working people from 

Saskatchewan, 250 more working people have moved to 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1309 

 

Manitoba from Saskatchewan than have moved in here. And the 

reason is very simple - is because there is jobs in Manitoba and 

there is nothing but the kind of political and economic 

wasteland in Saskatchewan, the kind sown by the government 

of the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to conclude my remarks with 

the following observation. Creation of jobs - not only does it 

require a long-term and integrated approach in terms of how all 

the parts of the puzzle fit together. Creation of jobs 

fundamentally requires political will. It requires a commitment, 

requires a commitment first of all to full employment; requires 

a commitment to the concept that people in Saskatchewan have 

a right to a job; that it’s not a privilege and that it’s not just 

something that’s handed out by this boss or that boss; or it’s not 

a crumb from any table of the owners of capital in this 

province; but that the job, a job in the sense of living a full and 

productive life, is a right. 

 

People, and the members on this side of the House, say that we 

believe people in Saskatchewan have the right to a job. And that 

is a fundamental, fundamental difference between our party and 

the party of the members opposite, because they don’t believe 

that. They believe that a job is something which is a privilege, 

which only those who beg and scrape should have, only those 

who kowtow will be entitled to. And that is not our view. And 

that represents a fundamental philosophical difference between 

their party and our party. And that’s why they don’t have the 

political will to implement and develop a full employment 

strategy. 

 

You know, during the budget debate and during these estimates 

we have put forward dozens and dozens and dozens of ideas of 

how to get this province working again. And I want to mention 

just a few of those that I’ve heard coming from different 

members on this side of the House. 

 

The member from Saskatoon University, in his reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, talked about conservation of energy as 

a method of job creation in this province. And that’s a 

long-term project which would involve tens of thousands of 

people in this province renovating their homes, putting in 

energy-saving devices, building energy-saving devices, 

developing energy-saving methods here in Saskatchewan which 

would last for years and years, and which would have the 

economic benefits of cutting down the cost . . . and the cost of 

running Sask Power, just as a side benefit, so that the 

Shands - the political boondoggles which the other side likes to 

promote - would not be necessary, because we would be able to 

save power. 

 

This is one small idea - one small idea, that would produce tens 

of thousands of jobs in this province, long-term economic 

activity, save the province and save the provincial treasury 

hundreds of millions through the operation of Sask Power. It 

would make this province a better place to live. 

 

I’ve heard other members speak up. I don’t know whether it 

was the member from Athabasca or the member from 

Cumberland who talked about the question of forestation and 

reforestation, and the putting of northern people to work by 

culling the forest, not through the use of sprays, 

not through the use of mechanical means, but in fact making a 

social commitment that we’re going to put Northerners to work 

and pay them union wages to do that work, so that in fact we 

can deplete the welfare rolls of Saskatchewan; we can cut 

Social Services’ costs; we give people pride and dignity through 

the instrument of useful and socially productive work. 

 

You know, we can cut unemployment by a great, great deal in 

the North just through reforestation, not to speak of the 

maintenance of roads and the development of the 

infrastructure - all of which provide more jobs and more jobs 

and more jobs, and which returns have greater economic returns 

to the province, and provides cash to the treasury of the 

province to cut the kind of deficit that has been built up by this 

totally pro-international, multinational approach of the 

government opposite. 

 

We’ve heard suggestions for developing jobs in other sectors of 

the economy, for developing new approaches when it comes to 

soil conservation. I remember one of the members talking about 

soil conservation and the need and the effect that that would 

have. 

 

And one of the primary effects of soil conservation, Mr. 

Assistant Deputy Speaker, is through the planting of trees. Now 

that doesn’t seem like a very major thing or very innovative or 

very radical thing to do. But if we’re concerned about the soil 

conservation in our province, as Senator Herb Sparrow certainly 

is, if the members of opposite have taken their . . . have taken 

their direction from in terms of looking at the problems dealing 

with soil conservation, you will see that the tree planting 

provides, in fact, a major method of labour-intensive 

employment and would be socially useful and has a social 

purpose to it, and would provide jobs for the dozens and the 

hundreds and thousands of students who are out of work in this 

province. So maybe we wouldn’t have headlines in the papers 

which read that jobs are scarce for students, because we would 

put them to work doing socially useful work. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on and on and list 

the dozens and dozens of rational, reasonable, cost-effective 

ways of creating employment in this province, that it doesn’t 

take a genius, or doesn’t take the kind of mental gymnastics 

exhibited by the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, but, in 

fact, would put people of Saskatchewan in work - which would 

get Saskatchewan working again, and which would work for the 

benefit of all the people and not just a small and privileged few. 

 

In saying that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to move the motion 

as outlined in the Orders of the Day, provided I can find it here 

in my pile of work. Thank you. 

 

I would like, therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to move, and it’s 

seconded by the member for Saskatoon University: 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 

to adopt the long-term economic development strategy 

which will provide new jobs and opportunities for all 

Saskatchewan people, particularly young people 

struggling to enter the work-force. And further, that this 

Assembly express concern with the fact that the 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1310 

 

number of unemployed in Saskatchewan has doubled since 

1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would just 

like to enter this debate briefly and second the motion of my 

colleague and make a few supplementary remarks to some of 

the points that he’s been making in support of the motion. 

 

I think the motion is timely in the sense that this is one of the 

worst periods of unemployment for all Saskatchewan people, 

but particularly for young people in this province, that we face 

now in many decades. And the figures are well known; my 

colleague outlined some of them. 

 

On a nation-wide basis, we have over 500,000 young Canadians 

officially unemployed, and we face record levels of youth 

unemployment in this province which have been exacerbated by 

the policies of the government. My colleague, the member for 

Regina Rosemont, outlined a number of those policies. I want 

to comment on a couple of others. 

 

One of the things that I think has hurt Saskatchewan young 

people most over the last few months, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 

that there have been dramatic cut-backs in programs for 

summer youth employment and for year-round youth 

employment in this province. 

 

We have seen in the last few weeks a decision by this 

government to cut 6,000 summer job opportunities for 

Saskatchewan young people, a reduction of over $6 million in 

funding for the Opportunities ‘87 program, in contrast with the 

funds that were in place in 1986. We’ve seen this government 

cut another $3.25 million in support for youth employment 

funding with the elimination of the youth access employment 

program, a program that had been designed to help young 

people between the ages of 15 and 24, who had been without 

work for 10 of the previous 26 weeks, get work under this 

program. That program is now gone, and the hope that was 

offered by that program to several thousand Saskatchewan 

young people has gone with it. 

 

So we’ve seen a government that over the past few years has 

been uncaring about youth and uncaring about the jobless in 

this province, and has exacerbated the difficulties of the 

unemployed in past few months with its vicious cuts to youth 

employment programs and to summer youth employment 

programs which has resulted in, first of all, a record number of 

young people in Saskatchewan being forced to leave 

Saskatchewan. And in effect this year we’re seeing that in May 

of 1987 there are 6,000 fewer young people between the ages of 

18 and 24 working in Saskatchewan than there were last year in 

May of 1986. So those are the figures that are before us, and I 

don’t want to dwell on those in any more detail. 

 

What I do want to do in the few minutes that I have, Mr. 

Speaker, is to expand on some of the comments that my 

colleague from Regina Rosemont made with respect to the kind 

of youth employment strategy that we would like to see being 

emphasized as part of an overall, long-term strategy to get 

Saskatchewan back to work. And one of the 

first things that I would like to say that we in the New 

Democratic Party are committed to, is a strategy of employment 

and particularly youth employment that emphasizes resolving 

some of the major environmental problems that we face in this 

province, and at the same time putting thousands of young 

people in this province back to work in resolving those 

environmental difficulties. And my colleague from Regina 

Rosemont mentioned one of the major areas of initiative that’s 

required is that of reforestation. 

 

One of the things that I’d like to make reference to, Mr. 

Speaker, is an article in the July 17, 1987 Leader-Post that 

announces . . . It cites Paul Brett, the executive director of the 

forestry division of the Department of Parks and Renewable 

Resources in this province, announcing that only 3.5 million 

trees will be planted in Saskatchewan this year - about half, 

essentially, of what was planted last year - as a result of 

government budget cuts. Last year, about seven million trees 

were planted, Mr. Speaker. And that’s no more than 50 per cent, 

again, of what was planted in 1981 and 1982. 

 

During that period, Mr. Speaker, there were about 12 million 

trees a year being planted in this province. Now we’re looking 

at 3.5 million being planted - a dramatic cut-back. What that 

means, very simply, is that this province is cutting a lot more 

trees than it’s replanting. And it’s continuing to erode its 

valuable forest resource and doing very little to replenish it. 

And we all know that that simply doesn’t make either 

environmental sense or long-term economic sense. There are 

8,500 jobs in this province that depend on the forest resource. 

And we’re very unwise to be depleting that forest resource. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now, one of the obvious opportunities for a long-term 

employment in Saskatchewan is to make a major commitment 

to replenish the forest resource. And at least 2,000 people in this 

province could be employed in a major program of reforestation 

and intensive forest management with the expansion of our tree 

nursery operations in northern Saskatchewan and the planting 

of at least 30 to 40,000 trees a year in this province. That’s 

what’s required, Mr. Speaker. And if that was done, if that was 

done for the next 20 to 25 years, we could replenish the forest 

resource in this province. 

 

It’s a matter of political will. We, on this side of the House, 

have that political will. And we will put that kind of 

reforestation and intensive forest management program in place 

when we come to government, and we’ll employ at least 2,000 

people, particularly from the Prince Albert area, and the 

northern areas of this province, in implementing that kind of a 

program when we’re elected to government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to give a second example of the kind 

of initiative that an NDP government would take, if we were in 

office today, to resolve some of the very serious, long-term 

unemployment problems that this province faces. 

 

A second major initiative that’s required is an initiative to try to 

prevent the increases in energy demand that we see 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1311 

 

in this province that require, as a result, major new capital 

investments in dams and in energy generating facilities that the 

taxpayers of this province can ill afford. 

 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Mr. Speaker, is already over 

90 per cent debt financed. In other words, the people of this 

province have less than 10 per cent equity in SPC, and every 

time that we go out and have to build a new generating station, 

it costs the people of this province at least $500 million, or to 

put it another way, at least $1,000 a taxpayer. And it’s money 

that our taxpayers can ill afford, and it’s money that we don’t 

have to be putting out, Mr. Speaker, if we were, instead, 

prepared to make a major commitment to a conservation 

program in this province that would put thousands of people, in 

communities right across Saskatchewan, back to work. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s our view, on this side of the House, that 

the time has come in Saskatchewan for a major investment in 

home insulation and in upgrading the energy efficiency of all 

our major industries and all our major businesses in this 

province; that it’s worth making an investment of several 

hundred million dollars over a period of 10 to 15 years in that 

kind of an initiative. And at least 3 to 4,000 people a year would 

be employed as a result of such initiative, but not employed 

simply in one community where a new generating station may 

be built, but employed in every community right across this 

province in a major attempt by Saskatchewan people to upgrade 

the energy efficiency of all their buildings, all their industry, all 

their farms, with the support and the assistance of the 

government of Saskatchewan. That’s the kind of major 

commitment that’s required, that will put thousands of people in 

communities right across this province back to work, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

A third major initiative that we want to see taken, Mr. Speaker, 

is an initiative to replenish the staff at our hospitals, replenish 

the staff that are providing health care services right across this 

province that have been so savagely cut back by this 

government. 

 

An Hon. Member: Peter, be honest. 

 

Mr. Prebble: The member from Maple Creek asked me to be 

honest. I will be honest with her if she will be honest with the 

people of Saskatchewan. Four hundred and eleven dental 

therapists, to begin with, have been cut by your government, 

and when we are re-elected, we will put the dental care program 

back in place and we will hire 400 people to replace the 400 

people that you fired, 400 jobs in communities, in rural 

communities right across this province that you’ve robbed from 

the people of Saskatchewan in a thoroughly irresponsible way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: I say to the member from Maple Creek, it’s up to 

her to be honest with the people of Saskatchewan. We on this 

side are being honest. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of this province, there’s 

been a major reduction in health care services, a major 

reduction. We’re seeing record waiting lists right across this 

province, record waiting lists in my own home community in 

Saskatoon, with over 10,000 people 

waiting to get into the three hospitals in the city. And I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that there’s a major opportunity for new jobs to be 

created, particularly in the nursing field. There are hundreds of 

unemployed nurses who would gladly work in our hospitals if 

the government would only put in place the funding that’s 

required to hire those nurses. We will do that when we come to 

government, but in the interim we call on members on the PC 

side of the House to come forward with the commitment that’s 

required to hire more nurses and to put our hospitals back into 

working order. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to outline a few other underpinnings 

of a long term strategy to create jobs in this province. One of 

the things that’s required, in our view, is the need to institute a 

policy of Saskatchewan first - a policy under which government 

contracts to go Saskatchewan businesses first, where jobs from 

those contracts go to Saskatchewan workers first, not workers 

from Alberta, not workers from Manitoba, not people like Peter 

Pocklington who comes in from Alberta to build a plant in 

North Battleford. We want to see government funds where they 

are expended going to support Saskatchewan businesses first, 

with the understanding that people in local Saskatchewan 

communities will be hired first. And we on this side of the 

House believe that a Saskatchewan first policy needs to be 

implemented as quickly as possible. 

 

Another thing, Mr. Speaker, that we would like to see done as 

part of a strategy to increase job creation opportunities in this 

province, is the launching of a new highway and street repair 

program in Saskatchewan - a program that over a period of five 

to seven years could create hundreds of new jobs in our urban 

centres and in our rural areas. Our rural highways are in 

desperate need of upgrading. Our streets in Regina and 

Saskatoon and many other urban centres are in disrepair as a 

result of the major cut-backs to urban assistance that members 

opposite in the government have instituted. 

 

We say that those cut-backs are short-sighted, that in the long 

term the bills that will have to be paid by Saskatchewan 

taxpayers to repair our streets and our highways are going to be 

unnecessarily high because of these cut-backs. And we say that 

the time has come to spend some money now on putting our 

highway system into repair again and to create the necessary 

jobs that are required to do that at the same time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are just a few examples of the kinds of 

initiatives that, if the government took, jobs would be created 

right across this province. They’re common sense initiatives 

that are going to save the taxpayers a good deal of money, and 

that at the same time are going to, at the same time, create badly 

needed jobs for people right now who are looking for work, 

who have the skills to do the work, but whom your government 

will not provide the opportunity to make those jobs available. 

 

And I say to members opposite, if you were committed to 

employment creation, at least use the means that are at your 

disposal, as a provincial government, to provide the jobs that 

are required - basic jobs in health care, basic jobs in education, 

basic jobs in highway repair and maintenance, basic jobs in 

reforestation and intensive forest management, jobs in energy 

conservation and 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1312 

 

housing. 

 

Those are the kind of jobs that you could be providing and are 

not providing, because you don’t have the political will to take 

money out of areas like oil royalty reduction and put them into 

providing the badly needed services that Saskatchewan 

taxpayers deserve to have. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by making two concluding 

comments. One is that one other obvious area where the 

government ought to be investing money, and is choosing not to 

do it, and an area that would create a great many jobs at 

relatively small public expense, is that it is simply time, in my 

judgement, to see an investment made in cleaning up our lakes 

and our polluted rivers in this province, cleaning up the 

hundreds of dump sites across Saskatchewan that are not being 

monitored, that have hazardous chemicals and hazardous wastes 

stored at those sites, that badly need to be cleaned up, Mr. 

Speaker - that badly need to be cleaned up, Mr. Speaker. There 

are hundreds of dump sites across Saskatchewan that are being 

unmonitored, and where the employment of two or three 

students, or two or three young people at each site for a summer 

could readily clean them up. And it’s our view on this side of 

the House that that’s the kind of work that ought to be done, 

Mr. Speaker, before our aquifers and our streams and rivers 

become further polluted. 

 

There is an urgent need, Mr. Speaker, for this government to 

invest funds in cleaning up our environment, and if the work is 

not done now the costs will be far greater later on when the 

pollution of our water supplies and aquifers begins to be more 

serious and then major, major work needs to be done to clean 

up the sites quickly and at very substantial public expense. So 

the time to do the work is now, and it’s our view that this work, 

at modest public cost, could put hundreds of young people back 

to work all across this province for at least two to three 

summers. 

 

I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by quoting Graham Riches, the 

associate professor of the Faculty of Social Work at the 

University of Regina, who expresses a concern that I have about 

the growing number of young people who face the prospect of 

not working at all in this province over the next decade unless 

something is done, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Riches says: 

 

One of the facts that really has to impinge upon the public 

consciousness is that people are being born in Canada and 

Saskatchewan today, and that probably those born over the 

last number of years, who are probably never going to 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s an appalling thought. And it’s our view on 

this side of the House that it’s an unnecessary thought. It’s a 

reality that’s only coming to fruition as a result of the 

callousness of government policy and the lack of political will 

that governments across this country and in this province have, 

not to implement job creation opportunities for young people in 

Saskatchewan today. And it’s our view, Mr. Speaker, that if the 

political will was exercised, there is no need for any young 

person who is born in Saskatchewan today not to be assured full 

employment opportunities in this province from the time they 

enter the work-force at 18, to the time they’re ready 

to retire at 60 or 65. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: It’s a matter of political will. It’s our view, on 

this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that every Saskatchewan 

resident ought to have the right to work, and that it’s the 

responsibility of the Government of Saskatchewan to provide 

that right, to assure that right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by 

suggesting to members opposite that if they were serious about 

providing employment opportunities for young people this 

summer, they’d be prepared to invest 25 to $30 million in a 

program for youth summer employment. A program, 25 to $30 

million, would have put to work every young person who was 

out of work this summer. 

 

And my question to you is: will you exercise the political will 

and the political commitment to invest $25 million in a program 

next summer that will employ every young person in 

Saskatchewan who doesn’t have a job? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Prebble: Will you commit yourself to that? Because I tell 

you, when we next come to government, we’ll be prepared to 

put in place a program that does do that. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Sauder: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in this Assembly and to join in this debate on the resolution 

dealing with the long-term economic development strategy for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Progressive Conservative government has 

viewed economic development and diversification as one of its 

major priorities over the last five years. Mr. Speaker, we believe 

that we must continue to diversify our economy if we are to be 

able to provide the opportunities or jobs for the future for the 

students, for the young people, and for the citizens of this 

province. It’s only going to be through diversification that 

we’re going to have expanded economic development and, with 

that, employment opportunities that’ll come with 

it - opportunities that are going to be particularly important to 

those young people, many who are still in school at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has consistently had one of the 

lowest unemployment rates in Canada. That doesn’t mean that 

we’re satisfied with our record. We want to continue to improve 

it, Mr. Speaker. We’re working to see that a good quantity and 

high quality of opportunities will be there in the future for the 

people of Saskatchewan. We believe that by following a path of 

economic diversification we can ensure our province’s 

economic health well into the 21st century. 

 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1313 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all hon. members in this House are 

aware of the massive changes that have taken place in the world 

market-place in recent times. The members opposite may not 

understand the implications that that has for Saskatchewan. 

They may not understand that when the price of potash is cut by 

50 per cent, it has major economic impact in our province. They 

may not understand that when the world price of wheat declines 

drastically, as it has over the last number of years, that it has a 

major impact on our economy in Saskatchewan. I can 

understand that they don’t understand that. They’ve never 

displayed their talent for understanding economic reality or for 

dealing with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tremendous drop in our resource prices 

world-wide have not come alone. They’ve been accompanied 

by international trade wars as other countries have tried to take 

advantage of the situation, as they have tried to dump their 

products on the world market, as we see from countries who 

have expanded their production over the last number of years 

have surpluses and are now are trying to use that to balance 

their trade. 

 

Certainly, when taken together, these factors have caused 

serious problems. This has led to the problem or rearranging our 

economies here at home. Some people especially the members 

opposite, thought that this could never happen. Mr. Speaker, 

they went through a period of time in government when they 

thought the only way things could ever go were up; the only 

thing that could happen was that markets would expand; that 

there was no end to the situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in those heady days of the ‘70s, when there was 

surplus funds available, what did they do? They didn’t put any 

away for the future; they didn’t plan for long-term 

diversification and economic development. No, their idea of 

economic development was to buy an existing industry, buy the 

potash industry, spend the money of this province, the 

taxpayers’ money, on something that was already here; buy 

another hole in the ground, not create one single new job, Mr. 

Speaker - not create a single new job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then they talked about the uranium industry. That 

was going to be the way of the future. They spent more 

hundreds of millions of dollars buying the uranium industry 

up - an industry, again, facing economic difficulty with 

declining world markets. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their 

solution to those massive funds that they spent in the 1970s is, 

we’ll shut the industry down; we’ll close it down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that as they sit here this 

afternoon and talk about jobs in northern Saskatchewan, the 

members from northern Saskatchewan that represent those 

communities that have uranium mines are not here to listen to 

that story. They don’t even believe their own colleagues as they 

stand in this House and speak to us about economic 

development in the North. Mr. Speaker, the other people of this 

province don’t believe them either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have not just talked about it; we’ve acted on 

economic diversification. Look, if you will, at the 

projects like the NewGrade heavy oil upgrader and the new 

paper mill being built in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker - projects 

which members opposite said would never happen. Let’s 

contrast that to what their solutions were in the early 1980s. 

They talked about a heavy oil upgrader. And what did they 

have? They had a name, a location, without anything on paper, 

no deal, nothing worked out with the industry. They didn’t have 

any concrete plans. 

 

What was their solution to the forest industry? It was to 

nationalize the pulp industry, spend more hundreds of millions 

of dollars on that. For what? Not to create anything else. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to be the saviours of that 

industry. They’re going to go into a reforestation program and 

spend hundreds of thousands - hundreds of millions of dollars 

on reforestation in this province. And I certainly agree that the 

time has come for more reforestation. 

 

But I would like to contrast our solution to forest management 

to theirs. Theirs was that they would sell it off, the forest 

industry, or rape, pillage and plunder with the Crown 

corporations and then turn to the public treasury to say, we 

should do some reforestation. 

 

Let’s contrast that to what’s in place at the present time. Let’s 

look at the management that’s there with the forest industries 

who are utilizing that resource, who are paying dues, who are 

putting money into a reforestation plan, and who are 

implementing reforestation projects such as Saskatchewan has 

never had before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, reforestation projects 

paid for by the industry who’s utilizing that resource in our 

province. Mr. Speaker, those projects are creating thousands of 

new jobs and at the same time are broadening our economic 

base and diversifying our economy. 

 

Other major projects like the Gainer bacon plant in North 

Battleford and the Intercontinental Packers’ expansion in 

Saskatoon are helping to strengthen and diversify our 

province’s agricultural sector, as well as providing hundreds of 

new jobs in those industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on listing the hundreds of new 

and expanded projects that are contributing to the process of 

economic diversification in Saskatchewan. Not all of them, I 

admit, are large like the larger scale Vanguard recreational 

vehicle plant in North Battleford, or the Phillips Cable plant in 

Moose Jaw, but they are creating jobs and they’re breathing 

new life into our province’s economy. 

 

The member from Regina Rosemont talked about one of the 

methods to create economic activity and diversity is through a 

policy of public ownership, and he said that should take place. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got community-based enterprises that he 

talked about, which I believe is a form of public ownership, 

when you have local municipalities contributing to economic 

development in their areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a major initiative in Department of 

Rural Development to promote just such things. We presently 

have a number of them that are up and running, and I would say 

that the most significant example is in the 

  



 

July 21, 1987 

1314 

 

community of Wood Mountain, where they have initiated new 

industry in their community - industry that they felt they 

needed, industry that utilized the resources that they had 

available, Mr. Speaker, and industry to create jobs for the young 

people in their own area. If that isn’t an example of 

community-based enterprises and public ownership, I would 

like to know what they’re talking about. I’m not so sure that 

they really know about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about small-scale private ownership, the 

individual enterprises. I don’t know if they think that 

small-scale private projects or individual-ownership enterprises 

operate without profit. I don’t know a single one of them that 

do. It seems to me that they have a double standard: profit is 

fine if you’re just so big, but don’t try and get your head above 

the water because we’re going to knock you down. But don’t let 

somebody get bigger, because they don’t fit into our plans for 

the future. We don’t want the people investing big dollars. We 

just want the little guy out in his town. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen major changes in some of our 

other things in Saskatchewan, and I think particularly of some 

of the ones that are creating new jobs, that are looking to the 

future, Mr. Speaker. The NDP opposite would say, take me 

back to the past. Take me back to the past. Our solution to 

economic development is to buy up your farms, to buy up your 

mines, to buy up your forest industry. We want to own it. We 

want to control it. We’re going to have our thumb on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s stop for a moment and look to the future. 

Let’s look at the new high-technology companies, specialized 

service companies, small manufacturers and processors who 

have expanded, who have built since we’ve taken government. 

Mr. Speaker, governments . . . or companies that are 

emphasizing innovation, companies that are emphasizing high 

technology and, most of all, knowledge. Mr. Speaker, that is 

one of the things of the future, and we are pleased that those 

companies are coming to Saskatchewan and are expanding 

within our province. Mr. Speaker, they’re part of that new trend 

that is visible in many places in our world and every facet of 

our society today as we become more and more dependent on 

high technology and on the knowledge-based industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I admit that they create fewer jobs than the 

blue-collar industries, due to the higher degree of automation 

and technology involved. But they are a wave of the future, Mr. 

Speaker, and Saskatchewan must be prepared for that future. 

And this government is dealing with that future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, being near 5 o’clock, and I have many, many . . . 

Mr. Speaker, having many more things to say, I would like to 

beg leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 


