













































October 20, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 19, 1987 

 

 

3359 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Patent Protection Legislation 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to address a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 

tomorrow marks the first anniversary of the October ’86 

election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And I think you will agree, Mr. Premier, I think 

you will agree, Mr. Premier, that it also marks a year of 

disappointment for the people of this province and a year of 

deception. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, many of the campaign promises 

which you made have been broken. And I remind you in 

particular, in June of last year, just a few months before the 

election you issued a news release in which you promised to 

pressure the Mulroney government in order to pass legislation 

to reduce patent protection so that the farmers could have 

available generic drugs. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Premier: what has Ottawa done? Have they done 

anything in respect to that or was it simply a promise made at 

election time and a promise broken after the election? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the hon. member 

is talking about generic drugs in consumers, not farmers. 

Farmers . . . farm chemicals. The hon. member, I believe then, 

Mr. Speaker, if I just can get the question right, wants to know 

about farm chemicals, farm chemicals and the production of 

farm chemicals here, and the change of the law with respect to 

encouraging the production of farm chemicals in Canada- 

fertilizers, generic drugs — so that in fact we can have access to 

more chemicals here, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well, he’s got drugs and chemicals mixed up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would say with respect to farm chemicals, Mr. Speaker, we 

will and have been encouraging the production, and I’m happy 

to say that we just opened up a new plant in Tuxford last week 

which encourages the formulation of farm chemicals right here 

as opposed to in the United States. And in fact one-third of all 

the phosphorus now provided in the liquid form for 

Saskatchewan will be available in southern Saskatchewan at 

Tuxford. 

 

With respect to changes in laws as they apply to both 

consumers and producers, Mr. Speaker, what we want to see are 

incentives to have the production here as opposed to us 

importing them from some other country, having all  

the jobs there and us just paying the tax or the tariff or 

something else which will cost us more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A supplement then, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the 

Premier didn’t hear the question. I indicated to you, Mr. 

Premier, that you promised the Saskatchewan farmers that in 

fact you would approach the Mulroney government to change 

the legislation in order that farm chemicals in the generic form 

could be made available. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You said drugs. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Farm chemicals. I ask you, Mr. Premier, what 

has happened to that? Or was it simply an empty promise made 

before the election only to be broken after the election? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are, even in the 

province of Saskatchewan, we are seeing the increase in the 

potential and possibility to have generic chemicals produced 

right here. And I don’t have them with me, but my estimates are 

coming up, I believe, on Wednesday or Thursday of this week, 

and I will be glad to provide the hon. member the kinds of 

things that are going on in Saskatchewan to encourage farm 

chemical production to take place here as opposed to either 

down East or in some other country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Fuel Refund 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 

just prior to the October 20th election, you introduced a 

program in which it refunded 21 cents per gallon, or 4.6 cents 

per litre, on farm fuel, and you said it was to assist the farmers 

with their input costs. But shortly after the October election, in 

fact on December 23 as a Christmas present to the farmers, 

what you did is to cut it back very substantially from 21 cents to 

9 cents. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Premier, can the Premier explain why the 

farmers needed 21 cents in October, and after the election they 

only needed 9 cents? I ask the Premier . . . I ask the Premier, 

was that gain another election promise made and an election 

promise broken? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I really think it’s time that 

the NDP told the truth. Tell the truth. You tell the truth, my 

friend, and you tell it on health care and . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order. The Premier is attempting to answer the question, but he 

cannot do it if he’s interrupted immediately — if he’s 

interrupted immediately. I ask . . . Order, please. Order, please. 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let’s make it very, very 

clear that the NDP voted with us on the oil royalty program, and 

they’d helped and they agreed with the formula. They passed it, 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3360 

 

formula and on interest rate protection. 

 

As interest rates go down and as oil royalties go down and the 

price of oil goes down, Mr. Speaker, it’s tied to the formula for 

protection for farmers, and he knows that. As oil prices go up, 

the royalty program goes up to farmers; and as it goes down, 

obviously the program is designed to go down. And he will not 

admit it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact is you should tell the truth. Tell the truth about the 

program because you support the interest rate program, Mr. 

Speaker. And I am accusing, I am accusing the NDP of not 

telling the truth with respect to health care expenditures or 

royalty programs or interest rate protection programs, and they 

know that I am telling the facts, and they never tell the truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Manufacture of Farm Chemicals in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, today we want to talk about 

election promises made and election promises broken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — We’d like to go back to the issue of farm 

chemicals. Last October, Mr. Premier, you promised that 50 per 

cent of all chemicals used by Saskatchewan farmers would be 

manufactured in Saskatchewan by 1991. And you said that $10 

million a year would be spent in each of the next five years “as 

seed money for new manufacturing plants.” Well the seed 

money, Mr. Speaker, hasn’t seemed to germinate very well. 

 

Can the Premier tell us where the $10 million in seed money 

went this year — and it certainly didn’t go into the Tuxford 

operation, so we don’t want you talking about that — and what 

percentage of farm chemicals used in Saskatchewan this year 

were actually manufactured, compared to 1986, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted that the 

opposition has finally recognized agriculture and its importance 

in the province of Saskatchewan. I congratulate them on their 

line of questioning — at least they’re in the ballpark now. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, for the area . . . the hon. member 

comes from North Battleford. They don’t like to listen to the 

truth, Mr. Speaker. They’re not accustomed to telling the facts 

as they are, but I’m going to lay it out for them so that they 

understand. The hon. member is from North Battleford and he 

asked that question. 

 

Every single project that we have initiated in North Battleford 

region, whether it’s recreational vehicles, whether it’s 

agriculture jobs, packing plants, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the 

kind of things that we can do for agriculture, that member has 

voted against — he’s voted against, Mr. Speaker. And they he 

stands in his place and says, well for Heaven’s sakes, you have 

a goal, Mr. Premier, to have 50 per cent of the agriculture 

chemicals manufactured in the province of Saskatchewan. 

One, if we did do it, he’d be against it; secondly, if he ever did 

get in government, he nationalize it; and third, he just sit over 

there and criticize and have more jobs in agriculture than any 

constituency in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier didn’t hear the 

question. We’re asking about farm chemicals and you said, 

during the election campaign, you would put seed money in the 

amount of $10 million a year for the next five years so that 

chemicals for Saskatchewan farmers would be produced in 

Saskatchewan. What happened to the $10 million this year? 

And actually how much chemical was produced this year in 

Saskatchewan compared to 1986? Tell us that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I said, during 1986 and 

during the campaign, so the hon. members can hear it again — 

they hate to hear it, Mr. Speaker, because obviously they were 

not successful. In 1986 I said the goal for Saskatchewan over 

the next five years is to produce half the farm chemicals right 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s the goal, Mr. 

Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say to the hon. 

member . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. We can’t have a 

reasonable question period if the interruptions are kind of 

constant, coming from both sides of the House, and this time 

the Premier is being interrupted, and I would like to ask 

members to allow him to continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, our goal is to produce more 

and more, and eventually at least half of the farm chemicals that 

we use in the province of Saskatchewan right here in the 

province. Now one of the ways that we can do that is deregulate 

natural gas that allows us to produce nitrogen fertilizer here. 

One of the ways we can do that is expand on the new upgrader 

that’s here. One of the ways that we can do that, Mr. Speaker, is 

encourage more and more tariff-free trade between other 

countries so we could have access to wholesale supplies here in 

the province so that we could build here and not import, Mr. 

Speaker. And one of the most critical things that we can do, Mr. 

Speaker, is to encourage cost-reduction measures in the 

province of Saskatchewan so that in fact we can build and 

expand and create, not only for Saskatchewan and not only for 

Canada but indeed world-wide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Seed Money for High-Tech Research 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. New question, Mr. 

Speaker, to the Premier. Mr. Premier, on Friday, October 10 of 

last year you stood in Saskatoon and promised $10 million, an 

extra $10 million for each of the next five years, a total of $50 

million in seed money for the high-tech community of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, this year you have cut the budget 

for the Department of Science and Technology from $5.5 

million to $2.8 million, including other various funds associated 

with high-tech research. I ask you, Mr. Premier, how do you  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3361 

 

justify this betrayal of your election promise to the 

Saskatchewan high-tech community? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m happy the hon. member asked that 

question. I believe that if he’d have looked in The Globe and 

Mail last week he’d find out that Saskatoon, and indeed the 

province of Saskatchewan, is second in all of Canada in terms 

of new high-tech companies. And it’s been because, Mr. 

Speaker, we have encouraged them to invest here, expanding on 

the science. The fact that we have committed about $79 million 

new dollars to a new biotechnology, high-tech communication, 

that whole field, with a critical mass in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, 

is precisely what’s going on. 

 

When we can open up Innovation Place and we can have SED 

Systems expanding; when we can have others investing; so now 

we rank number two in the country and number two in jobs in 

the country, I mean the opposition has got nothing to complain 

about. We’ve got the second-lowest unemployment, the 

second-largest high-tech industry any place in Canada, and 

they’re standing up and saying, well, you haven’t got it all 

done, a five-year program in the first year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if we’re as fortunate in five years as we are 

in the first year, well, all I can say is that I look forward to the 

next five years. Maybe the opposition doesn’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask you, Mr. 

Premier: when are we going to see the first $10 million to the 

high-tech community, and not simply to other aspects of the 

economy the seed money you promised to the high-tech 

community, $10 million for each of the next five years? And 

you cut your commitment in half to the budget of the 

Department of Science and Technology. When are we going to 

see that $10 million this year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, don’t you find it interesting, 

Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member will stand and ask for $10 

million of government funds and will not acknowledge that up 

to $500 million of private funds are going in new paper mills, 

going into an upgrader, going into recreational vehicles, or into 

packing plants? He won’t talk about the private sector stuff. He 

wants another $10 million of government money on a five-year 

program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me point out to the hon. member: I promised in the next 

five years that we would have a program in this province that 

encourages high-tech development that we would rank among 

the best in the country, and that we would spend up to $10 

million a year over a five-year program. I promised that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

All I say to the hon. member: you watch — you watch us 

deliver on a five-year program in high technology, as well as 

farm chemicals or any other industry you want to talk  

about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Seed Money for Tourism 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my question again to the Premier. Twenty million dollars that 

he can’t find, that we can’t find — I’m going to ask him about 

another 10. And I want to ask him about his promise last year 

during the election campaign to create 7,500 new jobs in 

tourism by spending an extra $10 million each year over the 

next five years to expand that industry. 

 

Mr. Premier, this year’s Tourism budget is exactly the same as 

last year’s, and I would like to know where the $10 million 

went that you promised the tourism industry a year ago, or is 

this just another election promise made and another election 

promise broken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if you just . . . the hon. 

members know only about buying. They don’t know about 

building. During the campaign, Mr. Speaker, we never 

mentioned Queensbury Downs . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 

Unfortunately, I must interrupt once again — which I don’t like 

to do — and ask hon. members to please allow the Premier to 

answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, just to remind the hon. 

members. I never campaigned on the new Queensbury Downs 

either, but we made a significant contribution to that — 

significant contributions to the whole agribition complex, Mr. 

Speaker; a significant contribution, Mr. Speaker, to the new 

trade centre. Why doesn’t the member talk about the new trade 

centre going up in a hotel right here in downtown Regina? 

Would he mention that? Four season resorts destinations for the 

province of Saskatchewan — he doesn’t mention that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

All I can say is that when the private sector invests here along 

with our incentives, the NDP, who are against the private 

sector, won’t acknowledge it. It’s like the member from 

P.A.-Duck Lake won’t acknowledge Weyerhaeuser’s 

contribution — $500 million, and he doesn’t mention it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that we promised to see tourism 

grow, we promised to see farm manufacturing grow, we 

promised to see high technology grow and, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

running first or second in the country, and we’re going to 

continue to see that kind of success on into the next five years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that a financial 

commitment and financial commitment to any area is fairly 

elusive. I got a new question to the Premier about something 

perhaps a little more tangible. Mr. Premier, last year you 

promised to have a new tourism and hospitality institute in full 

operation by this fall. Well, Mr.  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3362 

 

Premier, the people can’t find it. And I’m asking you where this 

new institute is located. And I’d like to know, as well, when it 

opened its doors, or was this just another election promise made 

and another election promise broken? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, doesn’t seem to realize that it’s a partnership in 

Saskatchewan, and we do things with the private sector, with 

communities, with municipalities. 

 

And if you want to look at tourism, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan tourism industry is working with us. We’re 

putting together a board of directors so that we can have that 

kind of expansion. It isn’t just run, Mr. Speaker, like it used to 

be out of a Crown corporation for the whole province. It’s a 

partnership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re not trying to own farms; we’re not trying to nationalize 

businesses; we’re not trying to take over the uranium industry; 

we’re not trying to apply sanctions to people here. We want to 

see a partnership for growth, and that’s what you see in tourism 

and agriculture, processing and manufacturing. And the jobs 

record, Mr. Speaker, speaks for itself — the second best job 

record in Canada as a result of the things we’re doing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Proposed New Fertilizer Plant in Regina 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 

Premier — the member who is somewhat less than an expert on 

the truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to ask him about 

election promises made and about election promises broken, 

and so I want to ask about some of the economic development 

projects which he announced with such great fanfare prior to the 

last election. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, in April of 1986 you announced a $200 

million fertilizer plant which was to be constructed beside the 

Co-op upgrader here in Regina. Can you tell us what is the 

current status of that proposed fertilizer plant and when you 

expect it to open, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, from a political strategy 

point of view, I got to ask, what in the world are they doing in 

this question period, Mr. Speaker? They have walked into this 

one. I mean, they didn’t build an upgrader in the years, the 25 

years they were in government they never built one upgrader. In 

our first term we put it together and they’re against it. They’re 

against it. They said we’d never build a new paper mill, Mr. 

Speaker, and they’re against it. And now they’re asking where 

is the new fertilizer plan because they’re against that too. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, all I can say to the hon. member is you just keep 

your eyes wide open and you watch us build fertilizer plants in 

the province of  

Saskatchewan so that we can go back and say . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . paper mills, yes, Mr. Speaker, 

upgraders, yes; packing plants, yes — expansion. 

 

So the hon. member knows, and I could ask . . . Mr. Speaker, 

we looked very carefully with the Sask Wheat Pool, who 

explored it very carefully whether it would fit into their 

operation — and I hope he isn’t belittling the Pool — and they 

looked at their operation. They stood beside me and said, we 

want to explore this possibility, as have many others, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s exactly what you want to see. 

 

I don’t recall them coming to the NDP and saying, would you 

build this with us? They knew it wasn’t even in the cards, Mr. 

Speaker. The NDP might buy one after it was built, but they 

wouldn’t build a new one, and they wouldn’t encourage others 

to build it. And that’s why we’re on this side of the House and 

you’re reminiscing on that side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Bandage Factory for Swift Current 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, another one of those economic 

development projects, which you made a major announcement 

of, was the bandage factory at Swift Current. You said, during 

last October’s campaign, that there would be $12.5 million 

spent on a plant in Swift Current and it would start by the spring 

of 1987 and it would be completed and built by this fall. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, I ask you a very straightforward and simple 

question: can you tell us when this plant was officially opened 

because we seemed to have missed it? And if it wasn’t opened, 

can you explain to this House why you misled the public in 

Saskatchewan that way? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s 

becoming very clear why the NDP are not the CCF. Do you 

remember, Mr. Speaker, years and years ago, the former 

premier of Saskatchewan — the Hon. Tommy Douglas, the 

former premier of Saskatchewan, CCF premier — Tommy 

Douglas would at least have the courage to try and build. And 

he had tried to build this project and this project and this 

project. And the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are not in 

favour of trying to build, they’re in favour of either criticizing 

others who build or, Mr. Speaker, they will only nationalize 

what’s already built. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 

Order. Order, please. Order, please. I believe the Leader of the 

Opposition has the right to ask his question without immediate 

interruptions, and I ask for that favour. 

 

Vacancy in Saskatoon Eastview 

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3363 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, it’s been more than three and a half 

months since the PC member of the legislature for Saskatoon 

Eastview, Mr. Martineau, resigned. This has left 18,000 voters 

in Saskatoon Eastview without their own elected representative. 

Mr. Premier, why have you failed to call that by-election up to 

now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member can rest 

assured that there will be a by-election in Saskatoon Eastview, 

and he can also be rest assured that I will give him ample 

notice, and that I will give the public ample notice when that 

by-election will take place. And he knows that. He’s called 

by-elections when he sat in this chair, and it’s the responsibility 

of the Premier to do so, and I’ll be making the announcement at 

the appropriate time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Premier, you have spent this afternoon in question period 

saying how proud you are of your record, saying what a good 

record it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Premier, if you believe that, 

if you believe it’s a good record, why won’t you give the people 

of Saskatoon Eastview an opportunity to pass judgement on that 

record, and they will tell you whether it’s a good record or not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the same thing that 

happens after every general election; the NDP lose and they 

start calling for an election. Mr. Speaker, I mean I can 

understand why they want one. 

 

Last year, in 1985, they called for an election and they called 

for a by-election, and they called for a general election, and 

then they were defeated again. Mr. Speaker, they lost. And the 

honourable . . . the Leader of the Opposition says he’d be here 

for five more years; well what happened to your promise? 

 

You’re about to leave. We may even have to have a by-election 

in Regina Elphinstone. Okay. As a result, Mr. Speaker, I will 

call the election and I will decide when your by-election is 

ready. And they can call for more elections, Mr. Speaker; every 

single time they get defeated, Mr. Speaker, they ask for another 

election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 

hon. member from Moose Jaw North to please be quiet. I don’t 

think those kinds of interruptions are necessary or called for. 

 

Order, please. Order. I also ask the member for Regina 

Rosemont, and I don’t want interruptions from him, please. I 

think if all members would just co-operate, we wouldn’t have 

this scene in this House, and it doesn’t  

behold them. 

 

Order. Order. Order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 

students that have enrolled in a dental therapy course in 

Wascana have been — who were enrolled there a year ago — 

have now been reduced, I think, down to 16 in number. What is 

happening to them, though, at this stage, Mr. Minister, is that 

they are in need of from 2,500 to 2,700 school children on 

which to do their practicum so that they can properly complete 

their courses. 

 

Now all efforts by the faculty and the director at that school 

have only yielded 700 students. That’s all they can get at this 

stage, Mr. Minister. Now the parents, and of course the students 

themselves, find that they’re very anxious at this stage because 

they are unsure whether or not they will actually be able to 

complete this particular program. 

 

Now there were places available prior to your government’s 

decision to scuttle the school dental program; these students 

were available. Now what I want to know, Mr. Minister, is: will 

you stand good on behalf of these 16 students and assure them 

that you will do something to get those 2,500 to 2,700 school 

children on whom they can do their practicum? Will you assure 

us of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just to clarify, Mr. Chairman, the point 

that the member makes is as it relates to the people in training at 

Wascana who are — I believe it’s 16 students as you say — in 

the therapy program who are finishing their course, that they 

will need students to work on as they have in the past. Frankly, 

a similar situation exists at the dental college in Saskatoon 

where under the former program there were certain schools in 

the two cities that were just designated arbitrarily, said these 

schools shall . . . all students who receive their therapy services, 

and so on, shall receive it from the students at Wascana through 

the Wascana program, and the similar thing in Saskatoon. 

 

Now what we have done, and people will know this, is that 

when the registration forms and so on were sent out to parents 

across the province to say, choose your dentist that you would 

like to have the services from under the new program, we also 

sent a letter to the folks of Regina to say that this was available 

for them to choose. They could choose the dental therapy 

program in place of choosing dentist A, B, or C downtown or 

wherever they might be located. We have a number . . . there 

are not enough  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3364 

 

people who have chosen to do that with their children, to go to 

the therapy program rather than go to dentists. We know that 

there is another mailing going out with an encouragement to do 

just that, and that will be the case, and we don’t know to what 

extent that will have the desired effect. 

 

The point that you raise is a valid one, in the sense that it’s 

important that they do have, you know, someone to work on in 

order to develop the practicum side of their program. There are 

other options open to us, some of which may be to approach 

adolescents, and they may be approaching some adolescents 

who were formerly under their program to come that way, but 

that’s not determined at this time. 

 

But I’ll give the member the assurance that there will be the 

young people available, whatever age they are, there will be the 

young people available to deal with . . . or for the students to 

deal with in their training program. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, when a student enrols in a 

school, I look upon it myself as almost like a contract between 

the school and the student. And what I want is an assurance that 

the contract is not broken. And certainly it’s not the intention of 

the school to break it, but it’s because of the change in 

programs that this is happening. 

 

Would you consider going to the private sector to ask for 

assistance in producing the students? Because obviously a lot of 

these students, a lot of these children are now going to dentists 

in the private sector. We know we’re up to 700, and we still got 

close to 2,000 to go. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll go to your first point in terms of the 

nature of it, and you characterize it as a contract in terms of the 

assurance that when one enters a program that they enter the 

program and will receive the training, including the practical 

components of that program. And that’s fair and we recognize 

that. 

 

So, yes, you’ll have the assurance that there will be people to 

work on to the extent that it’s humanly possible for us to do 

that. Remember what you’re asking though. If you say for us to 

go to the various dentists in Regina, in this case, the Wascana 

program, and say, designate certain students to go over there, I 

mean, we are doing through encouragement to the extent that 

we can, and so on, for people to go to Wascana because there 

are dentists there at Wascana and on the site and under the 

supervision of professional dentists, and so on, and people need 

to know that. 

 

But the point here is, I don’t know how we can impose on 

parent A, B, or C to say, you must send your child there. And 

I’m not sure if that’s what you’re suggesting. Because we have 

said, as one of the aspects of this program, is that parents will 

and should have the right to choose the dentist that they take 

their child to. Parents, given that choice — and you’ve pointed 

out at just the argument that I’ve been making for some weeks 

— given the right to make that choice, the parents have chosen 

to register their children in private dentists’ practices. And 

they’re chosen to do that, and not a sufficient number have 

chosen to go to the Wascana program which is at . . . even 

though the Wascana program has professional dentists in  

the supervisory roles there. 

 

So we’re doing everything we can. We recognize the point that 

you make as it relates to being sure that the practical aspects of 

the program are in place. We will do that through whatever 

means we have, and certainly through increased encouragement 

for people to register in that area. There’s still time for that, by 

the way. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well I hope that you are able to get these 

children for them. In the event, Mr. Minister, that you’re just 

unable to generate the children necessary to complete the 

practicum, would you make a commitment to offer an alternate 

type of training for these students in the event that they are just 

unable to complete this or get their total program commitments 

and make their total commitment to the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, you have my commitment that . . . 

and they have, and they need to have the commitment of those 

of us in government, whether it’s myself in conjunction with the 

Department of Education, there will be . . . the practical aspect 

of their program which includes the opportunity to work with 

the young people, and so on. We’ll do everything we can to be 

sure that that takes place and to have alternate systems, and so 

on. We’ll make sure that that’s there. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to turn very briefly to 

another topic. I dealt with this in Environment estimates, and I 

asked the Minister of Environment. I want to ask you, as well, 

are you familiar with what is known as the 20th century 

disease? It’s a disorder — and it’s not . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, I’m not referring to that. It’s a disorder of 

the central nervous system and at least one other system, and 

it’s increasing, certainly increasing in frequency, and often 

results as . . . is most often, I believe, in Saskatchewan results 

after spraying season or after people are working a lot with 

chemicals or some other aspect of perhaps airborne or 

water-borne pollutants. 

 

I want to know whether you are recognizing this disease 

officially, and whether you’re doing any . . . taking any 

statistics in trying to set the basis for how to deal with this 20th 

century phenomenon. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ve just signalled for another of my 

officials to come down, so if you just bear with us for a minute 

or two we’ll have the response to whatever extent we have 

available to us today, okay? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Could I then turn to the next one. We’ll 

come back to this. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want 

to carry on in terms of our discussion of the children’s dental 

plan. And I believe that you probably got the same letter that we 

got, discussing some concerns about pediatric dentistry in 

Saskatchewan and, in particular, the discrepancy or the problem 

with the fee schedule that was negotiated between the 

Department of Health and the college of dental surgeons. 

 

(1445) 

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3365 

 

And as I understand it, Mr. Minister, for someone specializing 

in pediatric dentistry — and this is dentistry for children who 

have behaviour problems or may have physical disabilities — 

there is only a 5 per cent differential between the general fee 

schedule and what a practising specialist in pediatric dentistry 

might be eligible to receive. 

 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that we 

only have three pediatric dentists in Saskatchewan and only one 

of those dentists practising full time, I’m wondering, Mr. 

Minister, if you can advise me what arrangements have been 

made to improve the fee schedule for a dentist practising in a 

specialty such as pediatric dentistry, in order that we can ensure 

that we have those kinds of specialists available to 

Saskatchewan children. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just in answer to the question: yes, 

we’re aware of the issue that you raise. As you will know, 

under this plan and under the dental plan, the prior dental plan, 

the fee schedule is determined by the college of dental surgeons 

of the province, and that’s the way that it’s always worked. It 

worked then, and it works now. 

 

Our role in that is to deal with the total amount or the amount 

per student enrolled, and so on. But I . . . just to answer your 

question more specifically, I’m aware that within the college of 

dental surgeons there have been — and I think as late as late 

last week I think there was another meeting of it — they are 

attempting to come to some resolution of that within their own 

college as it relates to the amount that will be charged by 

specialists, or the amount of mark-up, or whatever term we 

might want to use there. 

 

But I’m confident that there will be a resolution of that within 

the college, but I’m also aware of the issue that has been raised 

by some individual specialists in letters to myself and probably 

to yourself as well. And I, at this point, certainly will be leaving 

it within the college to come to that determination but at the 

same time monitoring what the results will be if they’re not able 

to come to a determination. I’m very confident that they will. In 

fact, I feel very strongly that they will come to a determination 

on it. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, just to recap here. We only 

have three pediatric dentists in Saskatchewan. Only one of them 

is a full-time dentist. The other two practise in the College of 

Dentistry in Saskatoon. 

 

As you are probably aware, pediatric dentists deal with 

behaviour-disordered young people and young people with 

serious physical disabilities or physical disabilities. And it 

doesn’t make much sense in terms of time allocation to only 

receive a 5 per cent differential from what a general practitioner 

would receive when you’re dealing with someone that may take 

some time to treat. 

 

And so I guess I’m interested in knowing if the college of 

dental surgeons can’t come to some sort of arrangement with 

these specialties. What are you as Minister of Health prepared 

to do to ensure that we don’t lose this kind of specialty from 

Saskatchewan? As I understand it, there are only 130 pediatric 

dentists in the country. Only three of  

those are located in Saskatchewan. Of those three, only one is a 

full-time practitioner treating young people. And I’m just 

wondering: as the Minister of Health, what are you prepared to 

do so that we don’t lose those specialists? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I guess I am sensitive to the issue that 

you raise, and I would say that, as I have said to you before, just 

a few minutes ago, I believe there will be a resolution to the 

problem. 

 

You ask a further question along the lines of, what am I 

prepared to do if that is not the case? And I would just say to 

you today, and to them — whoever will read this record — but 

certainly I’m prepared to bring the two factions — I don’t know 

if that’s the right term really — but to bring the specialists and 

the executive of the college and whatever together, to be sure 

there is a resolution for the benefit of the young people who 

need that specialized service in this province. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. The other 

day when we were speaking about what sort of training 

arrangements were made to ensure that there were more training 

positions in the dental hygienists’ program, you indicated that 

there were 30 positions at Wascana Institute. I’m wondering if 

you will still maintain that position, Mr. Minister, that there are 

30 hygienists’ positions at the Wascana Institute. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m informed that there are 30 

hygienists in training now at Wascana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m informed that there 

are only 24 hygienists in training at Wascana. I’m informed that 

there were only six additional positions created after the dental 

therapists were fired by your government. And I just want you 

to put it on record, because there seems to be some dispute 

between what you’re saying and what people in the community 

are saying. 

 

So if you could just confirm how many positions were there 

previous, how many new positions were created, that would be 

most helpful in terms of advising the public of Saskatchewan 

what you’re doing to assist a few — and I say a few — dental 

therapists in getting into alternate training and retraining. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I’m informed that the numbers that 

I’ve given you are the accurate ones from the officials of the 

health sciences program at Wascana. Last year’s program had 

12 in hygiene, dental hygiene, and there are 30 now in training. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I just refer you to Hansard on 

August 12. When I questioned the Minister of Education, he 

advised me that there were 24 positions in the dental hygienist 

program, so I gather you’ve created another six positions. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another issue, and I guess I 

see it as a broader issue, and that’s the whole area of preventive 

health or wellness policy. I think it’s quite clear that if you look 

at the provincial budget and the allocation of money in the 

provincial budget in terms of the health care allocation, very, 

very little is spent on  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3366 

 

preventive health care. 

 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, to what extent do you 

believe that work place injury is an important health issue? Do 

you believe that illnesses, diseases, and injuries of the work 

place, on the farm, in the shop, in the plant, in the bush, or in 

the hospital are a significant health issue? And if you do, Mr. 

Minister, I’d be interested in knowing what your government is 

doing about this particular problem, health care problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Before I get to the specific points about 

work place injury, which I agree with the member is part of a 

wider and a very broad issue as it relates to this whole very 

large enterprise which is the health or the well-being of our 

citizens, I guess if one was to . . . if we ever had the luxury — 

we being the public or all of us in government, or whatever — 

of starting from square one again, sort of thing, and saying 

where would be the emphasis, it would certainly be in this kind 

of area, there’s no question. 

 

And we need to build more and more toward the preventative 

side and promote wellness and all of those kinds of things that 

you’ve talked about. I’ll get to the specifics of what’s 

happening in the work place in a moment. The analogy I’ll use 

is one that, you know, and I’ve talked to a lot of health 

professionals, as you have, and it’s sort of like what happens 

within the confines of a particular hospital. 

 

(1500) 

 

You use that analogy, well, there are so many things that can 

happen in that hospital in terms of better ways to spend the 

money in terms of prevention and so on, the attention is always 

at the emergency room door because that’s where the here and 

the now and everything is . . . the attention is always there. 

 

And that’s sort of what it is if you take that analogy and put it to 

the broader health care field where we’ve got this huge amount 

of dollars to be spent. We’ve got this tremendous pressure from 

all of the various areas on this department and on the whole 

enterprise, the health enterprise, whether it’s this department or 

all the health care association and all the other groups out there. 

 

And you say, well, to what extent can we get this very large 

ship turned around so that we can point the bow in a another 

direction? — and that direction being preventative health and 

wellness and so on. For example, I think a few years ago — not 

very many years ago, frankly — if you were to ask someone to 

put up one picture or one image, or to describe one image that 

would best describe a good health care system, I think a few 

years ago it would have been an operating theatre with all the 

most modern equipment and everybody with the, you know, all 

of the professionals around and carrying on whatever duties 

they do there. 

 

And I would submit to the member and to other members of the 

committee that that has changed in a significant way over the 

past few years, number of years, to the point where that image, 

if you had one image of people’s attitude towards health, would 

be an image not of a  

hospital or an operating theatre or doctors gloved and gowned 

and so on, but it would be an image of better nutrition, or health 

food store . . . I don’t know about a health food store in 

particular, but the right kinds of foods, maybe a pair of jogging 

shoes, or that kind of thing, a sweat suit, activity — all the 

kinds of things which we know now, and which the wider 

population is becoming more and more aware of that contribute 

to better health and to wellness. 

 

So those are the kinds of changes that have taken place in our 

society and the kind of changes we as a department and we as a 

society should be encouraging in a greater way, the kinds of 

things that I would like to see if I would have a sort of a, I don’t 

know, for the lack of a better word, a vision for the department; 

I would like to see that ship turn around at a more rapid pace 

than it has. And that’s something that is very hard to do. We 

need a lot of water to be able to turn it in because it’s very large 

boat. 

 

Now to get to the specifics, work place injury and the kinds of 

things that are happening. Some of them are things that have 

happened for a good long period of time and continue, and there 

is excellent work in this area. 

 

I think of things that are being done by the safety council, who 

does receive some funding from the provincial government. The 

Saskatchewan Safety Council does excellent work in this kind 

of area in terms of prevention of work place injury and 

advertising and so on, increasing awareness. 

 

Workmen’s compensation board is a similar area, for obvious 

reasons. The advertisements that come from the large Crowns 

which are associated with government — Sask Power, for 

example — and we can all see the ads that, you know, in our 

mind’s eye, the ads that they use in terms of farm accidents, and 

so on, obviously in their case related to electrical power lines, 

and so on, but those ads go beyond that in terms of encouraging 

people to be careful. SaskTel and the others. 

 

The Environment department has a responsibility as well for 

issues as it relates to the environmental health and then the 

health of people through the environment, a little bit related to 

what your colleague from Prince Albert was talking about 

earlier. Those are the kinds of things that come to mind. 

 

And then the one other one, of course, which is very prevalent, 

and that is what is being done in the alcohol and drug abuse 

area as it relates to the work place, as it relates to employee 

programs. It’s not just within government but the kind of things 

that are being encouraged through SADAC (Saskatchewan 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission), an agency involved 

with this department in terms of employee programs in the 

work place for people who have some significant difficulty with 

abuse of drugs and alcohol, and so on. So that’s just a bit of an 

overview of some of the things that are under way. 

 

I’ll reiterate once again, if we could ever have the luxury of 

starting from a new point, sort of thing, and turning more 

quickly, I would very much like to see this ship turn toward the 

preventative side in a faster way than it is now.  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3367 

 

But one of the ways that that can happen, and one of the ways 

in which I’m encouraged, is the public attitude that that is the 

way to go, and there’s more and more of the public are very 

much aware of that sort of thing. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I guess, Mr. Minister, I don’t think we 

have to sort of start all over again. I don’t think that that’s 

necessary. When the children’s dental program began, I believe 

it cost about $165 per child when you considered the start-up 

costs of the program and the cost per child remained fairly high, 

and then it started to decrease to such an extent that when the 

program was terminated by yourself it cost about $90 per child 

for them to be seen by a dental therapist and all of the other 

dental workers in the dental program. 

 

I guess my point in this is that when you start dealing with 

prevention it is expensive, initially, but over time you start to 

garner some kind of reward. As the children’s dental program, 

Saskatchewan went from the worst dental health amongst 

children and young people in Canada to the very best, and that 

took some time. It was expensive, initially, but over time the 

cost decreased dramatically. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I’d like to know whether you know how 

many work place injuries there were in 1986 and what that cost 

the people of this province through workers’ compensation 

fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — While I understand the question being 

related to health, certainly it is, I mean, this department cannot 

say, well that’s not something that, you know, that work place 

injuries and those kinds of statistics aren’t related to what we 

do; certainly they can be. Just in the way in which the statistics 

are kept, they’re kept by Workers’ Compensation Board. The 

reason I just asked the Clerk the question here as it relates to 

Labour estimates, is if they’ve gone through here. I believe they 

have. 

 

But that’s a question better directed . . . but I won’t pass that off 

and say, well here, direct it to my colleague, the Minister of 

Labour, at some appropriate time if they’ve already gone 

through. What I will say is that I can bring on that information. 

But I don’t have it here, and we didn’t come prepared to discuss 

those statistics, but I can certainly provide it to the member. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, as the Minister of Health, 

I’m disappointed that you don’t know the answer and your 

officials don’t have the information. For your information, and 

we can only go on 1986 because your government hasn’t yet 

tabled the 1986-87 report, there were 16,621 work place 

injuries. Mr. Minister, that cost $90 million. That’s what it cost 

the workers’ compensation program — $90 million. 

 

Mr. Minister, last year there were 38,000 workdays lost due to 

permanent work place injury. That’s more workdays lost than 

anything associated with a strike or lock-out or those kinds of 

labour disputes that you people like to talk about and get so 

upset about. We had 38,000 workdays lost due to work place 

injury. And those are permanent injuries, Mr. Minister, they’re 

not the temporary kind. They are the long-term kind. They’re 

not a broken arm, they’re not a burn, but they’re permanent.  

And, Mr. Minister, I understand that that cost the Saskatchewan 

economy, alone, $4 million last year. And we’re not talking 

about pay-outs from the workers’ compensation plan, we’re 

talking about lost revenue for the people of this province 

through the economy. 

 

And as the Minister of Health I would think, sir, that you would 

be concerned about that. That that is a major amount of money, 

$90 million, just for workers’ compensation; $4 million lost 

from the economy. That’s a major, major expenditure. 

 

So I guess my question to you is, what are you doing as the 

Minister of Health — and you are the Minister of Health — 

along with your colleague from the Department of Labour, what 

are you doing to reduce the number and severity of work place 

health problems in Saskatchewan? 

 

I note, Mr. Minister, that since you’ve taken office the number 

of occupational health and safety staff have been cut 

dramatically. And that, Mr. Minister, is a major preventive 

health measure when you have people in the work place 

ensuring that we have proper occupational health and safety 

procedures so that people don’t get injured. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just want to clarify a couple of things 

with the member. When I said . . . you know, when I was 

checking on whether Labour estimates had gone through, I 

asked the member this question — because while you can say, 

well it’s your responsibility as Minister of Health — which I 

agree — we need to co-operate very fully with the Workers’ 

Compensation Board and others who will carry on the programs 

that are there. And there are some very excellent ones in this 

province that have been ongoing for a long time, and certainly 

they are updated as time goes on. 

 

What this department provides to workers’ compensation — 

they tap into our data in terms of lost time injury and the cost to 

the health system and all of that sort of thing. And they use that 

data in terms of developing the statistics, some of which you 

cite here from another year, and in terms of them developing the 

programs that they see are most appropriate for that year or for 

the future if there are some alarming trends changing in one 

way or the other. 

 

I guess I could ask the member: did you raise this with the 

Minister of Labour when he was up with Workers’ 

Compensation Board? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, I talked to him. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, because I think it’s important if 

it’s the issue, that would be the appropriate place to have raised 

it, and when they went through here — Workers’ Compensation 

Board. That’s what a responsible member does. If you’re 

interested in an area, ask the appropriate minister because I 

don’t have it. But I have said to you that I will provide any kind 

of data, if you have specific data from there — since it is gone 

by — that you neglected to ask for at that time, I’ll certainly 

provide it or undertake to. 

 

We did not come with the Department of Labour staff  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3368 

 

today or the Workers’ Compensation Board staff or any of that 

sort of thing. And I’ll just give you the undertaking that we’ll 

provide some of those kinds of things if they’re pertinent to the 

discussion here. 

 

Having said that, I want to say that they do run excellent 

programs through the Workers’ Compensation Board, and they 

do have excellent up-to-date data, and they do run excellent 

programs for people’s awareness of work place injury. 

 

But I just say to the member, I don’t want to diminish in any 

way, I don’t want to diminish in any way the importance of this 

issue, of work place injury and the costs of work place injury to 

the taxpayer through the utilization of the health system. I 

understand that that’s true. The points you raise are pertinent 

ones, and there’s little more I can say about that except to say 

that the most appropriate place is there. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think you seriously 

misunderstand workers’ compensation because they do not run 

any kind of program to reduce occupational disease and 

injuries, Mr. Minister. The Department of Labour has an 

occupational health and safety division where they have some 

staff people that are to go into the work place and train workers 

on how to prevent occupational health and safety injuries. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I get the distinct impression that you’re 

passing the buck, and I realize that we have a Department of 

Labour, and I realize that we have a member responsible for the 

Workers’ Compensation Board, the member from Melville, but 

I’m asking you: what is your department, what’s your 

department doing to reduce the number and severity of work 

place injuries? 

 

(1515) 

 

And I note that the member from Maple Creek, in her typical 

snide way, has to enter into the debate, and I would ask her to 

bring her estimates forward so we could have a little go at her, 

because I note that she regularly ducks question period and very 

seldom . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. I do not 

believe that the minister is the topic of conversation at this time, 

so please get into the Health again. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Bring her to order. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I do not expect this ruling to be debated. 

Now would the member please continue asking questions 

concerning the Department of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In coming to . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. 

Chairman, a couple of things. The member says that workers’ 

compensation does not conduct programs in this area. I am 

informed by people here that they run significant programs in 

that area. I don’t think you — you know, there are very few 

work places in the province where there are not those, the 

posters and the kinds of things and the reminders that are out 

there from WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) for the things 

that they do. I believe that they do a good job and have for a 

good period of time. 

That’s not to say — and I don’t want you to get away with, in 

any way, shape, form, the suggestion that I’m trying to pass the 

buck, to use your term. It’s not the case. And in fact if you 

would have listened carefully, what I said is, if you have 

specific information which you neglected to try to get from my 

colleague when his estimates were up, which was the 

appropriate place to ask the questions, which you didn’t do, I 

have said to you, and I said earlier in a mode of some 

significant co-operation, that I’ll try to get those and hand over 

whatever information we have, so that you can see the stats and 

the kinds of programs and some samples of their programs and 

whatever else you might like, and you can have that. 

 

So all I say to the member is, I think there are significant 

programs; I know there are significant programs that go on 

there. There is excellent co-operation between our department 

because we recognize the point that you made earlier, that it has 

significant impact upon the Department of Health and the 

expenditures of the Department of Health in terms of the 

wellness of our citizens, if you like, and we take that seriously 

and continue to. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you talked about co-operation 

between your departments. I’m wondering how your 

department is co-operating with the Department of Labour to 

reduce work place injuries. Can you give us some information 

in terms of how you co-operate with other departments in this 

particular field which can prevent major expenditures of money 

if work place accidents and injuries are reduced? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The role that this department has now, 

and had in years gone by, before our government and in the 

days of your government and so on, is that we become . . . well 

we are, for obvious reasons, their only source of hospital and 

medical data, the very stuff that they need in order to develop 

the programs that they will need to carry on. We co-operate in 

every way with that, and they are very pleased, I’m told, in the 

way in which that’s done. 

 

And we continue to encourage them, as we always will continue 

to encourage them in the programs that they carry on to 

discourage people from practices in the work place which can 

lead to injury and then therefore cost to the health system, but 

certainly personal costs as well in terms of time away from 

work and all of the rest of that sort of thing, trauma, and all the 

other things associated with serious injury. So, sure we 

encourage them in that area, and we co-operate in every way 

possible. And we recognize that that’s a cost factor without 

question, but I don’t think it’s fair to say that there are not 

programs because there are significant programs in this 

province to discourage work place injury. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I know there are a few work 

place programs, but in terms of my familiarity with them they 

tend to be union programs where the union has gotten involved 

in occupational health and safety issues. And of course, that’s 

beneficial to those workers, but it would be appreciated, I think, 

if there was some decision by the government, in co-operation 

with the Department of Health and the Department of Labour, 

to launch an  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3369 

 

extensive work place prevention program where we could 

prevent and move towards preventing work place injury which 

costs the treasury of our province a great deal of money each 

year, and it cost workers’ compensation a great deal each year, 

and it costs our economy a great deal of money each year. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I guess I’m disappointed that you talk about 

how the Department of Health is helping in a technical way, 

through statistics and data base and that sort of thing, the 

Workers’ Compensation Board. But it’s disappointing that 

you’re not doing more in terms of working with the Department 

of Labour to prevent work place injury. 

 

I want to go on to another issue, and that’s the whole issue of 

suicide. And I note that in Saskatchewan in 1985 there were 

133 suicides, and that’s a decrease from 1984. Among the 35 to 

44 age group and also the 25 to 34 age group, suicide was the 

third leading cause of death. And among the 15 to 24 age group, 

suicide was the second leading cause of death. In 1985, in 

Saskatchewan, suicide accounted for 4,984 life-years lost. I’m 

wondering, Mr. Minister, whether you see this as a major health 

issue amongst young people, and whether or not your 

department is working along with community organizations and 

community service groups to try and do something in terms of 

preventing suicides in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have someone from the mental health 

branch coming down for the member from Nutana’s question. I 

wonder if I could revert back now to the answers to the member 

from Prince Albert. The member from Prince Albert . . . you 

asked some questions a few moments ago as it relates to what 

has been dubbed “20th century disease.” And you made the 

comments, I believe, that you know it related to certain times of 

the year in our province and so on in terms of use of chemicals 

and some of these kinds of things. 

 

I want to tell you that there’s no consensus that we have been 

— I say we have been — the medical profession has been for 

some time trying to come to some grips with this. There are no 

statistic kept as it relates to this because there’s no consensus 

within the profession, within the medical profession, as to what 

constitutes this disease or what causes it. We do recognize 

special cases where patients manifest total allergy reactions, and 

that’s really what this is. It’s a total allergy sort of reaction, and 

that’s what has been called 20th century disease, apparently. 

 

The kinds of funding that we provide, you know, are just the 

normal ones. If someone . . . to general practitioners to treat this 

in whatever ways, there’s some consensus the treatment would 

work. In terms of specialists, we provide that help for treatment 

as well. There are some specialized out-of-province programs 

for treatment where prior approval is received from MCIC 

(Medical Care Insurance Commission) through just the normal 

referral pattern. Some doctors will refer someone to another 

program outside the province if they feel that there could be 

some help, and, of course, through the drug plan, where the 

patient suffers complete allergy, or complete food allergy, 

whatever, which now is this disease. 

I know I haven’t been very definitive, and the reason I’m not is 

because I don’t think you’ll find anyone in the profession who 

is very definitive, or certainly very definitive in a way that is 

accepted by the profession itself. So obviously there’s a good 

deal of work to be done in this area. But the question that you 

raise is a valid one in the sense that there are people in the 

province, both in the profession and outside, and lay people, as 

you and I are, who are discussing it here today, who will have 

some concerns as it relates to this. And obviously there are 

some theories, and they are just that, now — theories about 

what the causes are and how they relate to this province. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I’m aware, Mr. Minister, of the elusiveness 

of defining the disease and subsequently, of course, the almost 

impossibility of dealing with it. And I know that the medical 

profession across Canada has tried to attack this, but really I 

guess they have not been able to come up with anything very 

tangible, although when you talk to parents or relatives of 

members that are afflicted by it, then they’ll tell you it’s quite 

real. 

 

And I think that that’s where perhaps a role of a department like 

yours may be able to help out. Perhaps some seed money in 

terms of establishing a bit of a research depot so that we can at 

least monitor the occurrences that are identified — monitor the 

occurrences that are identified. 

 

Whether or not there is official recognition, I don’t know 

whether that matters. I suppose just by putting some seed 

money to it, and so that eventually if you can identify the 

occurrences we can work towards training people in it and 

eventually, if necessary, developing training facilities. 

 

And I say this because we now have estimates that in Ontario 

it’s between 20 and 50,000 people who are afflicted by it, so 

you can take perhaps a proportional amount of people in our 

population. 

 

And I leave that with you, Mr. Minister. I know there are no 

definitive answers, but I would like to see you make a 

commitment at least to consult with the Department of the 

Environment and try to establish at least a preliminary strategy, 

because this thing is not going to escape us, it’s going to get 

worse, if anything. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Your suggestion as it relates to research 

being done here, for example, and so on, is, frankly, a valid one. 

And we have in the Health budget on an annual basis . . . there’s 

the Saskatchewan health research board, or whatever. But there 

is money available for . . . And the reason it’s just that is 

because someone, or a group of practitioners, or a group of 

researchers who are moving in an area that’s elusive, as you 

say, and that may have some significant ramifications in our 

province because of some of the things that we have here, can 

apply to that and get some research. So there is that pool of 

what we’ll call seed money, to use your term, that is available, 

and anybody who would be into that kind of research would 

certainly be looked upon favourably to receive that kind of 

thing and to get on with the kind of research. 

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3370 

 

There’s no question, when something is this sort of 

controversial within the profession in terms of trying to get a 

handle on it, the research will spring up here and there. And we 

all know as well that research money is not the easiest thing to 

come by. But that would be looked upon favourably in this 

province. 

 

The issue that the Health critic raised as it relates to suicide in 

the province is one obviously that the Department of Health and 

the mental health branch is always very — well, interested 

would be the wrong term, but are very involved in that whole 

area. 

 

I will say that there are some positive signals, however small. 

The rate of suicide is slowly declining. Just to give you some 

numbers, some comparative figures: in 1981 there were 17.7 

per 100,000; and in ‘85 there were 13 per 100,000. Obviously 

one is too many, but as you watch the trends — and these are 

the kinds of trend lines that become important in monitoring 

whether any programs we have are successful, or at least we 

hope that they can be. 

 

We’ve expanded our counselling skills, I’m told. And we’ve 

offered — and through our department staff they’ve been 

offering more and more what we will call management forums 

on stress management and that kind of . . . in that sort of area 

because it’s stress-related very often, some of these things. 

 

(1530) 

 

And I will say another thing as it relates to SADAC 

(Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission). We 

often come back to SADAC and the alcoholic and drug abuse 

commission as it relates to so many issues within health, and 

here’s another example. SADAC has an expanded and 

increased role in this area for the last couple of years, but 

certainly now more since the initiatives have come in, since last 

December, in terms of the kinds of money that’s available to 

SADAC. They had two major conferences in the province 

where they dealt strictly with this issue of suicide, in this case 

obviously related to drug abuse and overdoses and so on, so 

that’s an important role. 

 

We had a project at Yorkton called the Yorkton suicide project, 

which was within the mental health branch, and as a result of 

that there’s just very recently, within a matter of a week or two 

ago, there was a . . . and this is a kind of example of the kind of 

things that our folks will do around the province. There was a 

group of 150 teachers in the Yorkton region who just had a 

major seminar on the methods of identifying the danger signals 

and the kinds of things which people that are working with 

individuals on a daily basis out there should be aware of in 

terms of identifying — well I guess the best term is danger 

signals and the ways in which we can prevent this horrible 

circumstance. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I just want to 

remind you it’s the second leading cause of death amongst 

young people between the ages of 15 and 24. And it represents, 

I believe, of all of the deaths of young people in that age 

category, it represents 20.6 per cent. So  

it’s significant and it’s serious, and I realize that there are some 

teachers in the province that are very concerned about it and are 

starting up programs where they look for the danger signals and 

start identifying some of those behaviours that can be associated 

with suicidal tendencies. 

 

I was interested in knowing what your department is doing. And 

I realize that through clinics like MacNeill Clinic and through 

youth services on College Drive in Saskatoon, which is funded 

by the Department of Health, that those programs are dealing 

with young people and trying to help young people sort out 

some of their problems along with their families. 

 

But I was wondering whether or not you have any kind of high 

profile program planned in the year ahead so that the issue can 

be given some profile in Saskatchewan, because I’m not sure 

that the general public realizes the extent of the problem; and 

whether you will be planning some conferences to bring people 

together from around the province, representing various fields 

of authority, so that the issue can be . . . we can start dealing 

with the issue in a public way so that young people realize that 

we as legislators and people “in authority” have concern about 

that particular issue. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just want to point out — and I did in a 

very brief sort of way before — some of the things that have 

gone on and that are continuing to go on. There is more 

emphasis on this area now than there has been, I guess, 

probably ever, within the department and within the society. 

And like I say, the incidence is dropping every so slightly, and 

that’s an encouraging trend line. 

 

I think it’s important to point out though that the belief of the 

professionals in the field, and of others, and I think I share this, 

is that the best method of approaching a problem like this is to 

direct your efforts very, very substantially at the . . . what we’ll 

call the, you know, the “at risk” groups, and where you can 

reach them most, you know, in the best possible way. And 

that’s obviously done, as it relates to young people to whom 

you refer here. 

 

And one thing that’s significant in this is, in the division 3, the 

new health curriculum in division 3 in our school system pays 

. . . well the only time it’s ever paid attention, frankly . . . I 

remember the old curriculum, and I don’t think it paid any 

attention at all to anything like stress management or the kind of 

things that, you know, the pressures, peer pressures in the most 

significant sense. They just talked about the adolescence or the 

peer pressure thing, but not in a wider sense. 

 

And that new curriculum and some of the materials that are 

available through collaboration of the Department of Education 

curriculum developers and our department here is significant. 

And some of the things I mentioned earlier in terms of dealing 

directly, in terms of directing our efforts at those who are in 

best position to be involved in prevention of this kind of thing, 

and that is, to deal with, for example, teachers, people who 

work on a daily basis, you know, with young people and, I 

might say here, with young people of native ancestry because 

it’s statistically true that the incidence is higher there. 

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3371 

 

And so we have to direct our efforts, our money, our programs, 

our whatever we have, and resources, at prevention in those 

areas rather than some — what, I think, to use your term — a 

high profile thing which comes to mind, television programs or 

those kinds of things, which I’m not sure would be as effective 

as directed efforts at those areas. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I wasn’t talking about a 

“feeling good campaign” or some sort of awareness campaign 

on television. 

 

I guess what I was talking about was the commitment on behalf 

of the Department of Health to make suicide prevention an 

important priority. And I recognize the Department of Health is 

a huge department with a number of different functions. 

 

I think that if we’re talking about prevention, and very little of 

the budget is spent on prevention, that when you look at work 

place injury prevention, suicide prevention, and a number of 

other areas of prevention, that that is money well spent. We 

tend to treat the acute care side of health in a . . . We give more 

money to the acute care side of health, and I guess that’s the 

way it has to be. But I think that we need to start looking at 

prevention into those areas that cost us all a great deal of 

money, but which very little emphasis is put on in terms of 

expenditures, public expenditure, and commitment from the 

Department of Health to prevent things like suicide or work 

place injury. 

 

There’s another issue, Mr. Minister, that I think is a broader 

issue in terms of prevention, and I had the opportunity to review 

some statistics. And I note that the neonatal death rates in 

Saskatchewan has gone up since 1981. We used to, Mr. 

Minister, be below the Canadian average of neonatal death 

rates; and that is the mortality rate for babies under four weeks. 

And our rates used to be below those for Canada, and they no 

longer area. And I note that each year they’ve been going up: in 

‘82, the nation or the Canadian rate was 5.9, our rate was 6.4; 

1983, Canada rate 5.5, Saskatchewan rate 5.8; 1984, Canada 

rate 5.2, Saskatchewan rate 5.6; and in 1985 — and this is the 

last year that I was able to get data on — 5.2 for Canada and 6.8 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that we would all agree that infant mortality is often 

used as a proxy indicator for overall basic good health, overall 

basic good health amongst our population. And good health 

deals with income and diet and family hygiene and provision of 

basic public services or basic health services. And I’m 

wondering if your Department of health has looked into the 

problem of neonatal mortality rates in Saskatchewan and 

whether you see it as a significant health care issue for people 

in Saskatchewan, and what you’re doing about it, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The issue that you raise is a good one. 

There’s always two sides, and you’re on the prevention side. I 

just want to put a plug in here, I guess, and it’s important that 

we do for the good work that’s done at both . . . at the neonatal 

unit in Saskatoon, at the University, and the one at the General 

here in Regina. Because a good deal of what they do is not only 

the treatment but the tremendous follow-up that comes from  

there. And I know you’re aware of it, and I am certainly, of the 

follow-up that’s done by the people who work in that unit with 

the very young babies that go through that system and, in fact, 

when they leave, they call them graduates, and they follow 

them on into their life beyond. 

 

A couple of areas we have money available, and we have been 

increasing this in the last while in terms of money available to 

groups like the Native Women’s Association in Regina and 

Saskatoon, in those two centres for programs which they will 

conduct among their . . . especially the young people, you 

know, their very young mothers, and so on, in terms of 

promoting the healthiest babies possible and all of that thing 

which is extremely important, and especially dealing with the 

youngest mothers that we have, which in many cases are very, 

very young. 

 

And we have last year given a commitment to the Institute on 

the Prevention of Handicaps which is headquartered in 

Saskatoon, whose mandate is very much just this kind of thing 

in terms of . . . and their focus is on prevention, and they deal 

with all of the pre-natal sort of things, you know, as do many 

other programs. 

 

(1545) 

 

So yes, we recognize the area that you raise. Certainly one of 

the issues that I think is important to recognize is, as technology 

has increased and as the neonatal units and some of these units 

have been increasing their ability to save these very young 

babies, you know, there’s certainly a marked drop in the 

number of babies who do not make it because of premature 

birth and other things. So there are some improvements there, 

but certainly it’s an issue that, in terms of general health of a 

wider society and so on, that has to be watched, and I agree 

with you to some extent on some of your earlier comments. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not quite clear from 

your answer why it is that Saskatchewan has a average higher 

than the Canadian rate, and it seems to have gone up since 

1981. I would be interested in knowing whether or not you have 

an explanation for that, but it doesn’t appear as though you do. 

 

I’d like to now turn to the community health services branch, 

and as you know, this is the, what I call the prevention branch. 

This branch does a lot of work in terms of preventing illness. 

 

And I note, Mr. Minister, when we look at the budget, subvote 

8 in the Department of Health estimates, that we see that the 

expenditure for the branch has been reduced from 17.4 million 

to $17.2 million, and the staff complement has gone from 368.2 

person-years to 347 person-years. 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan health 

services branch is preventive in nature, and much of it is 

designed to reduce further demands on our health care system, 

and a major part of its work is directed towards child health 

services. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think we know that pre-natal courses for 

expectant parents is a good preventive measure, that  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3372 

 

those pre-natal courses assist parents, expecting parents, on how 

to ensure that they have proper nutrition. And they do all of 

those kinds of things that are necessary to prepare parents for 

parenthood. 

 

Now I note from a clipping in the Regina Leader-Post that 

pre-natal courses are being dropped or put on hold because of a 

shortage of public health nurses. Now this is according to the 

Saskatchewan Public Health Nurses’ Association. And I believe 

that they are talking about a problem that many positions in the 

10 public health regions have gone unfilled as nurses have quit 

or retired. 

 

And she talks about a problem in the area of Assiniboia, this 

woman that is being interviewed by the Regina Leader-Post, I 

believe. Now she said, as a result of those shortages, public 

health nurses are having to not vaccinate children as a priority 

because there is a shortage of nurses. 

 

I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what you are doing to ensure that 

we have pre-natal classes not only in urban Saskatchewan but in 

rural Saskatchewan as well. I note that your executive director 

of the community health services branch said that the 

Department of Health did consider the idea of eliminating the 

pre-natal program when it was cutting costs last spring but that 

no final decision has been made. 

 

Now I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, what’s the position of the 

Department of Health? Are expectant parents in this province 

going to have access to pre-natal courses or aren’t they? Are 

pre-natal courses going to have to be purchased? Is this another 

deterrent fee that you’re implementing, Mr. Minister? What 

exactly is the position of the Department of Health when it 

comes to the provision of pre-natal courses to Saskatchewan 

families? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I saw the clipping that the member 

refers to. I just want to say in a clear a way as possible that the 

pre-natal classes are very much in the preventative side. I just 

want to give you some . . . begin with a few stats and then come 

back to this because I’ll get into it. In ’86-87 the number of 

women attending our pre-natal classes to the number of births 

was 56 per cent, okay, to the number of births recorded. This is 

as it relates to the rural health regions where we’re responsible 

for this area. It’s not related to the two larger cities, okay. I’ll 

just go down through these stats: the number of pre-natal 

classes held, 1,614; number of pre-natal series held, which 

means six classes equals one series, 269; number of women 

who attended, 5,432; number of infants born in the rural health 

regions, 9,691. And then that percentage figure that I gave you 

earlier which is 56 per cent. 

 

I want to point out that there is no intention of any change in 

terms of the way the neonatal . . . not neonatal, pre-natal classes 

are conducted. We have some difficulty, and we have been for 

some time advertising for public health nurses, and there are 

now eight vacancies in the province — eight vacancies in the 

rural regions, and we are actively pursuing these folks. 

 

One of the areas, and it’s a fact, and all of us who are from the 

rural area will know that these are some of the most respected 

health professionals out around the area,  

because of all of the people that they do touch in their day to 

day business. And many of them were long-standing 

employees. And when the early retirement program came 

around, which was a global thing across government, I think it 

was 13 of the 19 people who took early retirement in this 

branch were public health nurses. And that obviously leaves a 

significant hole in terms of experience to the job as well as just 

in terms of the numbers of people to conduct the classes. 

 

But we recognize pre-natal classes as very much a preventative 

health issue, and we recognize it as one that needs to be 

developed in a greater way than it has. And obviously with 

some of these vacancies it’s caused some delays. 

 

But you mention Assiniboia — I think it’s in the Moose Jaw 

region. There haven’t been any classes cancelled in that region 

up to now. And then there have been some areas, the 

Weyburn-Estevan region, the worst hit, frankly, in terms of the 

availability of pre-natal classes because of our inability to be 

able to hire public health nurses there. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, the association 

chairperson, Colleen Ochitwa, I believe her name is, said that in 

the Assiniboia area there are only two nurses remaining, and 

there used to be five. And when that’s the case, nurses have to 

make difficult choices about what duties should be given 

priority. So they are concentrating on child immunization 

programs, setting up respiratory equipment for patients, and 

visiting schools and homes. When you get into that sort of 

thing, it leaves little time for designing programs or 

implementing programs for new parents. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I just want to go back to the budget for the 

community health services branch. I note that in 1980-81 the 

portion of spending for this branch, in terms of the total 

spending of the department, was about 2.1 per cent. By 1985-86 

this had been reduced to 1.6 per cent. And — this is based on 

actual Public Accounts — the estimates for ’86-87 in 1980 . . . 

1987-88, provide further evidence that your government is 

reducing its commitment to the community health services 

branch to an extent that it causes me a great deal of concern. 

 

The percentage of your department’s budget allocated to the 

community health services branch in 1986-87 was 1.5 per cent, 

and in 1987-88 it is projected to be 1.4 per cent. Now we’ve 

gone from 1980-81, where the spending in this branch 

represented about 2.1 per cent of your total departmental 

spending, we have now got a projected estimate that this 

spending in this branch represents 1.4 per cent. 

 

And as I said earlier, Mr. Minister, this is what I call the 

prevention part of the Department of Health. And I’m 

wondering what has happened in terms of your department’s 

priority. I would say that even in 1980-1981 that that allocation 

was not enough. But it causes me a great deal of concern when I 

see that the spending has decreased significantly in this past 

year, and when it’s decreased significantly since 1981-81. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just a couple of points as it relates to 

this. I think it’s important to be sure that we’re making the  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3373 

 

comparisons . . . A couple of things in the realignments over a 

period of some years, some transfers in and out of community 

health services branch, for example the health promotion, that 

whole area of health promotion and so on, once was in this. It’s 

not there now — it’s not included in there. 

 

Communicable disease, some of the aspects of that are gone 

over to the expenditures of the lab, okay? You say, I think, the 

comparison’s back to when it was 2.1 per cent. That was before 

the days of continuing care being part of the big health pie in 

terms of all of the expenditure that that brought to the big 

budget. 

 

So we’re making a comparison as a percentage of the total 

health budget. That would make some significant difference, 

and I know you agree with that . . . (inaudible) . . . No, I know. 

No, I make that point. Sure, I do the same thing but I’m just 

making the . . . and I readily acknowledge that when we talk 

about the amount of money being spent on health care we do 

talk about continuing care as included in that, so I’m not trying 

to make a difference in terms of apples and oranges here. 

 

(1600) 

 

And the other thing that is an important one to remember in all 

of this is that of all aspects of the health budget, that aspect 

which has escalated at the greatest rate is obviously the hospital 

side, and it’s tremendous escalations in that area. And so when 

you’re talking about the percentage of the total health budget, 

you’re into a very difficult kind of comparison to make, and I’m 

not sure how valid, given from the time between, say, ’81 and 

’86 in terms of the rate at which hospital expenditures have 

increased. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just note that I know 

how much hospital spending has escalated since 1980-81, and 

we spoke about that the other day. It hasn’t escalated to the 

extent that spending in your Executive Council, your political 

arm of government, has escalated. It has not escalated to the 

extent that medical care insurance commission has increased by 

some 95 per cent in spending since 1980-81. And so I guess my 

point here is that very little money in terms of the percentage of 

the total health care budget is spent on prevention. 

 

Now I want to go back to the public health nursing services, 

Mr. Minister. I note that in 1982-83 there were 162 public 

health nurses. In 1984-85 the number was reduced to 154, and 

in 1985-86 it was reduced to 152. I also note that there were 

22.5 person-years cut from your spending in ’87-88 in the 

community health services branch, and I’m wondering if you 

can tell me how many of those position cuts were, in fact, 

public health nursing positions. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The specific answer: the early 

retirements were 13, as I said before, and vacancy deletions, 

three, for a total of 16 public health nurses. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So 16 public health nursing positions were 

deleted in this province. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, it’s not correct. Early retirements, 

there were 13 who retired, and vacancy deletions were three. 

Okay? In other words, when the vacancy deletions went across 

all of government and there were positions that had been vacant 

for some time, they were deleted on the basis that there was no 

one in them. 

 

I want it to be very clear here, and, as I’ve said before, we have 

eight vacancies now which we’re trying to fill — with some 

great difficulty to try to fill them. You know, we hear so much 

about it’s difficult for people to find work, but well-trained 

people who have potential to be public health nurses are 

certainly wanted by the Department of Health and it’s . . . 

That’s specific to some regions. Some regions it’s very difficult 

for us to hire public health nurses, and that’s been an ongoing 

thing. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you said there were 13 early 

retirements, public health nurses retired, plus there were three 

vacant positions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. So does 

that mean that there are 16 public health nursing positions that 

were deleted as a result of your budget cut-backs? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Of the 16 that I mentioned, seven of 

them came from what we’ll call supervisory positions, so that 

means nine that were in what we’ll call the front line positions. 

Okay. Now that’s in terms of the number of person-years that 

are there and available, and that’s the 16. 

 

But I want to reiterate again, while you can have the 

person-years in the book, unless you can fill those positions 

with actual living and breathing public health nurses who will 

carry on the work out there, there’s no reason to have them in 

the book. There isn’t any reason, you know, to deal with the 

budget numbers. 

 

And as I said before, we have, even with the reduced number of 

health nurse positions available, we are short eight and are 

actively trying to recruit eight people to fill these positions now. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, I understand, Mr. Minister. I guess I 

would say this, that the priority should be placed on finding 

public health nurses for Saskatchewan, and particularly rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As you know, they’re involved in pre-natal and other child 

health services with emphasis on immunization, screening, 

teaching, counselling and pre-school core services program. 

Now, Mr. Minister, this service is cost-effective because a lot of 

those public health nurses are involved in identifying children 

that have difficulties — developmental difficulties or 

developmental problems. 

 

Now I understand, Mr. Minister, that there is a great deal of 

concern with your allocation for speech language pathologists 

and I know that in 1982-83 your government doubled the 

number of funded positions in Saskatchewan, and that was an 

admirable thing to do. I’m wondering if you can advise me now 

how many of those positions are vacant, Mr. Minister, and how 

many of those positions have been deleted with your budget 

cuts? 

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3374 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As it relates to speech pathologists, Mr. 

Chairman, we had 19 positions. We now have a complement, or 

the number of positions available of 16, so that’s a reduction of 

three. We have . . . The member shakes her head, but I want to 

point this out as well, because . . . and if I can be allowed 

another commercial here, and it’s the same thing as what I said 

as it relates to public health nurses and audiologists on another 

day. 

 

It’s fine to have the numbers in here to say, these are the 

number of people that are available in terms of the person-years 

available so it makes the budget look good. But if you can’t 

recruit the people to fill the positions, there’s no advantage 

because there’s no person out there delivering the service it 

needed. As it relates to speech pathologists, of the 16 positions, 

we have 14 now filled; two are vacant. Those two we are very 

hopeful will be filled in the very near future. We’ve been 

actively recruiting for a while. But apparently we have two 

bursary students, or students who have received bursaries in the 

past and went out for training who are now coming back, or at 

least we are hoping that they are now coming back to take 

positions here and to fill our full complement. But that’s been a 

very difficult thing to keep those positions filled, and we’ll do 

everything we can. 

 

And if I might, Mr. Chairman, I want to just, for anybody 

watching who knows audiologists, public health nurses, or 

potential public health nurses, audiologists, and speech 

pathologists, we’re hiring and we’re looking for people who are 

qualified to do those positions. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, at a time when a number 

of citizens are concerned about a lack of speech pathologists in 

their particular community . . . in fact, I am told that at 

MacNeill Clinic that some parents are worried that their speech 

pathologist position after January isn’t going to be funded. 

 

At a time when we have students who are leaving the province 

to take speech pathology in other parts of the country — I know 

you have a bursary program — I think that you should be 

encouraging these young people to return to Saskatchewan. And 

I know once again of a speech pathologist who couldn’t find a 

job in Saskatchewan and left the province along with the 

audiologist because they were a couple, Mr. Minister, that it’s 

unfortunate that you’re deleting positions in speech pathology, 

in public health nursing when these two particular professions 

are involved in preventative work, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now I want to talk about your health promotion branch. It’s 

now, I guess, called the communications and health education 

and it used to be the health promotion when we were the 

government. It’s interesting, Mr. Minister, that in the 1981-82 

year the budget for that particular department was $1.2 million. 

In those intervening years, Mr. Minister, it hasn’t increased one 

cent. It’s still $1.2 million. That’s six years. There’s been a 

slight decrease in the number of staff who are working in that 

department. There’s been no change in the budget even with 

inflation. And I’m wondering if you believe that this health 

promotion area has an important job to do, and if it does have 

an important job to do, why do you keep cutting the  

budget and freezing . . . or cutting the number of staff and 

freezing the budget, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The specific answer is yes, it’s 

extremely important. Health promotion to SADAC which is . . . 

As you know, we spend a good deal over in our . . . Within the 

Department of Health and within health promotion branch, 

we’ve spent a good deal on health promotion through the 

SADAC branch, which is not related to this. And when we left 

that branch with the amount of money, very similar to the 

amount that was there last year, we knew that this year there 

would be some initiatives coming forward as it relates to the 

AIDS initiatives and that will be coming forward and will be 

added to this area. We didn’t have a number on that, but there 

will be AIDS initiatives as I spoke to your colleague, the 

member from Regina Centre, two or three days ago about the 

initiatives as it relates to AIDS. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, there has been some concern 

that you’re going to reduce the number of community health 

services branch regions or the number of health regions. There 

are now 10, I understand. Can you advise me what your plans 

are? Are you going to lower the number of offices that are 

available to the public? What exactly are your intentions for the 

coming year in terms of those health regions? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just a point I would make on this as it 

relates to . . . Within this Department of Health we have, for 

example, the community health branches which you talk about 

in terms of 10 regions in the province. In the mental health area, 

which we talked about just a few minutes ago, we have eight 

regions in the province. There is some concern about that and 

should be, because these are two branches which have grown up 

quite independently of each other which they should not have 

done, and we are looking very carefully at some kind of 

concurrent boundaries between the mental health and the 

community health branches within this single Department of 

Health. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to say to you 

that people are very concerned about the possibility of reducing 

the number of regions. I have heard from people across the 

province that they already have a problem with the number of 

staffing positions allocated to their area. There’s a problem with 

public health inspectors, speech pathologists, psychologists, a 

whole variety of health professionals. And I guess I would urge 

you, because I know that you have some money in your budget 

for a bursary program for health care professionals, I would 

urge you to do all that you can to encourage young people in 

this province to go into fields that will help support health care 

in this province, particularly in those areas where we appear to 

have some shortages. I’m not so sure that if we didn’t undergo a 

vigorous advertising campaign across this country that we 

couldn’t attract psychologists and speech pathologists and 

physiotherapists and all of those other support people in health 

care. 

 

I guess, Mr. Minister, we’ve just gone through a process of 

looking at the preventative side of health care. We’ve  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3375 

 

talked about suicide prevention, work place injury prevention, 

the community health services branch and all of the 

preventative things that they’re involved with, and I have to tell 

you that I’ve been somewhat disappointed in your remarks and 

responses. I have a number of questions that I could have asked 

you. You seem to take a great deal of time to respond to the 

questions. That is disappointing in a way because it appears as 

though you’re kind of what you call dragging the puck because 

we are now at 4:20 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ragging the puck, not dragging . . . 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Or ragging the puck, whatever you want to 

call it. And I guess that’s really unfortunate because there are a 

lot of people in this province that are interested in prevention 

and they’re interested in knowing what the Government of 

Saskatchewan is going to do in terms of preventing health 

problems. 

 

And it seems, Mr. Minister, that you’re interested in sickness, 

and your department is interested in sickness, but you don’t 

seem to be that interested in health. And your definition of 

health, Mr. Minister, is somewhat narrow and I think that it’s a 

Conservative viewpoint. It’s a viewpoint that doesn’t 

acknowledge change, and we are changing. Change. Change. It 

doesn’t acknowledge change, because if we’re going to change 

the direction of health policy in this province away from 

treatment and acute care, we have to start looking at prevention, 

and very little money in the budget is spent on prevention. We 

will note that the health promotion budget hasn’t received an 

increase since you people came to government. In fact, there’s 

been a decrease in the number of people who are trying to 

promote good health in Saskatchewan. 

 

We will note that the community health services branch, which 

does a lot of work in terms of prevention . . . and I call it one of 

the few departments of the Department of Health which is 

involved in preventative work. And yet we’ve had a deletion in 

the number of positions for public health nurses and speech 

pathologists, and I understand psychologists as well. 

 

Now when I talked about occupational health and safety 

disease, Mr. Minister, you didn’t seem to know much about it, 

and yet we have lots of victims in this province, victims of 

occupational disease. And it would seem proper that the 

Department of Health should be involved with the Department 

of Labour in trying to do something about the amount of money 

that is spent in this province to support injured workers through 

our health care system, rehabilitation, and all those other things, 

Mr. Minister — $90 million in 1986 spent through the Workers’ 

Compensation Board, on workers who were injured in the work 

place. 

 

In terms of suicide, Mr. Minister, I know that there is some 

good work being done through those health regions, particularly 

through non-government organizations and through the school 

boards and others. But it seems to me that we need to start 

co-ordinating some of that activity, Mr. Minister, because 

suicide is the second killer of young people in this province. It’s 

the second cause of death amongst young people, and with that, 

Mr. Minister,  

comes a great deal of tragedy for those families. And there is a 

cost to society when young people kill themselves. 

 

In addition, Mr. Minister, I was surprised that you didn’t know 

that Saskatchewan’s rate for neonatal mortality is higher than 

the Canadian rate. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I knew that. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well you may have known it but you didn’t 

indicate you knew it. And I don’t see what your department is 

doing to try and lower that, because it has increased since you 

people came to government. And neonatal death, Mr. Minister, 

is a good indicator of what’s happening in a society, what’s 

happening in terms of their nutrition, in terms of employment, 

and all of those other indicators. And we will note that the 

number of people in this province has increased dramatically — 

or the number of people who are unemployed in this province, 

has increased dramatically under your rule. The number of 

people on welfare has increased dramatically under your rule. 

We have hungry children in Saskatchewan, and I know we have 

hungry adults. 

 

And yet, Mr. Minister, when there’s a time when we see the 

neonatal rate, or morbidity rate increasing, you are cutting back 

on the number of public health nurse positions in this province, 

and those public health nurses are involved in pre-natal work, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

You have also destroyed the school-based children’s dental 

program. And, Mr. Minister, that was a preventive program. 

Saskatchewan in 1968 had the worst dental health amongst its 

young people, and now, Mr. Minister, we have the best. And we 

will wait with some anticipation, and it’ll be interesting to see 

whether or not you keep any records on the state of dental 

health amongst our children in years to come. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think that your policies are somewhat 

misdirected and misguided. I think we have . . . There’s no 

question that we have an acute care system in Saskatchewan, 

and that acute care system is in crisis. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s unfortunate that you don’t seem to be 

spending much time or effort, or even thinking, on how we 

develop a wellness model and how we go beyond the medicare 

and look towards the future in terms of how we start stopping 

those escalating health care costs through prevention. And it’s 

going to cost money initially, because you can’t put all of your 

emphasis into prevention and not into acute care. You have to 

have both. You have to have both. 

 

And I know you want me to wrap it up, but I’m not going to 

wrap it up. I just want to continue my remarks, Mr. Minister. 

Prevention is important. It’s important to the people of this 

province. And it seems to me that you need to start thinking 

about prevention in order that we can move away from a 

sickness model of health care delivery to a wellness model of 

health care delivery. 

 

So with that, Mr. Minister, I’d like to conclude my remarks on 

prevention. And if you’d like to respond, I’d appreciate that. 

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3376 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have a very short response for the 

member, and it isn’t following, it is something that I have said 

earlier. When we talked about prevention, and I used the term 

before which said . . . and I remember her comments as it 

relates to having the luxury of being able to start over. Well 

obviously you can’t, and I didn’t suggest that anybody ever 

thought that we could. 

 

But there’s no question that the society within which we live is 

now more and more aware, are becoming more and more aware 

of the need for preventative health, for the wellness model, for 

all of that sort of thing. There’s no question that that’s the case. 

 

I want one more time to say to the member, because she 

mentions things like the positions of public health nurses, of 

audiologists, of speech pathologists, and all of these areas 

which are very much involved in the area of prevention. And 

just to put in a word of a type of commercial if you will, in the 

sense that we are looking for people to fill the positions of 

audiologists in this province and those advertisements have 

been ongoing. Public health nurses, we have eight vacancies 

which we are trying to fill on an ongoing basis. Speech 

pathologists, the same thing. 

 

The member will always refer back to, you have this number of 

positions in the total complement of positions available. And 

while it’s fine to say you have this number of positions, it 

makes no sense to have a greater number of positions than you 

have the ability to fill because of the availability of people to 

fill those positions. And we are doing everything we can to hire 

those people. 

 

So I say to the hon. member, the record will stand for itself and 

the numbers are there. And we have the numbers. We have 

excellent people involved in the community health services 

branch. We have excellent programs under way in terms of 

prevention. And obviously there needs to be more in that area 

as the time goes on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I just 

want to ask a couple of very brief questions. I have a constituent 

who advises me that her situation with respect to the 

prescription drug program is as follows: 

 

We are a family of three living on my husband’s UIC 

benefits which are $348 every two weeks after income tax 

deductions. We have a drug bill of $156 monthly, which 

has some prospect of being reduced somewhat if we use 

generic brands. That was the suggestion from the 

department. But the drug bill would certainly be well over 

$100 monthly on any basis. 

 

She has applied to your drug review panel, drug benefits review 

panel and has been advised that she will get no assistance other 

than special priority envelopes. 

 

Now I want to repeat the facts again: a family of three living on 

my husband’s UIC benefits of $348 every two weeks after 

income tax deduction; a drug bill currently of $156 monthly 

which, even if reduced by any use of generic drugs, would be 

well over $100 monthly; her application approval was not 

recommended; it has asked . . . the panel has asked that we 

supply you with special  

priority envelopes. 

 

Do you have any reason to deny any one of those facts? And do 

you then have reason to deny that that is a fair representation of 

the level of people who are denied help by the drug benefits 

review panel? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The numbers that the member has 

related to me, can you give me the . . . the number is, I believe, 

$348 per month. Were those the numbers that were . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — No, sorry, $348 every two weeks from 

UIC benefits, Mr. Minister — UIC benefits of $348 every two 

weeks after income tax deductions. A little calculation would 

indicate that that would be about $750 per month after income 

tax deductions, roughly — twice that plus one-third of a week. 

And this is a family of three — a man, wife, and one child. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And the drug bill was $156 . . . 

(inaudible) . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, and the drug bill is $156 per 

month. And there is some reference in her letter here to . . . 

 

If our doctor agrees to prescribing generic brands for two 

of the prescriptions, we have some opportunity to reduce it 

to something over $100. 

 

She’s not clear what it would be, but something over 100 and 

less than 156. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The member’s question is: do I have 

reason to deny that those were the numbers, and so on? I don’t; 

I have no reason to. But my folks don’t, you know, aren’t aware 

of a case; we don’t have a case here. 

 

But I will say to the hon. member, the various options which are 

there for the drug panel and the ways in which they deal with 

them — some cases, in a case like this, I would say that 

probably would have looked at one of two things; the priority 

envelopes to ensure that they had their money back in time to 

deal with next month’s drug bill, or the option of a 20 per cent 

up front, one payment of 20 per cent up front. And that’s a . . . 

But I don’t have the specifics before me and I accept, you 

know, you’ve said here. And I don’t make those decisions, 

obviously. 

 

But I would say to the hon. member, that’s one of those two 

options. If, as you indicate, that the person has been given the 

priority envelope and if that’s too onerous, I suppose there’s an 

option for them to tell us that once again. But I’ll just leave it at 

that now, and I’m told that that’s the . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . No, I’m told that that’s the way it would have been dealt 

with — one of those options, priority envelopes or 20 per cent 

up front. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, my constituent advises me that it has been done with 

special priority envelopes, light brown in colour. I don’t know 

whether that is significant, but . . . And I just wanted to 

establish that. As my constituent has said, if we don’t qualify 

for a special consideration, and we obviously don’t, I’m 

wondering just how poor one has to  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3377 

 

be to qualify, and I couldn’t have put it better myself. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to go on to one other item, and that has to 

do with the Regina General Hospital, which is a hospital wholly 

owned by the Government of Saskatchewan and for which I 

assume you have ministerial responsibility. 

 

(1630) 

 

And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether up to some time 

this summer, the Regina General Hospital did not procure its 

meat and light products — meat and poultry and light products, 

from a local firm known as Butcher Boy, and I want to ask you 

whether some time this summer the product was no longer 

obtained from Butcher Boy locally, but from Gainers in 

Edmonton. And I want to ask you whether that is true, and 

whether it is the policy of the Regina General Hospital or any 

other agency of which you have ministerial responsibility, to 

direct purchases from local firms to Gainers in Edmonton, 

because of your special relationship with Gainers. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — First of all, I don’t know where the 

Regina General Hospital purchased their meat products prior to 

or even at the present time because it’s obviously a decision of 

the hospital board. 

 

And in terms of the suggestion — to use the mildest term — the 

suggestion that there would be some policy of the government 

to suggest to them that they should buy their products from 

Gainers in Edmonton or Gainers anywhere, or from Butcher 

Boy, for that matter, that is not the case. If anything at all, we 

have this policy which suggests to all agencies of government 

and boards and so on, whether they be at arm’s length or 

whether they be, you know, direct agencies of government, that 

they do in fact where possible buy Saskatchewan products in 

every circumstance possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Minister, 

thank you, Mr. Minister, although it’s not awfully helpful for 

you to say that you don’t know what happens, but you’re sure 

this does. 

 

I don’t know how I get the answer, but I’ll ask you this — I 

won’t detain the committee. Will you find out whether some 

time this summer the purchases of Regina General Hospital for 

meat and poultry and the like were not in fact changed from 

procurement locally, through Butcher Boy and perhaps other 

suppliers, to Gainers? Would you find that out? And I suspect, 

when you do find it out, you’re going to find out that it’s true. 

 

Now I obviously cannot give you all the reasons for that, since 

I’m not privy to all of the finances of the Regina General 

Hospital. But I ask the minister to find out what cover story was 

used for the direction of procurement of the Regina General 

Hospital from local firms to Gainers in Edmonton. And I ask 

you then, Mr. Minister: find out whether that isn’t true? And if 

it’s true, what cover story is being offered by you and your 

colleagues for this diversion of procurement from local firms to 

Gainers? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will tell the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, yes, I will find out. I will tell him further than  

that and give him the assurance that there was no impetus from 

myself or any of my colleagues to suggest to General Hospital 

at any time that they should buy their meat products from one 

source rather than another source. We did not say that; that is 

not the case. 

 

I will find out through the Buy Saskatchewan agency of this 

government if that is in fact the case, and why it is in fact the 

case if it’s as the member says. And I have no reason to believe 

that, you know, what he’s saying is not the case, but I will 

certainly find it out, and the member can be assured of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, can 

you tell me, is it not true that you appoint all the members of the 

board of the Regina General Hospital? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, that’s true. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, over the past two weeks we 

have had a remarkable display in this Assembly. We have seen 

the PC government members opposite do everything that they 

could to hide from health care. The government tried to have 

Health estimates and the drug plan amendments debated the day 

after the free trade deal in an effort to hide the PC disaster of 

health care. 

 

At a time when the PC government opposite is cutting 

medicare, cutting back on medical care services and actually 

cutting its overall health care spending in this province by $18.6 

million — this is at a time when Saskatchewan people are 

celebrating the 25th anniversary of medicare — we have the PC 

government and their minister actually bragging about their cuts 

to health spending in this province. 

 

Mr. Chair, let’s just review for a moment what the minister has 

told us in these estimates. He has tried to justify his sharp fee 

increases for home care and nursing home fees. Home care fees 

in this province have gone up to the . . . gone up in terms of cost 

to the elderly and the disabled by 66 per cent in one fell swoop; 

nursing home fee increases, Mr. Chairperson, by 18 per cent. 

 

And he has tried to justify his broken promises in terms of 

building new nursing homes, like the one for Moose Jaw, St. 

Anne’s nursing home in Moose Jaw, promised by a Premier, 

promised by a Premier before the election, and cancelled by that 

Health minister after the election. 

 

The minister has tried to defend the indefensible by trying to 

pretend that his PC government is administrating health care 

efficiently. The minister has tried to justify and defend his 

elimination of the school-based children’s dental program. 

That’s a PC decision that shows the true direction of this 

government in health care. It’s backwards, it’s hurtful, and it’s 

harmful to Saskatchewan families. 

 

This minister has tried to justify his cruel decision to attack the 

prescription drug plan, a decision that is causing a great deal of 

hardship to Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Minister, you may 

live on a $60,000 a year salary, $70,000 a year salary, and as 

the member from Elphinstone, the Leader of the New 

Democratic Party of  

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3378 

 

Saskatchewan has just shown you, there are people in this 

province who are living on less than $700 a month, a family of 

three, Mr. Minister, and they’re not eligible for any kind of 

assistance by your special drug review benefits committee 

except from priority post envelopes. How shameful. How 

shameful. 

 

This is another cruel decision by your government, and what it 

really is, Mr. Minister, is a tax on the sick. Despite what 

everyone in this province knows, the minister has somehow 

tried to pretend that there is no real crisis in Saskatchewan 

hospitals. You can pretend, Mr. Minister, but the people of this 

province know that there is a crisis in health care, that there is 

indeed a crisis in health care and in the hospitals. And that crisis 

is an underfunding by your Progressive Conservative 

government. 

 

Short-staffing in our hospitals, Mr. Minister, has caused serious 

problems for patient care. And the waiting lists in this province, 

particularly in the city of Saskatoon, are unacceptable and 

they’re unacceptably too long. 

 

Mr. Minister, you don’t have to take my word for it. All you 

have to do is go around this province and ask the hospitals, ask 

the doctors, ask the nurses, and ask the patients. As the people 

of this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know full well, you know full well that 

you’ve created an unacceptable crisis in medicare. 

 

And finally, Mr. Minister, you try to pretend that your PC 

government is interested in preventive health. Mr. Chair, if the 

minister’s hypocrisy were not so tragic, it would be ridiculous. 

Mr. Chairman, the PC government opposite seems to be 

approaching health care the wrong way. They are approaching it 

backwards. They are facing backwards, Mr. Chairperson, trying 

to undermine the medicare victories of the past, trying to attack 

through the back door the basic medicare services they don’t 

dare attack through the front door. 

 

But we don’t need the minister’s attacks on the past. What 

Saskatchewan needs, what Saskatchewan needs is a health care 

vision for the future. That’s what people are looking for, and 

they’re looking for some leadership from you people over there 

— a health care vision for the future that will preserve and 

protect the gains of yesterday and build on those tomorrows, 

Mr. Minister — that’s what the people of this province are 

looking for. 

 

We need a health care approach to take us into the future, to 

take us to a system where we start addressing the wellness of 

society and not the illness of society. Good health, Mr. 

Minister, that’s what we need. What we have here today is a 

sickness model. We don’t have a wellness model. 

 

And when we show you how your health care policies are 

hurting people, and when we point out to you how we have 

some serious problems in this province, particularly with regard 

to neonatal morbidity rates, suicide among young people, and 

work place injury, you’re not addressing it, Mr. Minister, and 

you should. 

Mr. Minister, what we need is an approach that has three 

fundamental principles. Universality, Mr. Minister; we need a 

principle fundamental to the future of health care, and that’s 

universality. We don’t need a two-class system of health care. 

We don’t need a two-tiered system, Mr. Minister. We don’t 

need one system for the rich and one system for the poor. What 

we need is a system that’s accessible, and accessible to all, so 

that regardless of your income, regardless of where you live, 

you have access to our health care system. We don’t need 

deterrent fees, Mr. Minister, and that’s exactly what you’ve 

created with your prescription drug amendment. That’s what 

you’ve created. We have unacceptably high waiting lists in this 

province. And when we have unacceptably high waiting lists, 

and we have 11,200 people waiting to get into hospital in 

Saskatoon, that is not an accessible system. That is a system 

that prevents people from getting into hospital. And, Mr. 

Minister, we need a system where people can participate. 

 

Never again, Mr. Minister, should we have a government in this 

province that has done what you’ve done. You have not 

consulted with people. You did not consult with the nurses and 

the doctors and the psychiatrists and the speech language 

pathologists and the public health nurses. You didn’t consult 

with the people — no consultations, just an attack. Just an 

attack — that’s what you’ve done, Mr. Minister. You’ve 

attacked people without consultation, and you’re attacking 

medicare. 

 

What we need, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is an approach 

for the future which will involve the people of Saskatchewan. 

What we need is a full and open participation — participation 

by hospital boards, by health care workers, by doctors, by 

community groups, and by the public. 

 

Mr. Minister, we need an improved health care delivery system, 

a principle that we could build on, Mr. Minister. What we need 

to do is examine alternative models like community health 

clinics, and we don’t see you doing that. We need to examine 

alternative models in staffing. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are a number of health care professionals in 

this province that could be doing some of the work that doctors 

are doing. Doctors don’t need to be the only point of entry into 

our health care system. There are a number of positive 

proposals by health care professionals around this province, and 

obviously you’re not listening. 

 

And above all, Mr. Minister, we need the development and 

implementation of improved preventive health services. That’s 

what we need — preventive health services, Mr. Minister. What 

we need to do is to develop a true health care future for 

Saskatchewan and not a sick care system alone, Mr. Minister. 

 

(1645) 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Chairperson, the PC minister and his PC 

government have failed to face the challenges of the future, and 

that is why this government and this minister have betrayed 

medicare. They betrayed the people of Saskatchewan. But what 

we need to do is protect medicare, preserve medicare, and go 

beyond medicare. 

  



 

October 19, 1987 

3379 

 

Mr. Minister, I will restate what I said the other day: you are not 

the Minister of Health; you are the minister of sickness, and 

you’re making a lot of people ill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 36 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I have a number of written 

questions that I’d like to send over to you in terms of 

out-of-province travel, the names of your staff, and that sort of 

thing, if you wouldn’t mind providing me with that information; 

and when could you provide it? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well just send the questions over and, 

sure, I’ll provide it within, you know, days. The normal 

questions . . . I presume these are the normal questions about 

who works in my office and my personal staff and that sort of 

thing. I’ll provide that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well this 

week. 

 

Item 36 agreed to. 

 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Page 10 of the 1988 supplementaries, any 

questions? 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Page 7 of the 1987 supplements. 

 

Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I would join with you in 

thanking the officials of the Department of Health, those that 

are here with us today in the House, others that are in the 

gallery, and have been patiently sitting through and listening for 

questions in their various agencies. And also, Mr. Chairman, if I 

might, officials of the Department of Health, a very large 

number of people who work in the Department of Health across 

this province in all the various places. And I want to say a word 

of thank you to them. I want to say a word of thank you to them 

for their willingness to be involved in making some very 

difficult decisions, but very responsible decisions, as we face 

the future of this province and obviously the future of the health 

and well-being of our citizens everywhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Chairperson, I too join with the 

Minister of Health in thanking his officials for providing us 

with some of the information that we requested. As a former 

civil servant, I know that it takes a great deal of time and energy 

in getting ready for these estimates, and we’ve appreciated you 

being here. I know there’ve been a number of you here over the 

last two weeks. 

 

Unfortunately we would have wished that some of the people 

who had been fired by the Department of Health could be with 

us as well, but they weren’t. We note with sadness the 411 

dental therapists that were fired and the way they were treated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 

 


