


















































October 22, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 October 22, 1987 
 

3455 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to Provide for the Imposition of Taxes 
on and the Collection of Taxes from Certain Purchasers of 

Certain Fuels and to Provide for Rebates of Taxes to 
Certain Purchasers 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I could wax eloquent on this 
initiative but I understand that . . . In the interests of moving 
matters along this evening, I will give an outline of the Bill 
respecting the fuel tax and I will refrain from my written 
comparisons of what it used to be prior to 1982, for the interest 
of the hon. member. I may have to do that in closing debate but 
we will see how the debate proceeds. 
 
The Bill repeals the current fuel tax Act and replaces it with the 
Act effective June 22, 1987, providing a tax of 7 centre per litre 
on fuel used to operate motor vehicles in the province. In 
addition, the tax on aviation fuel increases from 2.9 cents to 7 
cents per litre and the tax on locomotive fuel used by railway 
companies increases from 13.6 to 15 cents per litre. Certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill addresses the concern raised by many that 
interprovincial truckers and non-residents should pay fuel tax 
for the use of our roads and highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents who purchase fuel for 
personal use, other than aviation fuel, will be eligible for a full 
rebate of the tax paid. To receive the rebate, applicants will 
submit their fuel receipts with an application form. These 
applications forms will be made available early in 1988 to 
Saskatchewan residents to enable them to apply for the rebate. 
Mr. Speaker, the rebate forms will be assessed and the 
processing will be done by summer students. We have reviewed 
a number of options for collecting the fuel tax and providing 
relief to Saskatchewan residents. The fuel tax rebate is the 
fairest method of providing relief. 
 
Another important feature of the fuel tax program is the 
implementation of the fuel tax exemption permit system. This 
permit system enables farmers and other primary producers of 
renewable resources to purchase their fuel in bulk, tax free, 
from a bulk fuel dealer. For fuel purchased at a retail service 
station, the farmer and the primary producer may apply directly 
to the government for a rebate. I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that through the use of exemption permits, farmers will not be 
required to use purple fuel as they did prior to 1982 in order to 
receive an exemption from the tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, previously the tax was assessed on a 20 per cent 
variable rate. Fuel tax rates were automatically increased when 
there was an increase in price at the pumps. This does not 
happen with the Bill before us today. The tax of 7 per cent per 
litre will apply to gasoline, diesel fuel, and propane. A higher 
rate of tax is not being imposed for diesel fuel as was the case 
prior to May 9, 1982. The tax will essentially be collected by 
the major oil company suppliers on behalf of their vendors. This 
system of collection reduces paperwork for both fuel dealers 
and the government. 

Farmers and certain other primary producers of renewable 
resources are eligible for an exemption of tax. These primary 
producers include commercial loggers, fishermen, and trappers. 
In addition to the rebate to Saskatchewan residents for their 
person use fuel, and fuel tax exemptions provided to farmers 
and other primary producers of renewable resources, I am 
pleased to say that the tax does not apply to heating, cooking, 
lighting . . . for lighting purposes. In summary, the Bill provides 
a fuel tax targeted at out-of-province vehicles, commercial 
carriers, and vehicles used for business purposes. In this way 
the province can benefit from out-of-province traffic and 
receive revenue from interprovincial truckers and other 
commercial users that utilize our highways. Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of The Fuel Tax Act, 1987. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Would the hon. members 
please be seated. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, this is the tax that you feel 
every time you drive up to the gas pumps in any village or town 
or city in Saskatchewan. This is the tax that represents the 
promise which this government made in 1982 and which 
elected this government in 1982. It represents a promise made 
in ‘82 and it represents a promise broken in 1987. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only does it represent a broken promise to all 
of Saskatchewan. Then they go ahead and they deceive people 
that are in charge of operating our school boards, operating our 
municipal governments, by not advising them of what was 
going to happen because this tax was going to come down. 
 
This promise, Mr. Speaker, was written up in much of the 
literature, of the campaign literature of 1982, and I have in my 
hands the campaign literature from The Nipawin Journal on 
Wednesday, April 13, 1982, from the member from 
Shellbrook-Torch. And he has in it a little chart, a little chart 
about what you pay at the pumps and that time it was 43.7 cents 
— 43.7 cents. And what is it now, Mr. Speaker? What is it now 
when you go to Nipawin or Prince Albert or Paddockwood? 
Forty-nine cents — 49 cents and you might get the 7 cents back 
if you can manage to put them away and get them out of your 
glove compartment or get them out of your wallet or get them 
out of the show box. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is a broken promise, and I repeat what it’s 
done to the school boards. School boards were advised that they 
were going to get some money, increased money for busing. 
They were advised of that. And they needed increased money 
for busing because their buses were getting worn out and with 
increased inflation and increased costs, they planned according 
to that. They planned according to their budgets. Some of them 
purchased new buses, some of them had to make repairs to their 
buses, and some of them added the occasional route. Then what 
happens? Once their budgets were set, this tax came down, and 
they feel betrayed, Mr. Speaker, greatly betrayed by this tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another broken promise like we had  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3456 
 

the broken promise of the E&H tax which was supposed to be 
reduced — we see it increased to 7 per cent; like the promise to 
reduce the income tax — and here we have a flat tax imposed; 
like the broken promise to preserve and enhance medicare — 
we see a decrease in the funding to medicare and the result also 
in the increased prices that people have to put up now, up front, 
for prescription drugs, and the school dental plan which is being 
sadly missed, particularly in the rural areas. The hospitals’ 
waiting lists, Mr. Speaker — 10,000 we’ve heard about in 
Saskatoon, 3,000 in Regina, 900 in my home town of Prince 
Albert. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make additional comments 
on this at a later time and so would many of my colleagues, and 
I would at this time move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to Amend The Department of 
Revenue and Financial Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The amendments 
affected by this Bill are consequential to enactment of The Fuel 
Tax Act, 1987. Part III of The Department of Revenue and 
Financial Services Act, which this Bill amends, contains the 
general administrative and enforcement provisions that apply to 
most of the tax legislation administered by the Department of 
Finance. 
 
These consolidated provisions which deal with such subjects as 
the filing of returns, audits, refunds, offences, and appeal 
procedures currently apply to such other taxes as E&H tax, 
liquor consumption tax, and tobacco tax. 
 
By making The Fuel Tax Act, 1987, subject to these provisions, 
we are ensuring that the new fuel tax will be administered in a 
manner that is consistent with these other taxes. Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is introduced in 
conjunction with the Bill previous, and as we would like to 
advance debate on this Bill at the same time as we advance 
debate on Bill No. 51, I would move that we adjourn debate on 
this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I would ask permission of the members in 
the Assembly to make introductions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the 
members of this Assembly some visitors who are members of 
the 87th Cub Pack, England District Cub Pack, which is centred 
at the W.H. Ford School. They are guests of my seat mate, the 
member from Regina North West. They have just finished 
taking some pictures with the member, and I am going to be 
pleased to be able to  

meet with the group later on. The member from Regina North 
West has asked me to distribute some pins to you and to have a 
question and answer period. I welcome you to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, on my left here I have Bill 
Reader, deputy minister of Rural Development. Directly behind 
me here I have assistant deputy minister of Rural Development, 
Ernie Anderson. Right behind Ernie is Larry Chaykowski, 
director of management services; and over on my right is 
director of development services, Dennis Webster. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 
to begin in respect to rural development to indicate to you my 
concern with the problems that are being faced by rural 
Saskatchewan in these very tough economic times. And it 
seems to me that we are on the verge of having rural 
Saskatchewan transformed unless someone in the government 
will come to their senses and realize the seriousness of the 
problem that’s facing the farming community today. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, that I say that rural Saskatchewan is 
going to be transformed unless immediate action is taken 
because many of our young farmers are being forced off the 
land. And I want to give you some of the indicators of my 
concern as I progress with my remarks. I thin it’s common 
knowledge that you realize yourself that there’s heavy debt 
burden laid upon our young farmers. I think you will agree that 
there has been a reduction in the commodity prices. And I think 
that you will agree that while the government during the 
election year gave the impression of addressing some of the 
problems, that today in the state when the farming economy has 
digressed further, there is in fact no government assistance to 
those that I refer to — that young generation of farmers who 
may well be . . . Their very existence may well be under review 
at this time. 
 
And I say to you also, we had a proud rural Saskatchewan. And 
I can only use best the reference in my own constituency of the 
family farm. I go to my home community in Muenster, and they 
are reasonably small family farms — reasonably small family 
farms, but they’ve made a good living. And I can go to other 
communities — to the Annaheims and the St. Fronts and the 
Quill Lakes and the Leroys and the Wynyards and the Lanigans 
and Jansens and Drakes and Lockwoods. And there is, I say to 
you, in Saskatchewan a great depth of love for the land. And I 
say to you, Mr. Minister, as rural development minister you 
have to do more than just hold annual conventions with the 
R.Ms. You’re part and parcel  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3457 
 

of the solution or the problem. 
 
And so I ask you . . . In looking at it, I see the trends that are 
developing. I see the trend where it says: in Saskatchewan, 
farmers pay most interest — 15 per cent of farm expenses in 
this province, by far the highest in the country. Even more 
significant is, the interest payments were made by 42,332 
farmers out of a total of 53,242. The Saskatchewan farmers pay 
most interest. 
 
Saskatchewan farm capital depreciated from 31.3 billion to 29.2 
billion. The bank in 1981 indicated that the size of rural 
Saskatchewan farms are increasing, and I understand that that 
has been a progressive move as mechanization came in. But I 
say to you that there is a fear in rural Saskatchewan today, and 
the fear is that young farmers are going to be driven off the 
farms. 
 
And so without making a long speech, I ask you as Minister of 
Rural Development, meeting with all of the 299 councils of the 
R.M.s throughout this province, I ask you if you would be good 
enough to outline your vision . . . what you see for 
Saskatchewan five years, 10 years in the immediate future. So I 
ask you to project — this is your opportunity, Mr. Minister — 
to take a look as Rural Development minister and give your 
vision. Tell the young farmers your vision of rural 
Saskatchewan of tomorrow. Is it going to be the corporate 
farms? Is it going to be the equity finance corporation where 
outside investors own the land and young farmers are the 
tenants? This is the question that has to be addressed. 
 
And unless a government has a vision for rural Saskatchewan, 
I’ll tell you there’ll be a transformation the like of which you 
have never seen. And I’ll tell you they had . . . where 
government has refused to intervene. We can go to our sister 
states, the North Dakotas or South Dakotas, and we find that the 
population is half of what Saskatchewan is. And what has 
happened there is you have your huge inland terminals and you 
have your variable rates and you have all of the other structures 
that increase size of farms and drive young farmers away from 
farming. So I ask you to take it seriously and that’s the 
presentation that I make to you tonight — to not take it lightly 
because at issue here today is rural Saskatchewan; rural 
Saskatchewan of tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to project into the 
future five or 10 years, I’m sure there’s nobody in 
Saskatchewan and nobody in Canada can do that. But I can tell 
you some of the things that we’re doing today that may have a 
future, may have a reference five or 19 years into the future, 
some of the things that were not done 20 years ago that maybe 
should have been done 20 years ago. That is such things as 
value-added industries to our agricultural products. 
 
We have been the exporter, Mr. Chairman, of raw  

products for ever out of here; we have not, in fact, been the 
exporter at all of finished products. And when you export your 
raw products, you export your youth and your job opportunity 
and your growth opportunities here in the province. And we’ve 
done a lot towards that already, Mr. Chairman. And we’re going 
to . . . probably a lot more in the future. 
 
To give you an idea of what’s been going on today, Mr. 
Chairman, I had in 55 communities meeting in Regina here, one 
representative of each community talking about rural 
development, rural diversification, value-added industries to 
agriculture and to other things in the province. The meeting’s 
been on all day; in fact, I’ve just come from the meeting just 
now. There’s 55 communities there, each with their own 
representation and each making their own presentation on what 
they see they could do to value-added industries in this 
province. There’s been 102 different proposals put forward, all 
the way from ethanol plants to tourism to finished products 
such as finished products that you would find in your store. 
Those are the kind of things that’s happened in Manitoba years 
ago, that’s been happening in Alberta for many years, and it’s 
just starting to happen here now in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And you look at such things as our meat packing plants. You 
can look at such things as our upgrader; we’re finishing oil 
products. You can look at such things as Intercon, turkeys . . . 
or chickens at Wynyard. You can also look at the ethanol plant 
that’s being built out here on a reserve. Those are value-added 
industries to a province that has never really had the 
opportunity before, and we’ll continue to build on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, that is quite a vision. That is a great 
vision, Mr. Minister. Maybe you want a second try, because I’ll 
tell you, you need another try if that’s the best you can do. 
 
I sat here and I asked you in respect to the crisis on the farms 
and the depopulation of the farm community, and you 
side-tracked it. That’s exactly what you said. You said you have 
no answers to the young farmers, and the high debt ration of the 
young farmers in Saskatchewan, you never even mentioned, 
and he said he’s been here since 1982, and now he says, oh, a 
value added on . . . value-added industries. 
 
I’ll ask you, Mr. Minister, we had rural development in the past, 
and I’ll tell you I could use my constituency to demonstrate it 
because not only did we have the family farm but we had 
industries in small communities. And I defy you to name in my 
constituency, or throughout this province, similar development 
in conjunction with rural towns and small industries. I have 
gone through this before. I can go through every community in 
my constituency and there is an industry that has been set up 
and it was set up under the New Democratic Party. I go into 
Annaheim, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 
we’ve got some chirping now. They’re getting hurt a little bit, 
so they can’t take it, they can’t take it. 
 
The member from Pelly, he won’t get into the debate but  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3458 
 

he wants to chirp. I’ll allow him to chirp — get into it. Why 
didn’t you get up and speak on your taxation increases and tell 
us how it’s helping the farmers? 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, in a serious manner not to take the 
question lightly, and I’ll give you a second chance. I ask you: 
what are you doing and what is your plans and what is your 
philosophy and what do you see for Saskatchewan in the 
future? Is the family farm a myth under the Tory regime? Is the 
equity corporation an investment from Hong Kong and West 
Germany? Is that the future of Saskatchewan? 
 
I’ll tell you that the young farmers that I’ve talked to said, get 
this government to demonstrate their position. And that’s what 
I’m concerned about, and I’m talking about farmers. Are you 
saying that you want to depopulate the farms and put them into 
the cities? Is that your solution? 
 
So I’ll give you another chance. Do you have any sort of a 
vision to keep the family farm a viable unit in Saskatchewan? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, you know it’s interesting 
to hear the member from Quill Lakes talking about what there 
should be for the farmers and talking about the future. I go back 
to 1981 when I was farming, and many of us were out there 
farming, and I believe interest rates were 24 per cent. I sat on 
the opposition side of the House and I can remember then the 
premier, I believe, at that time, saying, you know, we can’t do 
anything about interest rates, we can’t help the farmers. Had 
they done some help then, it may have been a lot different now. 
 
Let me tell you a little bit about what is going on out there in 
rural Saskatchewan. Sometimes it’s hard when you live in 
Regina here to really realize what’s going on out there in rural 
Saskatchewan. There’s a farm symposium on financing farm 
debt to be held here next week. There will be 200 farm leaders 
from Saskatchewan at that symposium discussing one of the 
major concerns — farm debt, interest rates. They will be major 
concerns. 
 
If you look at the overall feature of why the farmers are in debt, 
you can go a long ways back. But you know, when you go back 
into the ’70s when land was fairly high priced, the interest rates 
were 25 per cent — no help for them at that time, writing it 
down, the accumulation of debt, and now the debt is very high. 
 
And you know, there has to be some things done with that, and 
the first step that we’re looking at — or not the first, but one of 
the ones we’re looking at — is a symposium on farm financing. 
And there’ll be 200 leaders in here next week discussing the 
alternatives and the opportunities that could be there. 
 
But let’s go back a little bit about what you talk about rural 
Saskatchewan. Right now, the Department of Rural 
Development is working with approximately 200 rural 
communities to look at diversification and development based 
primarily on agricultural products. And if you maintain the 
agricultural base out there and maintain  

industries related directly to that, you maintain the jobs and you 
maintain rural Saskatchewan. So you can plan now and for the 
future. And each community . . . 
 
Today was an interesting day down there with those 55 
communities making their presentations, talking about all the 
things that can be done out there to diversify our economy and 
to build on rural Saskatchewan, small town Saskatchewan. And 
you know, like the people out there are optimistic and they have 
a lot of different ideas, and many, many of them they can put 
into place. And certainly we’ll be working with them. We have 
a department now of Rural Development, and that Department 
of Rural Development is just exactly that. It’s not only roads 
and bridges, but it will be a development of rural Saskatchewan. 
And I don’t think anybody ever planned that ever, ever before 
in the past. This is today, and we’re planning for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I’m awfully glad the opposition is 
clapping for that statement. I gave the man a second chance, but 
he bombed again. He has no vision. I asked him in respect to 
what I can say that your vision is in respect to the community of 
young farmers. That’s what I asked you. Is the family farm 
continuation going to be viable under your projection, or is it 
exodus to the cities? 
 
The percentage of farmers under the age of 35, my friend, rose 
to 21 per cent in 1981 — young farmers going into the 
agricultural community. They rose to 21 per cent in 1981, from 
15 per cent in 1 971, but has dropped back to 19 per cent by 
1986, the number of young farmers. And what you’re having is 
the exodus under your regime. It rose, the number of farmers 
under our government. It rose to where there were 21 per cent; 
21 per cent were under the age of 35, and today that percentage 
has fallen. It hasn’t increased. And you have been saying . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That isn’t surprising. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — No, it’s no surprise. Of course I’m not 
surprised. It’s the Tory government, with no policies to keep 
young people on the farm. That’s exactly the situation. And 
now I see them huddling to get some information together. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, if I could have your attention, the 
percentage of farmers under the age of 35 rose to 21 per cent in 
1981 from 15 per cent in 1971, but has dropped back to 19 per 
cent by 1986. I want to say what is happening here is a trend. 
We’re losing our family farm community, and we’re losing it 
under your administration, Mr. Minister, as is evidenced by the 
remarks that I’ve made from the Star-Phoenix. 
 
Also, it’s indicated here, Mr. Minister, that people are in fact 
moving to the cities. And they’re indicating that by 1981, the 
ratio was up to 58 per cent; that is 58 per cent living in the 
cities. And according to a recent study commissioned by the 
government that will reach 65 per cent — 65 per cent of all our 
population will then be in the cities. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3459 
 

Now obviously it mans . . . this is by Sask Housing, 
commissioned by the Tory government, predicting that they 
have absolutely no policy for maintaining young farmers on the 
land, nor a policy for the viability of rural communities. That’s 
exactly where it’s at, Mr. Minister. 
 
And you have failed the young farmers of Saskatchewan, and 
now what you’re rearing as a solution — that if they want to 
farm, is to become tenants to landowners from Hong Kong. 
That’s exactly what your position is. That’s the position of your 
symposium. And you’re representing rural Saskatchewan, and 
that’s the solution that you’re offering to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you: specifically, what are you looking 
at in respect to the problems of the family farm, what it’s facing 
today? I’ll tell you, 29 per cent say they will not be on the land 
in two years time. And you can talk about all your 
volume-added industries, which is just a press release at this 
time, just like during the election, but I’m asking you, I’m 
asking you to give a clear-cut message as to what we can tell 
the young farmers, that 29 per cent that are going to be forced 
off the land. Do you have any vision, any method, any 
government programs which will guarantee the viability of 
family farms, or are you prepared to let them fold and larger 
and larger and outside investors to take over? I ask you that; I 
want you to address it, that specific question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just to answer some 
of his questions earlier before he got down to the final request 
of his there. He was talking about the difference in the young 
people on the family farm from 1971 to 1982, that it went up 
from 15 per cent, I believe he said, to 21 per cent. But what he 
didn’t tell you, Mr. Chairman, was that from 1971 to 1982, 
11,000 farms were lost in the province of Saskatchewan — 
11,000 family farms were lost in the province of Saskatchewan 
in that same period of time. 
 
So it tells you, Mr. Speaker, that although here were some 
young people coming back, because people were leaving the 
farm and coming back, all right, they were losing in numbers — 
11,000, Mr. Chairman, amounts to almost, almost 20 per cent. 
That’s 18 per cent. So just look at it that way. 
 
And he asked another question, what are we talking about 
assistant agriculture out there. Well if you go back and look in 
the late ’70s, if the former administration had made available to 
our farmers 1.2 billion of dollars at 6 per cent interest, I doubt if 
we’d have a debt problem today for the farmers out there. I 
doubt if we would, Mr. Chairman. They would be financially 
sound, and we would not be facing the major problems we’re 
facing today. 
 
Besides that, Mr. Chairman, we had made available to the 
livestock industry, which is doing extremely well in this 
province — it’s never done so well before, even in tough times 
— we have made available livestock cash advances, livestock 
cash advances. We have brought into this province and 
expanded the red meat industry like to has never been expanded 
before. And I could go through  

a whole series of things that we have brought in to assist the 
farming industry in this province. 
 
And I grant you, Mr. Chairman, there’s still lots more to be 
done, but we have to deal on a long-range basis as well as a 
short-term basis. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s exactly what I was asking, what is your 
long-range philosophy? You don’t have one. So I just want to 
indicate part of your speech, Mr. Minister, to the conference, 
82nd annual convention, Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, you said, “We see the role of our government 
(and these are the old clichés) to build, to diversify, to protect.” 
 
Ask the 29 per cent of the farmers that are going to lose their 
farms in two years unless something is done with debt 
restructuring. Ask them whether you are really protecting. Ask 
them. And you’ve lost 1,000 farms during each year of your 
administration — farmers — and what is more, there’s the 
highest rate of bankruptcies in Saskatchewan and in 
Saskatchewan agriculture of anywhere in Canada. That’s where 
it’s at. And you say you’re going to build and diversify and 
protect. 
 
You know what you said to this here conference? You said, 
“With farm size increasing,” which you are accepting, that farm 
size automatically will be increasing, you say, “the elevator 
points consolidated.” You say, “branch lines abandoned, and 
resource and development projects coming on stream.” And 
that’s what you are saying here. You’re saying that the farm 
size is increasing, elevator points are consolidated, branch lines 
are abandoned, and resource development coming on. 
 
I think that you’re saying in that, one, is that the family farm is 
going and we are going to let it go. Your Premier has, before he 
entered this House, indicated that you had to lose about 
two-thirds of the farmers because they are inefficient. Large 
farms — that was his policy, and that’s your policy, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
You know, you stood up and deceived the people of this 
province and rural community when the people of this province 
were fighting to maintain the Crow rate, and you put together 
your slick Ontario-based, blue-machine clichés, “We’ll keep the 
Crow and let Blakeney go.” That was your cliché. Very good. 
Laugh, Mr. Minister, laugh. Well I’ll tell you, the Crow rate is 
gone and I want to say the second step is under way, the second 
step is under way. The variable rates — and this minister hasn’t 
even said boo in respect to the entrance of variable rates. He 
wants them to go. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, it’s very clear that your policy is as it was 
articulated and I articulated with the Premier the other day. His 
deputy minister of Agriculture said that the restriction on 
foreign ownership of our land is archaic, that we’ve got to open 
our borders to the investors — that’s what it says. And the 
deputy minister of Agriculture said it. And the Premier also 
says the borders can’t be closed to outside buyers of our farms. 
And the article went on also to say . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . It’s a good issue in rural Saskatchewan, my friend. It’s a 
good issue and I’ll use it. I’ll use it. You’re right. I’ll use it. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3460 
 

(1945) 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that’s the direction of your 
government. You won’t save the family farm and you won’t 
save the 29 per cent of the farmers that are in serious trouble, 
because your mission is simply to see them go and to be 
replaced by larger farms. 
 
Mr. Minister, in rural Saskatchewan today, during the eight 
years of your administration, I’m going to say that there was 
virtually no small businesses started in rural Saskatchewan. 
Virtually none . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, laugh. 
 
I’ll tell you I have a constituency that’s representative, and I’ll 
tell you there’s a whole series of small business that helps to 
co-ordinate and work with the rural community. But that’s not 
your vision. Your vision is the Weyerhaeuser’s of the world to 
come in and take over. Give them a pulp mill — that’s your 
vision for the people of this province. And that’s going to be 
your vision in respect to the agriculture of the future. 
 
And I’m going to say to you, Mr. Minister, I stood before you 
here and asked you to give some hope to the farming 
community by this government. But the farmers of 
Saskatchewan know, they know they can’t trust this 
government any more. Because rural communities voted, as did 
many of the other urbans in ’82, and the did it, as was 
introduced today — the reintroduction of the gas tax. In ’82 you 
stood and you went across and you said to farmers, there’s a tax 
on farm fuel, which there wasn’t. You said you were going to 
take off 40 per cent and there was no 40 cents per gallon. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, your credibility is shot. I think the 
best place you can stay is in Regina because I’ll tell you, you 
have no popularity and you have no credibility — nor has the 
Premier — in respect to these promises that you made. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, if you think you’ve been 
doing so well, let’s take a look at some of the cuts. Let’s take a 
look at the myth of you supporting rural Saskatchewan. As I 
said, the polls indicate that the farmer is in the worst possible 
shape, and I defy you to stand here and say that farmers in ‘86 
are not worse off than they were under our administration. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, I want to run through some of the 
good things that this government is doing to protect rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, the provincial government has cut the agricultural 
department budget by 25 per cent. They’ve eliminated the 
property improvement grant, $83 million that helped all of the 
rural areas, helped the farmers pay their taxes — 83 million you 
took off. You’ve cut the agriculture budget by 25 per cent. You 
gave the farmers a fuel rebate, before the election, of 21 cents a 
gallon, and then after the election, you said, well we’ll cut it 
back now. So they did — to 9 cents. 
 
You promised that you were going to have a land transfer 
program to get young farmers involved in farming. You  

promised it in 1982, and you came in and you announced it — 
fewer young farmers on the land, my friend, today than in ’81. 
 
And you know what you did with the land purchase program? 
You phased it out, you phased it out, deceived the farmers 
again. You phased out all provincial funding for agricultural 
fairs and exhibitions. You phased out funding for all the 4-H 
regional program — 4-H. You have reduced the grants to 
various producer groups such as the Saskatchewan Livestock 
Association and the Sheep and Wool Marketing Commission. 
You planned to eliminate all the provincial funding with the 
prairie agricultural institute which tests and develops farm 
machinery. You cancelled travel grants and clinic operating 
grants for veterinarians meaning . . . You eliminated $120,000 
grants in rural municipalities for perennial weed control. You 
eliminated $365,000 in grants to R.M.s for rat control. You 
cancel the grants to the University of Saskatchewan totalling 
$200,000 for feed testing. You cancelled grants to the 
University of Saskatchewan totalling 80,000 for soil testing. 
Those are just some of the cuts. 
 
And you stood there s the minister of rural Saskatchewan and 
you watched the dental program, which was particularly useful 
in rural Saskatchewan, and you sat there and you agreed with it. 
And this was the dental program that brought it to the schools 
and provided not only dental care but preventative dental care. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, you destroyed the 
prescription drug which was used in rural Saskatchewan, and 
those are only some of the areas that you have decimated rural 
Saskatchewan. And I say to you, the people of this province are 
now aware that Tory governments, that you can’t be trusted, 
Mr. Minister, that certainly your Premier can’t be trusted. 
 
I have an article here, “A kick to the farmers.” This is the 
regional . . . “Provincial government cuts to rural programs are 
like kicking rural residents when they’re already down.” And he 
refers to the various cuts that have been made, and it says here, 
“cuts to production-related programs,” such as funds to 
perennial weed control, grants supporting soil, and reduction of 
ferry service, only to save the government about 1.2 million, 
while creating hardship at a time when farmers are already 
financially strapped. 
 
And many of these measures are not even cuts; they’re just 
transferring the cost, Mr. Minister, from the province to the 
rural municipalities or to individuals. And this is what you’ve 
done. You’ve been unfair. You promised a heaven, and you’re 
giving rural Saskatchewan a living hell today. That’s what has 
happened, and in this budget here, and as we go through it, Mr. 
Minister, it’s one of the greatest deceits that any rural affairs 
minister has ever presented to this House. 
 
And I want to ask you how you justify, when farmers are on 
their back, when they’re indebted, as I have indicated to you, 
when commodity prices are down, when they’re strapped, why 
you would cut your budget — and I’ll illustrate it — by over $4 
million? That’s what you’ve done, and you’ve transferred costs 
over to the R.M.s, and  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3461 
 

you’ve said, well, we kept the operating and the grants to the 
R.M.s about the same. Oh yes, you did. 
 
Well we’ll find out about that because that’s not true either, 
because we’ve taken a look at it, and I’ve talked to a few R.M.s. 
And well, sir, you’ve transferred now to them . . . Remember 
this gas tax that you took off? And now you have put it back on 
the backs of all the R.M.s and we’ll go into what it’s costing the 
R.M.s in respect to the gas tax and to the E&H tax — what it 
costs R.M.s And you’re saying, oh, I’m sticking up for rural 
Saskatchewan in these tough times. Well I’ll tell you, you’ll 
never fool the farmers again, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so what I want to ask you: how do you justify, as a rural 
affairs minister standing in this House, allowing the 
massiveness of the cuts that I have demonstrated and have only 
touch the tip of the iceberg? How do you justify pushing on the 
backs of farmers when they can’t afford to support further 
taxation, further cuts in programs? 
 
This is the last occasion, the last possible time that you should 
be cutting back to the extent that you have. So, I ask you 
simply: what is your justification of the massiveness of the 
cut-backs to rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting to 
note that the member from Quill Lakes says — what? — he’s 
saying that we haven’t done very much for farmers in the last 
couple of years or haven’t in any way put financial assistance 
out there for them. 
 
And if you look just over the last year, or year and a half now, 
there’s been over . . . approximately $415 million in 
Saskatchewan — in Saskatchewan — from a deficiency 
payment. There has been $1.2 billion at 6 per cent money; in 
fact it’s been interest free for a year and a half to the farmers. 
There’s been $70 million this year in livestock cash advances, 
interest money free, and there’s been almost, if not over, $500 
million in western grain stabilization money into this province 
— in the last year. In just shortly over a year, that’s just how 
much in cash has come into this province. It’s direct cash input 
into this province. 
 
It was interesting him saying that, what are you doing to protect 
the family farm. That’s what he said. I have to go back, Mr. 
Chairman, and say, when things were really good, the best time 
this province ever had, the best time this country has ever seen 
in the economic times around the world, 11,000 families left the 
farm. Now that’s quite a question for him to ask us when you 
realize that there’s been almost no exodus of families from the 
farm in the last few years. Now they have a debt out there, I 
grant you, and we’ve been working on it. 
 
You take a look at, he said, what did we do to help establish 
new farmers out there or young farmers. From 1971 to 1982 
they bought under state control and established 1,100 farms out 
there in rural Saskatchewan; at the same time they lost 11,000, 
remember. From 1982 to now there has been 5,400 farmers 
assisted at 8 per cent financing to establish them on the farms. 
In the last three years, the province of Saskatchewan has put 
$519 million direct cash out to help the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. In the last 10 years of the NDP administration, 
the last 10 years  

of the NDP administration, they put out $489 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s Department of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That’s just Department of Agriculture. 
That tells you, Mr. Chairman, how much we care about it and 
how we’ve been working towards it. 
 
The world price of grains, the world economy which reflects 
directly on us as exporters of raw materials and not the 
processor or manufacturer of any of these materials or the 
value-added industries which he last said, and says it doesn’t 
mean anything. Value-added industries in the provinces and 
across Canada where they are, are doing very well. They are 
very beneficial for long-term benefits to our farmers. 
 
So if he says, what have we done, we’ve done much, Mr. 
Chairman, over the last three to five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I like 
the way you keep telling the farmers of Saskatchewan that 
they’re better off today than they were in 1971 to ’82. Do you 
really think they believe that? You can keep telling them that 
until you’re blue in the face, but their pocket-book tells them 
different. And it tells them different for a number of reasons 
that have already been outlined, and I’ll just add a couple of 
more reasons. 
 
(2000) 
 
You ask the farmer of this province how much it’s going to cost 
their school districts to cover the cost of the gas tax to the 
school divisions. Ask them that. And I can tell you they’re 
going to say it’s going to cost us plenty. And the school division 
people will tell you the same thing. As in the Wakaw unit, 
$30,000 extra — $30,000 extra; $45,000 in P.A. rural. You tell 
the farmers how that’s better than they had it in the years past. 
 
And you ask them where that money’s going to come from. Is it 
going to come from the food budget on the farm? Because the 
money has to come from somewhere. Is it going to come from 
some of the payments to the banks, or their machinery 
payments? Where’s that money going to come from? 
 
We have a situation in Saskatchewan today where the 
hard-pressed farmers are being asked to pay more and more and 
more by your government. We see the fuel tax affecting the 
rural municipalities; we see the fuel tax affecting the R.M.s, and 
here, I’ll just quote from the Western Producer: 
 

Many services cost more in rural Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan rural residents pay more property tax per 
capita for municipal, school, and hospital services than do 
urban dwellers, according to a study done by 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 

 
And why, I ask, is that so? Why do they pay more taxes? 
Municipal and school and hospital taxes, why do they do that? 
And I tell you they do that because you have cut the  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3462 
 

funding to them; you have raised the gas tax to them; you have 
raised the education and health tax, and now they have to pay. 
They have to pay out of their pockets. Many of their pockets are 
empty. And so what happens? The services are cut. What 
happens to the school busing situation when all of a sudden 
there’s no money? Are you going to supply them money to keep 
their kids going to school? The way you operate, I doubt it. 
 
And then I ask you about the farm fuel rebate — cutting the 
farm fuel rebate in half. How is that helping the rural people of 
this province — $26 million coming out of their pockets and 
you’re helping them? I ask the minister this: can you tell me, 
Mr. Minister, what the total value of your gas tax means to the 
school districts in this province and the R.M.s? Give me the 
total, and then I want you to tell me where that money’s going 
to come from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that 
question was answered in the Education estimates. My 
understanding was, and I think if you’d go back and look in 
Hansard, it will probably tell you the exact figures, but that it 
was built into the formula and the grant structure knowing the 
tax was coming on, and there was extra amounts of dollars 
allocated to each school unit to allow for the amount of school 
busing that they would have at the 7 cents a litre. 
 
Also, with the R.M.s — and I think all R.M.s got the letter — 
that where they were doing construction work or building of 
roads and that, that we also funded the extra that it would cost 
them because of the 7 cents a litre. So all R.M.s got the letter — 
it was sent out to them — and any of them that requested it, it 
was refunded. It would be refunded to them. 
 
I don’t know when the letter was sent out. It was about . . .In 
fact, we’ve got a copy of the letter here that was sent out. I 
won’t read it all because it would take a while, but it said, 
August 10, and it just goes on to say that if you had a cost 
occurred or you’re building roads and the 7 per cent wasn’t 
allocated within the budget — we realize that — that we would 
pick up that. That 7 cents a litre on your fuel would be picked 
up on a cost-shared basis with the department. 
 
I don’t know how many letters we’ve had back on it but 
certainly I believe that’s what they asked us for, that’s what 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
asked us to do. I’ve met all around the province in the spring 
with just about, I think most of the R.M.s in this province. I was 
to all the district meetings. I had the opportunity to meet with 
them, and that was their request at that time and we honoured 
that request. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Let’s get specific here on it because I have 
phoned a number of R.M.s and I can tell you that I can detail 
some of the costs. 
 
In July, in this municipality here, it would have cost them from 
the time that it was instituted until July 16 about $1,120 extra, 
just on the tax. August 19 . . . It came into effect, I think, in 
June, June 21 to August. July 16 to August 19 — this is one of 
the R.M.s — they indicated it would be $1,347.50. I spoke to 
another administrator, and this R.M. uses about 500 gallons of 
fuel per day in  

midsummer and would go down to about 350 gallons now. And 
on 500 gallons of fuel tax, it would be about $160 a day, and 
350 gallons, the fuel tax is about $112 per day. That’s what 
they’re saying they are paying. 
 
Also this municipality luckily purchased a new road grader just 
before the 2 per cent sales tax came in, and this piece of 
equipment cost them $100,000. So if it had been purchased 
after this budget came down, a 40 per cent increase on the 
E&H, that cost to the municipality would have jumped by 
$2,000. That’s exactly what it says — the E&H tax applies to 
everything on the R.M. buys, from stationery to earth-moving 
equipment, there are few exceptions. Electricity purchased for 
the street lighting, water, sewer, light, other recreational facility, 
is not taxed. 
 
Another R.M., and here’s . . . Well I won’t even mention it to 
you. I’ll just tell you I’ve got the details here. The municipality 
purchased a $36,000 tractor after the E&H tax went up to 7 per 
cent, so $720 extra was assessed to the municipality. This is 
what the R.M. secretary told me. And the R.M. will buy about 
150,000 litres of fuel this year. It has been as high as 190,000 
— years when a lot of road building was done. And so you can 
calculate 7 per cent will therefore cost the R.M. about $10,500 
in extra tax on gas. That’s what you’ve done in respect to the 
R.M.s. 
 
And you brought in a budget which is deceptive. But in your 
budget, yourself, you’ve cut it from previously 57.703 million 
to 54.469 million, and that’s a myth. But there it is — over 3 
million on your own figures that you’ve cut from the budget 
and then you’ve imposed the E&H tax and you imposed the gas 
tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you justify these unconscionable 
increases to the R.M.s at a time when you cut your own budget 
to them by over $3 million, on your figures? And your figures 
are not the truth, because we’re going to establish that. How do 
you justify it? 
 
And you say, in respect on August 20, you sent out indicating 
that it would be cost-shared basis. I think perhaps . . . Would 
you file that letter so that our side would be able to take a look 
at it to see? Because I am very surprised, Mr. Minister. Why 
wouldn’t you, if you had that intention, why didn’t you put it in 
your budget? How can your revenues, from the estimation in 
your budget, be correct if you have after August 20 changed the 
rules again? 
 
So I ask you: will you table the letter, or would you indicate 
how it’s possible that only so few municipalities have indicated 
that they want to go into this new deal that you’re giving them. 
Could you outline, in specifics, the nature of that deal in that 
August 20 letter because you said it’s cost-shared. What does 
that mean? They pay a half, you pay a half? Or do they pay it 
all? What’s the arrangement? Let’s come clean with it, because 
this is not what the R.M.s are saying, and I’ll tell you I’d rather 
believe the R.M. secretaries which gave me this information. 
Would you please explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s obvious he 
doesn’t understand much about how rural councils work  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3463 
 

or rural Saskatchewan works as far as R.M. roads go. 
 
For years, Mr. Chairman . . . it’s not something that we’ve 
brought in since we became the government; when they were 
the government, it was the same. There’s a cost-shared program 
in regards to building main farm access grids, heavy haul roads, 
primary grid roads, and they vary, Mr. Chairman, from 70 per 
cent all the way up to 90 per cent government share. 
 
So what we have said to those R.M.s that we will . . . If the 
tender was out, regardless of when it was, if there’s an 
additional cost involved because of the 7 cents a litre tax, we 
will cost share that at the rate that we normally do it, which runs 
between — he must remember the 7 cents a litre is cost shared 
from 70 to 90 per cent. So it could vary from 2 cents a litre or 1 
cent a litre — the R.M.s share — and the government’s share 
would be the difference. 
 
The letter was sent out, Mr. Deputy Chairman, on August 10. 
I’ll just read a portion of it to you because it takes a while. And 
it just says: 
 

This is to advise you that in those instances where council 
is of the opinion that some adjustment of a contractor’s 
tendered price is justified because of the new fuel tax, the 
department will be prepared to cost share on such 
adjustment in those cases where the council feels an 
adjustment is warranted. The department will also cost 
share on the tendered of common excavation unit price. 

 
So what it tells you is that they will, if you were doing your 
own contracting out there, or the R.M. was doing it, we’d cost 
share proportionally to help pay for that fuel tax, as well. So all 
the road construction in this province was cost shared. The 
additional tax on fuel was cost shared. Most of it would have 
been picked up by the Government of Saskatchewan, a small 
portion would have been picked up by the local R.M.s. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, let’s get specific, Mr. Minister. Is it the 
cost sharing that you’re talking about relate to the tenders that 
were put out prior to the announcement? Are those the only 
tenders that you’re talking about? 
 
And what happens once it has been applied? Once the increase 
came in in June 21, and now I put out a tender after June 21, is 
the same consideration applied? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, of course it is. The 
reason that we allowed . . . The concerns of the R.M. was that a 
lot of tenders go out prior to the announcement of the tax, and 
they would have awarded those tenders to contractors, in some 
cases the contractor is their own outfits. 
 
They’d awarded those contracts, and all of a sudden they found 
that the contracts at 7-cents-a-litre fuel tax was an extra cost 
onto the contractors. Many of those contractors work on a very 
marginal amount of money, so we have said to those R.M.s that 
you can expand, or that you can change the contract, we’ll 
warrant it, and we’ll pick up the difference of whatever, or cost 
shared the difference. And that cost sharing runs between 70 per 
cent and 90 per cent, and the government cost share that. It does 
in all  

contracts. 
 
So any contracts that come out after, after the 21 of June, the 
contractor’s aware of it, and he bid accordingly. Again, we cost 
shared all of those costs, as we always have done, and it always 
has been that way. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Tenders you talk about. Tell me how many 
municipalities tendered out their work out of the 299, and how 
many of the municipalities do their own construction? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don’t have an exact number of how 
many R.M.s do their own work, but I just asked the folks with 
me and they’re saying about 10 to 15 per cent of the R.M.s do 
their own construction work, and the balance would be under 
tendered contract to whoever else they would tender it out to 
within the province. 
 
I believe most of the contracts that R.M.s do tender out are 
awarded to Saskatchewan contractors. I think we had a . . . I 
remember the ratio was about 98 per cent, I believe — was it 
not last year? — that were Saskatchewan contractors. In fact, in 
a lot of cases they use local people because it fits within their 
. . . They’re using their own taxpayers in a lot of cases or their 
own local people. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I want to give you an example. I 
have an R.M. here which I’ve contacted, and they indicate that 
in June they used $4,300 in fuel; in July ’87, 6,400; in august, 
7,700. So you have 10,750 litres since June 21 when the tax 
increase came into effect. This R.M. does all its road work and 
construction and maintenance. 
 
I ask you, do they not indeed have to pay the E&H tax? The 
information that I got, and it’s from the secretary, municipal 
secretary, is that in July, from the time it came in until July 16, 
about $1,120; July 16 to August was 19,250 gallons, 1,347. And 
that’s what they’re paying in respect to the use on the gas tax. Is 
that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I’m sure if the R.M. council sent it 
to you, they felt it was accurate. 
 
Just to clarify for sure so you understand, if you were using 
local R.M. equipment for contracting your own roads, there was 
an additional 4 per cent built into what they call the excavation 
price that normally go, and it’s an average price, and that’s how 
it’s done year after year. It’s averaged every year to give you 
that price, and the R.M. councils know what they are previous 
to starting it, and it’s built in. So there was an additional 4 per 
cent built in to accommodate those R.M.s who were doing their 
own because of the increase in the fuel price. So they would get 
an extra 4 per cent moneys paid to them because of a fuel tax 
that was added that we brought in to allow for any extra costs 
that they would occur because of that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You know what? You’re not being honest with 
the committee in my view, because when you take a look at the 
grants to community economic development,  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3464 
 

they’re down, they’re actually down. And where else in there 
would you possibly be giving the funds to the R.M.s? It has to 
be either in unconditional grants or in conditional grants. And if 
the E&H tax is a new add on, new tax, and if you’re paying less 
to the municipalities as a group, then you have to be cutting 
some other service because your overall funding to the 
municipalities is reduced. In your own budget . . . your own 
budget indicates that the grants to the municipalities is reduced. 
 
Well I can read, 48,574,000 plus in 1986-87, down to 48 
million this year. Now you tell me, where else other than out of 
the grants structure do they receive their funds? And if it’s 
funny, then maybe you can ask your deputy to explain it to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I know the answer without having it 
explained to me. First of all, when he said I wasn’t telling the 
truth, I was telling the truth. I told it exactly how it is, and if 
you’re an R.M. council out there, you know that’s how it is. 
You’ve got the letter; you know how it works. And you can . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well I’ve got it here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don’t know what you’re reading, and I 
suppose that’s your prerogative; I do know how it works out 
there. And to tell you that . . . You talk about how come the 
budget can be down or the allocation within our budgetary 
expenditures can be down by 3 million of dollars, and we 
haven’t changed the grant structure, the grants formula. Well, 
last year because, I suppose, of tougher economic times and 
whatever else, the R.M.s themselves did not use up all the 
money that was available to them for expenditures. In fact, on 
the conditional side where they build roads, there was almost $5 
million left unexpended which we sent out, that there were . . . 
where R.M.s had built in advance, just to help them out, you 
know, so we sent it out. But there was almost $5 million 
unexpended from what was in the budget from the previous 
year, which we do send out to them on futures, but at the same 
time, we estimate that this year there’ll be probably some left 
again because a lot with the road rationalization program we’re 
proposing, they’re waiting to see how, in fact, and where they 
should be building the roads. 
 
As you know, we’ve been travelling around the province 
meeting with every R.M. council. We’ve sent . . . we’ve talked 
to and met with every R.M. council in regards to roads and road 
rationalization and road reconstruction. So they have held back 
in building some of the roads, waiting to see where they should 
build it, what communities are going to be needing the service, 
and how they should service their farmers. But just to be 
specific, there was $5 million less in the budget this year, end of 
this year because of less road construction. And we will send 
that money out in sort of an advance to next year to the R.M.s. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You’ve just admitted that what you have done 
is cut back, that the road construction is down, and what they’ve 
had to do is to take money now from their road construction 
grants — that’s what you were saying;  

that’s what you’re saying — and transfer it over to cover off 
this massive E&H tax and also in respect to the gas tax. That’s 
what you have said. You’ve said that they aren’t using up their 
road construction, and, you know, at a time when you’re 
introducing and allowing the variable rates, when more and 
more trucking is being done and more and more wear and tear 
on the road system, that’s what you’re asking is that all over the 
head . . . The minister has sat here in the House and, you know, 
he hasn’t made a speech on his feet. It’s awful funny . . . The 
member from Morse is chirping. Yes, I’ll tell you I’ll believe 
the R.M. secretaries any day before I’ll believe a Tory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I’ll tell you in the R.M. that I’ve dealt with 
they are saying they’re paying $1,120 for the gas tax in August, 
$1.347. Also in another municipality it would come to about 
$160 a day on the gas tax. 
 
I want to . . . It’s clearly established that what you have done is 
transfer onto them. You’ve kept your budget in respect to the 
funding of the municipalities less than last year. It’s down from 
last year; you can’t deny it. And I’ll tell you what you did: not 
only did you cut the grants to the R.M.s but you also rolled in 
another $2 million that they got last year into the grants . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . He says they are the same. That’s 
what you’ve done in your budget. Total deception. 
 
I ask you then in respect to the . . . I think the R.M.s are fully 
aware of the situation. I asked the minister if he would table the 
letter so that we would have a copy of that for our perusal. And 
I would repeat that: would you be prepared to table the letter 
that you sent out to the R.M.s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, we’ll get you a copy of the letter 
and send it to you. I’ve no problem with that; we’ll get you a 
copy of the letter and send it to you. The one I’ve got here, I’ve 
written all over, but I’ll certain get you a copy of the letter and 
send it to you. It’s public knowledge. It went out to 299 R.M.s, 
so I don’t think it’s very secretive . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well but they’ve still got the letter. 
 
In regards to the . . . you’re talking about the mileage. I want to 
make it absolutely clear, absolutely clear what I said before. I 
said last year there was some $5 million left unexpended mostly 
because of . . . well all because of not used up in capital 
expenditures. Some of that was because a lot of the contracts 
came in much less expensive than they had normally been 
coming in and for 1987, just so you know exactly where it sits 
at. In 1986 there was 1,016 kilometres of road reconstructed 
that was under the grant formula in Saskatchewan, and in 1987, 
to the end of September, there was 972 kilometres of road either 
built or reconstructed. And the total value for 1987 for almost 
the same amount of roads is estimated to be close to $13 
million. And in 1986 the total estimated value was some $14.4 
million, just to give you an idea. 
 
So there’s only 30-some-odd kilometres less built in 1987 than 
’86, yet the cost is down about $1.5 million. So I’m saying there 
probably will be some left over this year, which we, in fact, will 
sent out to the R.M.s. And some of them, they do some 
construction ahead of time, ahead of  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3465 
 

knowing the money will come, and they may be two or three 
years ahead of the grant formula, so we send that out to help 
them continue to build in the future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s a changing story 
because you stood up and said first that there was a saving 
because road construction was down, because I wrote it down 
as you said it initially. Now you change the story; so I don’t 
know which story to believe. I’ll believe the R.M.s. 
 
But I ask you, out of what provision of funds within your 
estimates here, out of the estimates, does this here so-called 
August 20 cost-shared basis to cover the E&H? Where does it 
come out of? And was it included in the June 17 budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just so you have it absolutely clear, first 
of all, you said that what I said was contradictory to my 
previous statement. That’s not true. That’s absolutely not true. I 
said, amount of road construction that we cost shared was 
down, and I told you later it was down. It was down from 1,016 
kilometres to 972 kilometres. And what I added to it, so you 
would understand it fully, was also the total cost of that 
construction of those roads was also down from $13 odd 
million to $14.4 million, from 1986. It was ‘86 it was 14.4, and 
’87 it was only just, not quite even, $13 million. And which is 
at one point, $5 million savings. And that’s what I’ve said 
before and that’s what I . . . I want to make sure you absolutely 
understand that. 
 
You asked where this here additional dollars would come out 
of. It comes out of the overall funding under the grant formula 
that’s for rural development and for the R.M.s out there. And so 
that’s where it fits in, and it always does because it’s always 
these types of things that fit into it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It wasn’t there last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well you can look. It’s under item 11 
which is your overall funding, and if you notice, there’s little or 
no difference from one year to the next. In fact, it’s up a slight 
bit — about $500,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right, Mr. Minister, let’s take your scenario. 
Last year you said you have essentially the same amount of 
grants, all right. Let’s take that scenario. About the same 
amount of grants to the R.M.s. You say that’s where it comes 
from. 
 
I ask you then, have you done a calculation as to what the gas 
tax, the total cost to all R.M.s in Saskatchewan, based on their 
information of number of gallons used, as I’ve done just for 
three or four, have you done a calculation to determine the 
amount of money that it will take to come out of this here grant 
to cover off the E&H? 
 
(2030) 
 
It has to be hundreds of thousands of dollars because you look 
at one municipality and they’re paying 1,200, 1,100, 1,300. 
Over here they’re paying $160 a day at 500 gallons a day and 
part of the time it’s only 350. But even at $100 a municipality 
. . . and it’s going to be more than that; it has to be. 

So I ask you, did you do a calculation and can you tell me the 
impact of the cost of the impact on R.M.s in respect to the 
increase of the E&H tax from 5 per cent to 7 per cent? And 
what that means because what you’re saying — you aren’t 
giving them any more money — you’re saying, if there’s 
anything within that budget that I send out there that you don’t 
use, I guess we’ll cost share. Because that’s what you said; it’s 
all wrapped up in here. It was never covered in your budget. So 
now either you haven’t appropriated any more money . . . You 
haven’t said that. You said it comes out of the development 
grants. 
 
So I ask you, if the R.M.s were paying it on their own — let’s 
say that — what would be the total estimated cost to the 
municipalities, based on their average use of fuel per 
municipality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we haven’t done a 
survey on the actual cost to the R.M.s. We did do a . . . We sent 
out a letter to the R.M.s asking them to tell us about their mill 
rate for 1987 and what it would be, and we were concerned that 
there may be some increases. And we were pleasantly surprised 
to find that 73 per cent of the R.M.s out there had no increase in 
mill rates, 10 per cent decreased their mill rates, and 17 per cent 
had a slight increase in mill rates, which, I think, tell you 
basically that the R.M.s held the mill rates in line. 
 
And if you look at the formula — you were talking about how 
this would fit in — if there is an additional increase in the cost 
to each R.M., under the formula which was devised many years 
ago they would automatically trigger additional moneys in the 
unconditional side of the formula for 1988. 
 
In 1987, to help offset some additional costs that may occur . . . 
They brought in a regravel program in 1986, as you know, to 
allow them to regravel up to 100 yards on all designated roads 
in the R.M.s. We extended that program to 1987; in fact, we 
increased the funding by 10 per cent to allow them, if there was 
any additional cost involved in doing their own gravelling 
which a lot of them do or, in fact, contracting it out to, in fact, 
maintain the road system out there and maintain the 100 yards 
per mile gravel program. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I guess, first of all, to be clear, we know we 
haven’t done an overall survey in regards to the cost to each 
R.M. We certainly will be looking at that over the next few 
months for 1988. But we did build in additional moneys to 
offset their grading or contracting or building of new roads. 
And we also, for the maintenance of the existing road system, 
we built in an additional 10 per cent on the regravel side. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d duck that question too, Mr. Minister. I’m 
appalled. I guess that’s why we’re in the mess that we’re in in 
Saskatchewan, because you brought in a budget, mister, which 
indicated that E&H was going to jump 40 per cent. And it’s 
going to have an impact on 299 rural municipalities. And you 
didn’t even take a look as to see what that impact would be on 
the R.M.s? 
 
That puts a pretty good picture as to where you’re at, Mr. 
Minister. You don’t know what’s going on, I guess. No, I don’t 
think you do. I think you know, and I think your  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3466 
 

officials can give you the answer if you asked, but you’d be so 
bloody embarrassed to stand in this House and give that figure 
that you’re denying that you know. 
 
I ask you: haven’t you done an estimate as to the cost, what 
moneys will have to come out of the allocated grants that you’re 
giving to rural municipalities? I’m telling you here that it’s 
costing up to $160 a day for the R.M.s that I’ve contacted. And 
you haven’t even the decency to stand here and tell us that 
you’ve done a calculation. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, do you really indicate that you went 
through your budget process, cut the grants to the R.M.s, cut the 
grants substantially because you rolled in another program of $2 
million, so it’s down substantially? And are you saying here 
that you didn’t even do a calculation to realize? And certainly 
you didn’t build into the grant structure to cover it. 
 
I ask you again, can you give us a ballpark figure as to the 
impact of the cost to the municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, he has been reading 
and looking and talking to a couple of R.M.s out there, and I’m 
sure that he has that information that he feels is adequate. I 
don’t want to make any guesses. I would like to think that we 
went out and talked to the R.M.s and got exactly, and put 
together, the information that he has asked for for next year so 
we can look at it as an overall feature. But let’s make sure that 
he understands that the fuel tax may have been and may be 
whatever he says — 4 or $5,000 per R.M. You know, some 
rough estimates, and I believe it’s something in that 
neighbourhood. I’m not sure what it is. 
 
And we did do some assumptions, and I’ll give him the 
assumption that we did. The annual fuel consumption of, say, 
65,000 litres a year would probably cost each R.M. about 
$40,000, and that was an average cost. That’s two motor patrols 
and with no road construction equipment. Now you understand 
that the road construction equipment is cost shared, and we pick 
up a share of that tax that would be increased or added on to it. 
 
But just to be sure, just to be sure that the R.M.s did not in any 
way suffer from any additional taxes that may have occurred, 
we continued with the regravel program. And, Mr. Chairman, 
we were just going through some of the lists of what some of 
the R.M.s would get, directly get, in addition to their revenue 
sharing, in addition to their unconditional grants, and in 
additional to their conditional grants. On top of that, some 
R.M.s would get as much as almost $60,000 per year, $60,000 
for 1987, and most of them run in the 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 
$50,000 from our share to help them regravel the roads that was 
never there and never there before. We brought that in in 1986 
to help them through a wet year. 
 
We continued this year because we felt that those R.M.s would 
need those additional dollars, and I know that there may be 
$4,000 estimated. That’s an estimate in regards to fuel tax put 
on to where you’re doing two motor graders and two motor 
patrols. But to supplement that, and not directly, but indirectly 
supplement it, we did  

bring in a program, and continue a program, that would have 
given them an additional 40 to $50,000. In fact, you could get 
as high as $60,000 and I believe that’s very, very substantial 
and would offset any additional costs that they may, in fact, 
have incurred. 
 
And in many cases, Mr. Chairman, just the increase in the 
amount of grant that we made available for regravelling — the 
10 per cent additional one — would probably be more than the 
E&H tax on the total amount that they would spend that year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I know why you’re dodging the 
question. If you take an average of $160 a day for the 300 
municipalities — that’s $48,000 a day — and multiply that by 
what? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Five working days. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Five working days in the week, 48,000 a day 
— it comes out to about $240,000 a day. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A week. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A week, rather — $240,000. That’s about the 
impact — just a rough calculation in respect to the R.M.s. 
 
I want to go on. Obviously you’re hedging. I mean, I can’t 
believe that any man would bring in a budget, place upon the 
municipalities a huge increase of 40 per cent on E&H tax, gas 
tax, rather, for their fuel, and decrease the amount of grants to 
rural development and say that they’re better off. None of the 
R.M.s, I’ll tell you, that I have talked to, believe you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I want to ask also: how you have worked into this here decrease 
in grants to the municipalities the impact in respect to the E&H 
tax? Have you covered that off? Because my information here is 
that if you go out and buy a $100,000 piece of equipment, that it 
would cost a 40 per cent hike, and sales tax would jump it by 
$2,000 — $2,000, Mr. Chairman. The R.M. here purchased a 
tractor for 36,000 and the E&H tax went up to 7 per cent and so 
$720 of that is extra E&H tax. 
 
I wonder if you could explain whether you did a calculation in 
respect to the impact of the E&H tax on the municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, maybe I heard him 
wrong, but I heard him say their purchased something for 
$50,000 and it went up . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A hundred thousand. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I don’t know much out there that’s 
worth $100,000. I suppose it wouldn’t be a motor grader, but it 
might be something — bigger equipment. 
 
Even at $100,000, when the increase in tax, Mr. Chairman, was 
from 5 per cent, which the NDP had there for many, many 
years, to 7 per cent, that seems to me that it would be $2,000, is 
what it would be. I think he said something like $2,500 or 
something. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3467 
 

But anyway, I just want to make it clear that in regards to the 
tax on gas for the R.M.s, you know, under the formula, you 
know, we have looked after, it’s about $4,000, and we’ve done 
many things to put it into place. 
 
He’s asking about the E&H tax on, in regards to equipment, 
yes, and that’s true there would be some additional costs 
involved there. And under the formula, as it’s been there for 
many years, if there is additional cost, whether it’s capital cost, 
whether it’s expenditures under maintenance cost, it is built into 
the formula, and it triggers the following year. So if there’s 
some cost, it triggers in the following year. 
 
And that’s the way it’s always been. That’s the way they had it 
when they were there, and that’s the way it’s been ever since 
then. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think, Mr. Minister, I asked you whether you, 
in respect to the E&H, will you agree that it applies to all of the 
purchases or essentially all of the purchases that are made by 
the R.M.s? 
 
By the way, just not to confuse you and if you’d listen, I did say 
that a road grader costing $100,000, that the 40 per cent hike in 
the E&H tax would be $2,000 — I didn’t say $2,500. So don’t 
start that game of putting in facts that I didn’t put in. Two per 
cent of 100,000 is $2,000, so don’t play your goofy games in 
respect to misinterpreting what I said, because this is what was 
given to me by the R.M. 
 
I want to ask you, you know, anything so incredibly 
incomprehensible as what you’re trying to say here — 
everything that the R.M. gets is either through the grant 
program, conditional or unconditional. The grants to rural 
development went down; E&H tax jumped 40 per cent. Okay? 
Gas tax jumped 7 cents a litre. You’re giving them less in grants 
than the year before and you’re saying it’s covered within the 
formula. Now obviously if they’re paying some items they 
didn’t pay last year, then something has to be decreased. That’s 
the obvious fact. 
 
But the fact is, Mr. Minister, the R.M.s across this province 
have been heaped upon with extra costs both in the gas tax and 
in respect to the E&H tax. And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, 
did you do a calculation as to the impact of the massive increase 
of the E&H tax of 40 per cent that that would have on the 
municipalities? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we could go on and 
on in a lot of different ways. But just to clarify it again, and 
certainly when he asked the question, is any road equipment or 
anything purchased by the R.M. tax exempt, and my 
understanding, no, it’s not. E&H tax is applicable to all road 
graders and any type of construction equipment. 
 
But when he’s talking about new road patrols or other 
equipment that you purchase . . . And he knows how it works. 
You put it under a capital program and it’s expended out over 
the years and there’s some financing costs absorbed. The 
bottom line is that we built in, directly or indirectly, or however 
you want to call it, to most municipalities a $40,000 benefit in 
regravel that  

would offset any additional costs they may have incurred. 
 
And I think when you go back — I hear them laughing over 
there — but when you go back and look at what the R.M.s have 
done with their mill rate, building almost the same amount of 
roads, maintaining the same amount of roads, in fact more — 
when you build more, you’ve got more to maintain — you look 
at it and you say 73 per cent of the R.M.s did not increase their 
mill rate, and they tell us 10 per cent decreased their mill rate. 
That tells me, Mr. Chairman, that in fact what we have done 
with rural development, the way we fund it, the changes we 
have made, the way that the regravel program is in, that in fact 
there hasn’t been an extra burden on the R.M.s. In fact they’ve 
been able to hold the line and probably one of the . . . This is the 
second year in a row that they’ve been able to do it, and still 
build almost as many roads as they built before and maintain 
more roads. Because each year when you add another 1,000 
kilometres of roads, you, in fact, you add . . . and this year 
another 972; that’s almost 2,000 kilometres of roads that you 
have added, that’s been added to the system, and they’re 
maintaining them and still reducing or maintaining their mill 
rates. It seems to me that that is not only a responsible type of 
government for the R.M.s, but it also tells us that, provincially, 
we’re funding in the right way to help maintain the system and, 
in fact, keep the mill rates right where they were. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, did you hear the question? Did 
you do a calculation on the cost that it would . . . a massive 
increase in the E&H tax would cost the R.M.s, or was that not 
considered either? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I told you . . . I told him, Mr. Chairman, 
that we built the cost, the estimated cost, any extra cost plus a 
lot more, into doing other things, such as the regravel program. 
And I went through the whole area of what the R.M.s have 
done. And when he says there’s a 40 per cent increase in the 
E&H tax — you talk about misleading the public; like 
sometimes there’s a limit to how far you can mislead anybody. 
That’s a 2 per cent increase in the E&H tax; that’s what it really 
is, not 40 per cent. 
 
You can take any numbers you want; you can drag them out 
any way you want. I mean, that’s certainly an option, and if you 
are getting . . . If you’re selling, if you’re selling beef to a 
farmer for $1 a pound and it goes up 10 cents a pound, that’s a 
10 per cent increase, right? So, that’s $1.10. So, you know, he 
can just change it any way . . . change around any way he 
wants. The bottom line is that the E&H tax went up 2 per cent; 
that we’ve built into, that we have built into the overall 
structure by using regravel program, by using different types of 
maintenance programs, by putting into place . . . leaving in 
place the unconditional grants the same as they were, and by 
using the same formula that’s been there for years, never 
changed it at all, other than to bring in some new additions to it. 
We have managed to do that, at the same time managed to 
control our budget and the R.M.s managed to control theirs, 
because it’s obvious they’ve never increased their mill rates. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I guess the minister missed the question or 
didn’t address it. You said you built in the estimated cost in 
respect to the massive tax increases. By the way, your  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3468 
 

sales tax did go up 40 per cent. You said you built in the 
estimated costs into your budget to cover that, knowing that in 
the budget there was going to be tax increases. I ask you: what 
was the estimated cost that you built in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, there’s two things, Mr. Chairman, 
you have to realize. First, the R.M.s don’t normally tell us when 
they’re going to buy a grader or trade a grader off; in most cases 
it’s trading one off. If they go in and buy a grader, usually it’s a 
trade-in. I don’t know what the grader prices are. When I was 
reeve of the R.M., I know the graders ran around 40 to $50,000, 
60, with a trade-in, and there’s a difference. 
 
The other part of the question that I believe that he asked was, 
how did you build it into there. You must remember that R.M.s 
don’t buy a new grader ever year, a new road patrol. They just 
don’t do that. They may buy one every five or six years. So the 
overall scale that we built on, and I went over it three or four 
times for the member, it’s been built into there. There’s ways of 
maintaining the system and building the system even better and 
using the budgetary expenditures in a very efficient way. I 
believe that’s what we’ve done. 
 
I believe that most R.M. councils would agree with that. And 
certainly, another year we’ll be meeting with the SARM 
executive, which I did today. I met with them twice today, in 
fact. We talk over many, many different issues, and they touch 
the folks out there as much as anybody else. I meet, as you 
know, on an ongoing basis with R.M. councils. I’ll be meeting 
with them again, starting district meetings and then into the 
mini convention and then at the major convention. 
 
I met last year, I think I can say, with 70 R.M. councils during 
the convention. I travelled the entire province. I’ve met with 
just about somebody from every council in this province over 
the last year. That’s consultation and we’ll continue that and we 
will look at the overall view of budgetary expenditures for 
1988. 
 
But for 1987, I believe that most R.M. councils were satisfied 
with what was done. It was done in a very fair and a very 
appropriate way, and I don’t know why the member would 
continue to belabour an issue such as this one. I think the R.M. 
councils would say to you — 99 per cent of them would, 
anyway — that they’re satisfied with the way it went so far, and 
they’d like to continue not only the process but the consultation 
process which has been going on over the last few years. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You should get a cap for that answer. Some 
kind of a Houdini you must be, because what you’ve done is 
paid the municipalities less and then you heaped on taxes which 
they have to cover out of the operating grants. And it’s as 
simple as that, and therefore, there’s going to be less and less 
capability of carrying on. And you can’t say that the funds are 
same or equal, and no amount of juggling can change that. 
That’s the fact. That’s what the municipalities have indicated. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m disappointed that you wouldn’t, in fact, 
indicate when the municipalities . . . and when you announced 
to the municipalities that the operating grants were going to 
remain exactly the same — the conditional  

grants. That’s what you indicated. Conditional grants would 
remain the same as the previous year, and you said the 
unconditional grants would be cut by 1 per cent. That’s what 
you said prior to the budget, by the way. Before you gave us the 
opportunity to even to look at the budget, you were making 
these great announcements and trying to sell it. 
 
But I tell you, you didn’t put in your press announcement the 
massiveness of the taxation that would have to come out of a 1 
per cent cut. That’s what you said in your press release, that you 
cut the funding in the unconditional grants by 1 per cent. And 
not only did you do that . . . That’s what you indicated in your 
press release and I can pull it if you want. And you said the 
conditional grants would remain the same. 
 
Then what you’ve done is heaped on to the municipalities, 
which you didn’t put into your press release, oh, but we’re 
sorry, out of your operating grants, out of your grants to the 
municipalities, conditional and unconditional, that you would 
have to pay, indeed, a massive amount of taxes, which you 
promised the people of Saskatchewan that you wouldn’t put 
back on. 
 
And you won an election in ’82, and you deceived them, and 
you’re part of the team that did it to Saskatchewan people and 
to the R.M.s. And you’re heaping more taxes at a time when 
they can ill afford it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don’t know if there’s a question there or 
not, Mr. Chairman, but I asked my officials to give me a sort of 
a breakdown of . . . be sure that I make it absolutely clear what 
we did with the budgetary expenditures for the Rural 
Development. 
 
Under the maintenance grant, the maintenance grant, it went up, 
I believe, 1 or 2 or 3 per cent. The unconditional grant, although 
we did tell the R.M.s it was going to drop by 1 per cent, it 
didn’t. We left it exactly the same. The conditional grant was 
where it went down. In fact the regravel grant went up 10 per 
cent, but the conditional grant because we . . . two reasons: one, 
less roads being constructed. That started back in 1986. There 
was $5 million left over, and in 1987 there is going to be a few 
less. I believe it’s 38-odd kilometres of roads that’s going to be 
not built in 1987. Again, I think I told you that the amount of 
dollars spend on roads, on capitalist construction of roads, is 
down. And so, therefore there probably will be a substantial 
amount left over again this year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That’s right. So therefore, the 
unconditional grants remain the same as 1986. The regravel 
program went up 10 per cent and the maintenance program, I 
believe, went up — I’m not sure — 1 per cent, 2 per cent, 
maybe up to 3. Yes, it ranged from 1 to 3 per cent, depend on 
the formula. So it went up in that area. 
 
So the area that was down under the budgetary expenditures 
was really under the capital or rebuilding or  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3469 
 

road building side which, in fact, the R.M.s are building less of, 
which just wasn’t all being used up. There was unexpended 
money left last year, and there will be some again this year. So 
R.M.s again could go out and build the roads. They just weren’t 
using up all the moneys that was there. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, as a 
percentage figure, what was the reduction of funds to the rural 
municipalities in your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, maybe he’d like to 
rephrase the question. I’m not sure if he means the revenue 
sharing from 1986-87 to 1987-88, which is down about 1 per 
cent overall, or does he mean each individual ones that I just 
outlined a few moments ago. Is that what he was meaning? 
Because I was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Overall, overall cut. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well the difference is: in 1986-87, it was 
$48,547,420; in 1987-88, it’s $48,061,950. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So, Mr. Minister, what percentage of a cut 
would that be overall to the rural municipalities including every 
aspect of the revenue from the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well the difference, and I think I said it, 
between the two overall budgets is about 1 per cent. It’s about 
$500,000, is the difference between ’86-87 budgets and ’87-88 
budgets. So that’s the difference of it, which is about 1 per cent. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have a clip from one 
Sinclair Harrison, the director of the SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), and he says: 
 

. . . however several grants including the $2 million for 
upgrading of heavy-haul roads rolled into the 
revenue-sharing money, making the overall cut nearly 6 
per cent. 

 
Do you agree with that statement, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well if you’re asking, is the heavy-haul, 
high-volume roads budget within the Rural Development 
overall road rationalization program, then the answer is yes. 
When you talk about the overall budgets put together and if you 
talked about, like, the heavy-haul roads, the Rural Development 
corporations, the revenue-sharing, I mean when you package 
them altogether, then you would come out with about 5.6 per 
cent difference in funding. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Minister, that cut of 6 per cent, I’d 
like to ask the minister, in order for those rural municipalities to 
maintain their function in that community that they represent, 
the roads, the ditches, all the programs they run, I ask you: 
where do you think that difference of 6 per cent is going to 
come from? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I know, maybe you weren’t 
listening, but I told the other member where that  

difference in the money would . . . where the difference is. 
 
Your maintenance has went up slightly from 1 to 3 per cent — 
that’s your maintenance program that’s been there for a long 
time. Your regravel program which we brought in in ’86-87, we 
increased it by 10 per cent. And our unconditional grants — 
that’s the one the R.M.s do whatever they want with; they don’t 
have to account for it back to the government, they’ve got to 
account to their own taxpayers — that’s remained the same. 
 
The difference, the difference in the dollars comes in road 
construction; and in the heavy-haul, high-volume roads; in the 
grids; in the main farm access; in the primary grids. That is 
where the overall construction is down. And also it was down 
about, I think, close to 40 kilometres — 38 or something. But 
also the cost of construction went down. So that there’s two 
areas . . . And besides that 1987, or 1986, the road construction 
year for 1986, the unexpended money left with rural 
development for road construction was 5-odd millions of 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, the way I look at 
it, if you have $100 and you’re $6 short, you’ve got to find 
those $6 in order to maintain your service. 
 
So, you’ve got an option. You can raise the mill rate and pick 
the pockets of the farmers more because the government’s not 
picking up their end, or you have reduced services, and that’s 
what happening. Because you’re cutting back to the rural 
municipalities, the money is coming out of the pockets of the 
farmers. I don’t call that rural development. I call that using the 
farmers who are hard pressed already for cash. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I just want to ask you one more question 
that I alluded to before and you didn’t answer: where will the 
cost of the . . . First of all, how much extra cost will it cost the 
school division to maintain their school buses because of the 7 
cent a litre . . . the 40 per cent increase in your gas tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that they 
asked that three or four or five times of the Minister of 
Education. He answered it, it’s in Hansard. I don’t have the 
details of what it costs to school units; that was done by the 
Department of Education. They did do those analyses; it was 
built into the overall funding grant, I understand. If you go back 
in Hansard and look back, you’ll certainly find those answers 
there. I don’t know what else you could say; it’s there three or 
four or five times in Hansard. I urge you to look for yourself in 
there. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, do you agree that that shortfall 
to the school divisions will have to come out of the pockets of 
the farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I think if you look in Hansard, there 
was no shortfall. I can’t remember the amount left over, but it 
seemed to me it was above and beyond what was allowed in the 
formula, was about 3 or $400,000 left above and beyond the 
allowing for that 7-cents-a-litre tax. I don’t believe there was 
any additional cost to the farmers there. 
 
If you . . . and you live out in rural Saskatchewan. I’m  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3470 
 

surprised that you don’t, in fact, realize that the major cost to 
farmers today isn’t whether there is an extra $100 or $200 in 
taxes one way or the other. Our major costs out there today are 
two-fold: one of them is debt out there and the payment of the 
farm debt. That’s a major, major concern and we’ve been trying 
to address that in a very, very broad scale. It’s got to be 
addressed and everybody knows it. 
 
If you want to take it back a ways — I’m not going to go back 
— but you go back to why it’s there, and I’m sure that your side 
of the House could accept a lot of that blame for that or a 
portion of that anyway. And the other important part of the 
concern out there is the price we get for our product that we 
sell. Export prices are down. 
 
So two major concerns: debt and the price for our product that 
we sell. I think that’s the two major concerns out there and 
those are the ones we’ve got to address. Whether the taxes go 
up $10 or whether the taxes go down $10, maintain the level we 
got, but address the real issue, and that is debt. And that is the 
farm income that we need to keep farmers alive out there and 
keep them surviving well. Those are the issues we should be 
addressing, and not whether it’s $10 in taxes one way or the 
other. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, I do live out in 
rural Saskatchewan and I know the situation and I know that 
debt is one of the things — the big thing. But let me tell you, 
your government’s not doing anything about that debt. And let 
me tell you about some of things that you’re loading on top of 
that debt, and I’ll add them up. There’s the rat control program 
that you’ve cut for $365,000. There’s the perennial weed 
control program that you’ve cut, that comes out of your . . . The 
gas tax that you’ve put up, the flat tax that you’ve put up, the 
E&H tax that you’ve put up, the cuts to the soil and feed test lab 
that you’ve put up. All the other things from all the funding that 
you’ve cut, you add those up to the farmers of this province and 
it’s not a slight to them. It doesn’t mean just a little thing to 
them, because their mill rate goes up, their out-of-pocket cost 
goes up, and it’s you and your government who has caused that. 
And if you think that those farmers in Saskatchewan today are 
any better off now than they were from ’71 to ’72, then I tell 
you, Mr. Minister, you are sadly mistaken. 
 
And I think that the farmers of this province know that, add up 
all the cuts from your government, that the rural constituency in 
this province is hard hit, and they’re hard hit by a government 
that does not care, by a leader of that government who is more 
concerned about running around the world than talking to 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
I think that’s the problem that you have, not knowing, not 
representing your constituency to the Minister of Education. 
You didn’t even know what the costs of school busing tax was 
because you didn’t represent that rural constituency to the 
Minister of Education, saying, no, that’s wrong, they shouldn’t 
pay that extra tax. You let the farmers of this province down, 
down badly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 
to summarize here in respect to the massiveness of the cut and 
the deception that you put out in your release.  

Today you stood up and you agreed that there was in fact a 6 
per cent decrease in overall funding compared to the previous 
year. And still you go forward and put in your press release the 
deception to the public that there was no cuts — exactly the 
same — a 1 per cent cut in conditional grants and unconditional 
grants you put in your press release were the same. And here 
you stand up in the House and you have to admit it because one 
of the executive officers of the R.M.s indicated and you agreed 
that it decreased by 6 per cent. Because what you didn’t do . . . 
 
You said, take a look at the grants to rural development and it’s 
just about the same. That’s what you said. But you know what 
you didn’t do? You didn’t say that the previous year that the 
municipalities had grants for upgrading of heavy haul roads of 
$2 million which you, in fact, rolled in to this grant system. So 
that’s a deception. And I think that, you know, you have to 
come clean with the public. 
 
You put out in a press release that the unconditional, no . . . the 
conditional grants are down 1 per cent and that the 
unconditional grants are the same. And when we grill you on it 
and we look through your budget, there’s an obvious cut of 
about 6 per cent. Why would you deceive the people of 
Saskatchewan by indicating in a press release that you only cut 
the budget by 1 per cent? Why would you say that, when in 
fact, if you look at the total budget, it’s down by over $3 
million, and in respect to the R.M.s themselves, you’ve rolled in 
another program worth $2 million? 
 
Obviously, you have to have eliminated something and you say 
you haven’t cut it. Why do you use that deception? Why would 
you say in your press release one thing, and here today in the 
House, you’ve had to admit that there was really a 6 per cent 
decrease in the grant structure to the municipalities? Can you 
explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we went over 
it three or four times, but just to explain it to him one more 
time. The $2 million he talks about in the heavy-haul, 
high-volume roads is what we estimated that would be used in 
1986-87. In fact, I believe it was somewhere around 
1-point-some-odd-millions of dollars that was used. In 1987-88, 
we estimate it will be somewhere around 1.3, 1.5. And I don’t 
know if it’s going to be that high or not. 
 
Estimates, budget estimates are the best estimates that we can 
get in regards to R.M.s., and given to us by R.M. councils on 
what they intend to do, carried over from the previous year. As 
I said to the member before, there was 5-odd millions of dollars 
that we carried forward, that we paid out in advance before the 
year end. So in fact . . . And there will be leftovers this year 
which we will pay out in advance to the next year to help R.M.s 
get going and get the year started. And you met with R.M. 
council; you know that’s absolutely true. In fact, they wait for 
the advance cheque to come. In fact, they’ll start phoning before 
the end of March wondering how much they’re going to get in 
advance. 
 
So in fact, what I’m saying is that although there was a 
difference, and there’s been no doubt about it, about 5.6 per 
cent, which is 2-point-some millions of dollars, there  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3471 
 

is in fact going to be left over money not spent by R.M. 
councils, not substantial, but dollars left over. It’s be in the 2, 3, 
4 millions of dollars again this year, left over that won’t be 
spent because of road . . . not as much road construction, and 
because the road construction is down, or the price of road 
construction is down. So there in fact will be and has been over 
the years and continually been done that way. 
 
So what I’m saying is, every program remains the same. The 
heavy-haul, high-volume program is the same as it was when 
we brought it in. The regravel program increased by 10 per 
cent. The maintenance out there, the maintenance program 
which has been out there for the last, I don’t know how many 
years, it went up slightly from 1 to 3 per cent. And the 
unconditional grants, the unconditional grants stayed the same. 
And the conditional grants, which are available to R.M.s when 
they build a road, the percentage pay-out is still the same. 
 
So really although the overall budget is down because of less 
usage of it, the actual programs remain the same. And that’s 
why R.M. councils felt very comfortable with it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Why did you indicate in your press release 
other than the facts? But leave that aside, Mr. Minister. 
 
This is what you have told the municipalities here, that: 
 

Government funding for municipalities cannot be expected 
to increase greatly in the near future. If your revenues are 
static or declining, then your council has one option left if 
tax increases are out, and that is to reduce services. 

 
That’s what you’ve said, and that’s what’s happening, Mr. 
Minister, a reduction of services. You have indicate . . . what I 
want to do, and I’d ask you if you could give us a breakdown, 
Mr. Minister, in respect to the unconditional grants. Would you 
give out of the breakdown of the $48 million the total amount 
paid this year in unconditional grants? What is that figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, because the budgets 
haven’t been approved totally . . . but the amount that we will 
pay out whenever we get these budgets completed, or if it 
continues on into the next year — I don’t know how that’ll 
work out — but we will pay out in unconditional grants 
$17,254,207 whenever we get our budgets finalized and 
through here so we can do those kinds of things. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Don’t start giving us this little gist about 
getting the budget through. Who sat on the budget until June 
17? Who made the announcement before this legislature had an 
opportunity to even look at it? It was you. So don’t start giving 
us that run-around, Mr. Minister, if you want to get through this 
budget. I’ll tell you that. 
 
(2115) 
 
Now what I want is the conditional grants. In the previous 
report, Mr. Minister, in your annual reports, you broke them 
down. And can you give me the itemized breakdown and 
whether there’s any other item included in respect to the items 
under conditional grants? The  

items that I have — and if they’re the same, Mr. Minister, these 
are the items that I want: primary grid, the total amount for that; 
main farm access roads, the total amount; bridges, maintenance, 
exactly the same as in your annual reports; maintenance, 
industrial access roads, resort roads, traffic safety, traffic 
counts, regional park roads, Indian access roads, timber roads. 
I’d be interested, fire, recreation, legal surveys. And if there are 
any others, please give me that breakdown and those figures 
because I want to know the amount allocated to each of those 
items and if there are any other additional items which make up 
the total for the conditional grants, and I also want the total 
amount of the conditional grants. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well it’s, you know, as you realize — and 
you can say what you want — the budget is not finalized. But 
we do have some estimates here that we feel . . . And never 
mind the budget, we haven’t . . . There’s still five or six months 
to go out there with the R.M.s. So these are estimates that we 
think that will . . . This is how it’ll probably work out. They’re 
the best estimates that we got and what we’re budgeting for. 
That isn’t what the annual report that you’re reading. You’re 
reading the actual dollars that was spent in that report; that’s 
different. You’ll get the actual report next year on what we’ve 
spent this year. 
 
So, okay. Under the main farm access reconstruction and 
primary grid work — now that’s how I got it broke down here 
— is 13,096,000 and some-odd dollars. I won’t give you the 
odd dollars, it doesn’t matter. On the industrial access, just 
about 345,000; regional park, 517,000; resort road, 159,000; 
Indian reserve access roads, 117,000; grid maintenance, 
3,750,000; regravel program, 7,138,000; timber haul 
maintenance, 103,000; bridges, 3,382,000; traffic safety, 
62,000; fire, 248,000; recreation, 193,000; heavy haul, 1.5 
million — 1,500,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, what’s the total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The total, plus the heavy haul is . . . The 
total without the heavy haul was $29,113,930. The heavy haul 
was $1,500,000 additional on top of that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can you sent over a copy of those? We weren’t 
able to get those down at the rate that you were going. I had a 
left-handed writer here, and he put it on the wrong side of the 
sheet. I wonder if you could send over a copy of the breakdown 
so that we could take a look at the expenditures, estimated 
expenditures — of course that’s what it is — and what we’re 
passing is the estimates here of your budget. So I’m not 
concerned with . . . I’m concerned with what your estimates are 
in respect to each one. So would you mind sending that over so 
that we would have that for posterity’s sake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve just written all over 
these, and I’ve done some other . . . had written something out 
of it. I’ll send over the information as . . . It’s a little scribbled 
up on, but we’ll send it over to him anyway. So if somebody 
could take it over to him. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much for your . . . This isn’t 
scribbled on. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3472 
 

All right. I have your conditional grants, your figures which is 
29,113,930, and under conditional grants of 17,178,070, total 
revenue sharing. What you have down in your book here, in 
your estimates, you have $48,062,000. I ask you for grants for 
rural development and you send over to me total revenue 
sharing, 46,292,000. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are your estimates, this is what you’ve put 
in your book. When I asked you to send it over and the 
breakdown, the figures are not accurate. I asked you to indicate 
in respect to what . . . and you have total revenue sharing. Can 
you indicate to me the discrepancy in respect to the amount that 
is indicated here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s not true. I 
said, I told him there was an additional $1.5 million for heavy 
haul. And I told him that. I said it wasn’t on that sheet. And he 
knew that, so that’s not really . . . he didn’t really state the 
whole facts there. So I just want to make it absolutely clear that 
he understands that. 
 
And the other thing that’s not on that sheet is rural development 
corporations, the funding for those, and the RDC’s, as you 
know, they’re all around the province — are starting up all over 
— there’s $250,000 for them. So those are two that are not on 
that sheet and I told him that before I sent it over. So just to 
make it absolutely clear that above and beyond — and those are 
estimates — and just to tell you why we hesitate to send it over, 
because I think it said 17 million 100-and-some-odd thousands 
of dollars when it came in, and those are estimates. Another 
come in at 207,000, I believe, not 178. So there is some changes 
and there will be some changes in those as we finalize those. 
Those are estimates only. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, let’s come clean. I asked you to 
break down the revenue sharing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
All right, then you add on. But what you’ve done is you don’t 
have grants to upgrading of heavy roads as a separate item. You 
have excluded what was a $2 million item for upgrading of 
heavy-haul roads. You have indicated in your estimates here 
that it’s rolled into the grants . . . grants to rural development. 
That’s what you’ve said. 
 
What I want is all of the expenditures that you’ve rolled in here. 
Why haven’t you included, then, in here the 1.5? But even if 
you add on the 1.5, Mr. Minister, it doesn’t come to the amount 
that you have indicated. It comes to 47,792,000, not what you 
have here. All I asked you is a breakdown of the expenditures 
of the grants to rural development. I don’t want a half story; I 
want the full story. I don’t know which to believe. What is the 
other items that we should be adding in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I gave him exactly what he 
asked for and that’s not normally done because those are 
estimates and they can change somewhat because of the 
situation out there. 
 
To make it absolutely clear, I said to him, add on to that, 
because that wasn’t on the sheet, $1.5 million in the estimates. 
And if you look in your estimate book for heavy-haul, 
high-volume roads, and $250,000 for rural development 
corporations which goes out to the funding  

of these RDCs which are being established around the province, 
which comes to $1.75 million. Add it to what I gave you, what 
you asked for, specifically asked for, detailed in fact. Like add 
to that and you’ll come out to exactly the amount of $48.062 
million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I said the items that were in the annual reports 
and any other expenditures made within the grants for rural 
development. Yes, I know, but don’t say that you gave me and 
I’m misinterpreting, because I said any other grants that are 
rolled in. 
 
All I can say is in respect to this, what you have done is clearly 
you’ve cut out of what was supplied to the rural municipalities 
the previous year. You’ve cut back $2 million, 1.5 million. So 
out of all the items of main farm access and primary grid work, 
industrial access, regional park, resort, Indian reserve, grid 
regravel, all of those items, traffic safety, fire, recreation, the 
$29 million there, what you’ve basically cut out of what you 
had last year, $1.5 million. So they get 1.5 million less for all of 
those other items than they did the year before, plus the 
$250,000 that you’ve rolled in in respect to the grants to 
community development corporations, and plus all of the extra 
taxes. 
 
And you can stand up and say that you only cut the budget by 1 
per cent. What a misrepresentation. What an exposure that 
you’ve had to present to this legislature. The deception of the 
Minister of Rural Development in respect to the funding to rural 
municipalities. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, I hope you have an opportunity to 
come back here the following year. I say, Mr. Minister, we’ve 
exposed totally to you the massiveness of the cuts. We’re going 
to move on because I want to get on with some of the important 
other issues and to find out where you stand on them. 
 
So I ask my colleague from North Battleford to take on another 
subject. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m sure that the 
minister realizes the importance of rural Saskatchewan and the 
importance that the make of rural Saskatchewan has played in 
our way of life as a province and the people who live here. 
 
We’re very concerned, and I would hope that you are too, that 
the roads are important as a transportation, especially in times 
when variable rates are coming in, and we’re going to be 
looking at heavier loads being hauled over those roads. So 
transportation is very important to the life of rural 
Saskatchewan. I think also communications are a very 
important aspect. 
 
(2130) 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that many departments affect rural 
Saskatchewan, but I would think that your department has an 
overall responsibility or an overall view of rural Saskatchewan. 
And it would seem that some of the things that might fall within 
other departments or agencies would be of concern to your 
department as well.  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3473 
 

So I would like to start off, Mr. Minister, by asking you about 
the telephone system in rural Saskatchewan. I’m sure that 
you’ve had contacts; I know that the minister in charge of 
SaskTel has had contacts. 
 
The example I’d like to use is the community of Maymont. 
Now Maymont residents in the immediate rural area around 
there can’t phone anyone else but their neighbors. If the senior 
citizen wants to phone for a doctor’s appointment, it’s a long 
distance charge. If the farmers wants to phone to see what’s 
happening at the implement dealer in North Battleford or 
Saskatoon or Radisson, it’s a long distance charge. If the village 
office or the R.M. office want to make a phone call to another 
centre, it’s a long distance charge. I would like to know what 
contacts the minister has had with the minister in charge of 
SaskTel and if there’s anything within the Department of Rural 
Affairs that they’re willing to front to try and resolve this very 
serious problem for Maymont and other communities like that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting to 
note that the opposition raise telephone service in the province 
of Saskatchewan. I realize that he raises a good point, that a lot 
of area because of rationalization of communities, because they 
are going further in a lot of cases, go long distance, or even the 
service industries are further away, the telephones do in fact 
become long distance. And 10 years ago or 15 years ago it may 
not have been so. But over the last 10, 15, 20 years, service 
industries have moved and if you go for parts you don’t always 
get it in your own small town; you may have to go 50 or 60 
miles. I know, I live in the area where I drive 70 miles for parts 
to get for my equipment. 
 
But there’s two things that’s went on since we became 
government. One, there was a . . . I don’t remember the name of 
it, but there was an advisory group went around the province, 
held hearings in regards to boundaries. I think it was called 
SaskTel boundaries commission or something, and they went 
out and they held hearings and I believe there’s been a report 
back to the minister in regards to how these could be better 
allocated, how the phone system could be set up to service an 
area. 
 
But the one thing that I think that we all know that’s come in in 
the last two years is individual line service. That is very, very 
important, and as they install the individual line service around 
our province — which is very, very important to our farmers 
out there — they are also looking at the whole boundaries and 
seeing where is our service areas for those farmers, and then 
they are looking at putting it together in an overall picture. And 
I know in my area they’re looking at that; in other areas they’ve 
done the same thing. 
 
I appreciate what you say up there in Maymont. That may be 
true and I really appreciate what the farmers must feel when 
you have to pay long distance to get to your nearest centre to 
get a part or phone for a part. But part of the overall plan of 
SaskTel, I believe is fair to say, is individual line service to 
every farm resident in this province and it’s come a long way. I 
believe it’s almost half completed, and looking at the regional 
boundaries so that the service areas will be serviced by that 
telephone system. 

It’ll never be big enough because, as you know, no matter 
where you are . . . Nipawin’s a good area; there’s a problem up 
in that area, where, in fact, you get further and further. I go in 
my area all the way to Saskatoon and Regina sometimes for 
parts. So you’ll never be totally able to look after it, but 
certainly some of the small areas, especially where there are 
private telephones before, individual or what would you call 
private telephone companies before, and now they’ve been 
either part of or still are now part of SaskTel. And I know what 
you’re talking about. I appreciate it and I know they’re working 
towards resolving that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I appreciate all the information on the 
private lines service. I was actually more interested in particular 
about having access to a larger community. And you expand 
your logic a bit too far. I know that there’s times when people 
have to go into Saskatoon and Regina and no one’s asking 
about that. But I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that from the city of 
Regina you can phone all the way out to Regina Beach and it’s 
included as a local charge call. 
 
I know that the community of St. Louis has a similar problem to 
that of Maymont. And I know that Maymont was told by their 
local member of the legislature that they would know by the 
end of December 1986 what the plans were and what the results 
are of the telephone exchange boundaries review board, which 
is the name of that study group that is supposed to have been 
consulting with rural Saskatchewan, consulting with those 
telephone subscribers who have to pay some penalty for living 
where they do. 
 
And I want to know a couple of things, Mr. Minister. One, did 
your department, the department of rural affairs, have any 
involvement in the telephone exchange boundaries review 
board? And if not, why not? And can you further tell us when 
we can expect to know, for communities like St. Louis and 
communities like Maymont, when they will have an expanded 
area of coverage so they can phone to their doctor and the drug 
store and the implement dealer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — You know, I can’t answer for SaskTel or 
the minister responsible for it. I know that they’ve been out 
there; I know they looked at the boundaries. But I understand 
— and I was just asking my colleagues here — that SaskTel has 
been before Crown corporations and I’m sure you had the 
opportunity to ask that question then. I assume that you would 
have. 
 
I’m sure if you ask the minister, you know, privately, he can 
answer that. He’s not here and I certainly can’t answer for 
SaskTel. I don’t have any officials to be able to give you that 
answer. 
 
All I can say is that individual line service is certainly very 
important to rural Saskatchewan and the boundaries are being 
looked at, I know, by a group of people who travel around the 
province. And you say that you’ve talked to, or asked those 
questions in SaskTel, and I’m sure you got the answer there. If 
not, you know, you should ask him because he’d give you 
better, more adequate answer in that regards than myself. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3474 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not on Crown 
corporations, and I thought that you, being minister I charge of 
Rural Development, you would have some knowledge, and I 
would have hoped that you would have had some input into the 
boundaries commission. And if you keep chirping like the 
Deputy Minister over there and extend the questions, you’re 
certainly not going to get done in Rural Development estimates 
tonight, sir. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Minister, beyond the telephones — and I 
can appreciate that you can’t give us an answer and their local 
member of the legislature can’t give them the answer. The 
answer they got from the minister in charge of SaskTel didn’t 
come true, so I guess people in areas that are concerned about 
their rural exchanges and limited access to their telephones will 
just have to suffer through for another length of time as to 
whenever this government shows some compassion and 
understanding and meets the commitments and deadlines that 
they set. 
 
Another very important thing in terms of communications for 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, that you’d be well aware of, 
is that issue of post offices and the cut-backs in services of post 
offices to rural centres right throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’m wondering if the minister could tell us 
what representations you or your department have made to the 
Canada Post Corporation in support of strengthened services, or 
at least retained services, by the post office to rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not aware of any 
request from any community, any R.M., and, as you know, I 
meet with SARM on a bi-weekly or monthly basis and, in fact, I 
met with them today. I’ve had no request from them in regards 
to post offices in rural Saskatchewan or any request to lobby on 
their behalf. I appreciate that . . . And certainly, as you know, 
and as brought up here last, I believe, last fall or last spring, the 
Premier has lobbied on behalf of retaining post offices in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I certainly agree with maintaining post offices in rural 
Saskatchewan and I believe that there was a federal government 
statement made that there would be no closures of post offices 
in rural Saskatchewan without consultation of the people in the 
area. But I haven’t had no further comments from not one R.M. 
or one local community of any kind or from SARM, who are 
certainly in touch with the folks out there. So that’s about all I 
can say, except that, you know, I really don’t think at this 
present time it’s a problem. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m very, very surprised with what you say. I 
went around and visited the rural councils this spring with a 
member of parliament, and one of their basic concerns that they 
raised at the municipal offices in my area — in the good old 
Quill Lakes where I’ve never lost — they raised the very issue, 
the issue of rural post offices. And it was a concern to those 
rural municipal councils. 
 
It’s really amazing, Mr. Minister. I asked you this question in 
the legislature and you said that you were making 
representations. I just want to say what is likely to happen here: 
 

Among other wholesale changes to the Canadian mail 
delivery, the business plan calls for a  

thorough reworking of Canada Post’s rural network of 
5,200 post offices. 

 
Simply put, 3,500 largest would be offered to private 
contractors, while many of the remaining 1,700, at least those 
within 18 kilometres of the post office, would be closed — a 
massive restructuring of the rural postal system. And here you 
are, Minister of Rural Affairs, I have never spoken to it; no one 
brought it to my attention; I never raised it. I asked you on 
behalf of the government and a representative of rural 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
And the fellow with the moustache, from Weyburn, is chirping 
again, saying nothing of course, as usual — as empty-headed as 
ever. An empty barrel makes a lot of noise; that’s the true 
indication of that member. 
 
I simply ask the minister from Kelsey-Tisdale: are you not 
aware of what is transpiring? Is this part of your vision of 
continuation of services? Will you undertake to raise that issue 
with the rural municipalities? And will you, in fact, make 
representation to the Mulroney government to retain as many as 
possible — indeed, all — of the rural post office as is requested 
by the rural municipalities, which I have, in fact, communicated 
with? 
 
Will you act on behalf of rural people which is part of the 
obligation that you have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly will, as the 
member asked, do what I can to convince the federal 
government to maintain, I believe the cordage he used, as many 
as possible post offices in rural Saskatchewan. In fact I’ll even 
go further than that, Mr. Chairman. I would urge the federal 
government to maintain all the post offices in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly I have no problems raising it with SARM. I have 
no problems raising it at the SARM convention. I have no 
problem raising it at district meetings, or with R.M. councils. I 
just simply said, which is absolutely true, it has not been raised 
with me. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, some of the major, major issues 
out there are not necessarily the post office, or not necessarily, 
like I said, whether the taxes are up or down $10, but it’s that 
farm debt that we’re looking at. It’s the price for our 
commodities we’re looking at. Those are the two major, major 
issues, and we really haven’t dealt very little with them tonight. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — We’ll get into that in just a moment, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
There’s two other topics I want to cover with you, but first 
before doing that, I’m wondering if you’ve had any . . . Mr. 
Chairman, could you call the member from Weyburn to order. I 
can hardly hear myself talking, let alone to communicate with 
the other minister over there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You 
don’t want to do that? You can’t hear that side. Well, that’s 
fine, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2145) 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3475 
 

Mr. Minister, you’ve certainly had correspondence, I’m sure — 
at least some of your members of the legislature have — about 
the business transfer that’s being proposed as part of Mr. 
Wilson’s federal tax reform. I just have an example of two 
school divisions here. The one school division, it would cost 
them an extra $31,600 a year by their estimate. The other school 
division, it would cost them a total of approximately $90,000 
per year with the business transfer tax coming into effect. And 
I’m wondering if your department or through the Minister of 
Finance, to express your grave concerns about the business 
transfer tax. Or do you, in fact, support the business transfer 
tax? This has an application, I would say, Mr. Minister, to your 
department because when it comes into place, certain mill rates 
are going to have to go up or a rural municipality is going to 
have to find funding from elsewhere for education. And this 
applies specifically to education They’re going to have to come 
up with those funds from somewhere. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I think we on this side of 
the House, and certainly yourself, have showed great patience 
this evening with the line of questioning undertaken by the 
members opposite. We have listened to items for some time 
now, for some time now, that have been with respect to federal 
matter. I don’t know if the member from North Battleford 
thinks that he’s still in the federal House of Commons or what 
he things. But these are federal matters, Mr. Speaker, and I 
would ask you to rule on it. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member from The Battlefords 
has raised those in those federal issues and asked the Minister 
of Rural Development if they have been raised with him, and I 
find that the member from The Battlefords is in order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It was interesting to hear the member 
from The Battlefords mention about the business transfer tax. I 
want to remind the member from The Battlefords that I 
personally went to Ottawa and before the Commons committee, 
the Standing Committee on Agriculture in the House of 
Commons, and presented to them a brief stating precisely that 
the business transfer tax in no way should affect our farming 
community, and it should not be put on in any way, shape, or 
form if it was to do that. 
 
I appeared before the Standing Committee on Agriculture, the 
House of Commons Standing Committee in Agriculture, I 
believed, honestly to say, this was the only government — the 
only government — that appeared before them in regards to 
farm input prices and in regards to the business transfer tax. 
And I appeared before them last, I believe it was in May of last 
year, or this year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, we certainly appreciate your 
intervention asking that the business transfer tax does not apply 
to the agriculture community or to farmers or their products. 
 
What I was asking you, Mr. Minister, was in the fact of  

school divisions in the province of Saskatchewan. I’ve cited 
you two examples where they’re going to have to pay increased 
amounts, and that’s the question I pose to you. So we’ll leave 
that. We’re rapidly running out of time. 
 
The other thing I want to refer to just briefly, Mr. Minister, was 
when you talked earlier this evening about the value added to 
products in this province of Saskatchewan, in rural 
Saskatchewan, and how that has been a large boost to what had 
been there before. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what studies your department has 
done to show which of these value-added products — or the 
normal commodities and resources that we have in rural 
Saskatchewan — as to where they can be marketed? 
 
I would assume that you’re very keen on the free trade deal 
that’s tentatively set up between Canada and the United States, 
and I’m wondering if you can tell us which value-added 
products, and which commodities or resources that there will be 
going to those greater access of markets in the United States? 
 
One of the problems in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, that 
I’m sure you’re well aware of is information and technology 
transfer so that farmers, people in rural Saskatchewan, know 
what governments are thinking and what the best direction is 
for them to take. And I think it’d be very beneficial for them to 
know what products, value-added, in what commodities there 
are greater access to the United States with the free trade deal. 
I’m sure your department has looked at that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s many 
opportunities if you want to go south of the border. 
 
In regards to the opportunities to market, many, many of our 
products, value-added products, either it’s processed or 
manufactured here in the province . . . What we have done at 
the rural development level has looked at what is consumed in 
the province, what could be processed or manufactured here for 
local consumption, and looking at it on a smaller scale. At the 
same time I’m sure there’s many opportunities across the border 
because there is, you know, 177-odd-millions of people over 
there that we have access to a market if we can produce the 
product here. But until we can establish processing or 
manufacturing lines here in this province, we won’t be able to 
market any manufactured products across the border. 
 
And certainly the only ones that as you . . . may be complaints 
about it, but Gainers at North Battleford and your home town 
certainly is manufacturing bacon into United States. Intercon is 
doing the same thing with bought beef and bacon in the United 
States or hogs. 
 
There’s many, many opportunities there, I’m sure, but we’ve 
been looking at . . . or what can we establish for local market, 
local consumption. You go to any store, you know that’s 
absolutely true; there’s many things there that we eat that is 
produced in a raw material here in our province but 
manufactured outside of our province. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3476 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You didn’t hear the question, obviously. I 
asked first off if your department had done any studies to 
identify what those products were and what value-added 
products would find expanded markets. And if you know that, 
then you should let the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
know that, especially people that are under the jurisdiction of 
your department, the department of rural affairs. 
 
You can’t provide adequate answers on the telephone exchange 
problem; you say no one’s made representation to you on the 
post office issue; you didn’t understand the business transfer 
tax; and now you won’t tell us what products there are that are 
value-added, and what the commodities are that we’ll have 
greater access to the markets in. And it seems to me, Mr. 
Minister, that you’re not doing a very honourable role in 
serving people in rural Saskatchewan. As rural Saskatchewan 
dies, you give us these rhetorical answers in the legislature here 
this evening, and I think you owe that information to people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, you know, I don’t want to go into it 
because we haven’t done a study into United States. But we did 
have Jake Brown, who is very familiar, a professor at the 
University of Saskatchewan at Saskatoon, Dean of Agriculture, 
who did a study, a rural development study around this 
province. He toured around this province, and in that study, his 
report back to us, he estimated that free trade could benefit 
Saskatchewan by $95-odd-million. That’s just his estimate, and 
that was done in 1985. So I mean he’s saying — and I’m going 
by the gentleman’s own words and his own research — that 
there is many opportunities there. 
 
But to answer your question, we haven’t went out and done 
studies. That’s ED and Ts job. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, with the privilege of the 
inexperienced member from Melfort, I want to raise another 
issue which is federal but has a great impact on Saskatchewan 
people. And what I’d like to ask the Minister, if he could 
outline and whether he has reviewed the detrimental effects that 
the white paper on taxation recently proposed or introduced by 
the Hon. Michael Wilson, that genius of a Finance minister — 
the friend of the farmer — and whether you would, in fact, 
indicate to this House some of the basic effect that that 
proposed white paper will have on farmers in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I believe the Department of Finance has 
been doing those analyses, and when it gets to his department, 
I’m sure he’ll be able to answer those questions for you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, right in the councillor, the 
Rural Councillor, they have put in here a total submission of 
their concerns. 
 
Have you looked at it? Have you met with SARM and deal with 
the concerns that they have. I ask you, what are the details of 
the concerns of the rural municipalities association in respect to 
the white paper? Can you outline  

them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well it’s interesting to say that you 
haven’t read, you know, whatever you’re reading there, and I 
don’t know what you’re reading. 
 
But it’s interesting to know that today we met with SARM, the 
entire executive. And we met with them for over an hour, and 
their concerns were listed to us, and I wish I’d have brought it 
in. I could have listed off their concern. The news media had it. 
 
And you’re asking me if we have done . . . You ask me if we 
had done an analysis of the impact of the white paper by the 
federal Finance minister on Saskatchewan. That is a very 
detailed, and would take analysers to do it, and it would have to 
be done . . . An analysis have to be done on it. And we asked 
the Department of Finance. They’ll do it and I’m sure when you 
get to his estimates that he’ll be able to answer that question — 
the impact on Saskatchewan in regards to that white paper. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, there is a joint submission here 
on the white paper on tax reform by the rural municipal 
associations of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 
 
I ask you: have you discussed the details with respect to the 
R.M.s’ association here in Saskatchewan? And if you have, 
would you indicate that, and would you indicate to me what are 
the basic concerns as it affects the farmers of Saskatchewan in 
the proposed white paper. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, first of all, I’ll tell you that I haven’t 
discussed it with . . .You call them rural — it’s SARM 
executive. I haven’t discussed it with them. We have ongoing 
meetings, and they may want to discuss it at a future date. 
 
I would like to have all the analysis done. I’d like to know 
exactly what it’s going . . . we estimate it will be done, what the 
impact would be on the province. 
 
You can read all the reports you want, and there’s lots of them 
out there to read, and some of them, you know, have different 
comments and different ideas how it can be. We’ll do our 
analysis, and when it’s completed we will then be able to, at 
least, address that in a very informational type of way. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, are you indicating, are you 
indicating to this House at this time that you are not even aware 
in the slightest regard to the concerns that have been raised in 
respect to the joint submission; are you saying that you have not 
analysed it on your own with your officials? Is that what in fact 
you are saying? Is this the way in which you are working with 
the R.M.s, that they have made a joint submission, and are you 
saying you haven’t read it and that you have no knowledge of 
their concerns? And if you are saying the opposite, that you 
have knowledge of it, all I’m asking you is to give me a general 
analysis in your own humble way — in the simple way that you 
can put it — as to what are their concerns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I don’t necessarily want to give it in 
a simple way and I don’t know if he meant to — I’ll  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3477 
 

stop at that point. Anyway I have read it, it is their views. I have 
not discussed it with SARM. They probably will down the road, 
we’ll have the opportunity to discuss it. We met with them 
today for over an hour; they did not raise it as one of their 
concerns. I met with them tonight for supper; they did not raise 
it as one of their concerns. And I’ll be meeting with them, I 
believe next week again, and they may well raise it as one of 
their concerns. But at that time then maybe we’ll discuss it 
further with them. I can’t say my thoughts on their views; I 
don’t think that would be appropriate. 
 
When we’ve done our analysis of it, then maybe I’d be more 
prepared to talk about what we think of it, not necessarily what 
SARM are saying about it or not saying about it because I’m 
sure each one has its own views on it. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, you really, really indicate how 
little you are concerned or how little you know about the issues 
that we have, because there is a devastating effect upon the 
farmers in Saskatchewan with the white paper, and to say this 
white paper has come down — a considerable length of time, 
Mr. Minister — and you haven’t even taken the time, 
apparently, to get a copy of the analysis by the Minister of 
Finance, and here is the joint submission by the R.M.’s 
association of three western provinces and this man says, first 
of all, he doesn’t know a thing about their concerns; he’s wiped 
his hands of it; and secondly, he is saying I have made no 
representation whatsoever, but gosh darn it, you know if they 
happen to raise it with me even though they public the Rural 
Councillor, which I suppose I had one here, your speech was 
involved in it — and not much of a speech by the way, either. 
But here is . . . I read it. Here is a submission of concern about 
the white paper, and the minister of rural Saskatchewan stands 
here and he throws up his hands. He says, oh well, if they come 
to me, I’ll look at it, but it’s over in Finance. I don’t know 
what’s going on. And it’s a devastating paper in respect to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what I want to do then is to ask you: will you agree with me 
that you don’t have any knowledge; that you haven’t turned 
your mind to it; that you don’t initiate any topics of interest at 
all that affect Saskatchewan? 
 
So I’ll leave that, and I’ll send it out to the R.M.s exactly what 
your answer is, along with the Councillor. And I’ll send out the 
facts in respect to the massive deception in respect to grants that 
you have demonstrated here — that you really cut them 6 per 
cent and not just 1 per cent as you indicated. I’ll send that out. I 
want just to demonstrate one point further — the inadequacy of 
you as minister of rural affairs. 
 
There’s another little federal matter, but it affects Saskatchewan 
people, and I’d like to know whether you have ever discussed 
with the rural municipalities, the association, anything in 
regards to the implementation of variable rates as been 
introduced and allowed by the PC government in Ottawa. Has 
that topic ever crossed your mind, as rural affairs, and did 
anyone twig you that it might be of interest to farmers across 
the province? I wonder whether you could indicate whether 
you’ve  

discussed that with them, whether you have a position on it, or 
is that transferred over to the Minister of Finance and he’s 
looking at the impact. Please give us the indication whether or 
not you had an opportunity, or anybody shook your shoulder 
and said, this here may be an issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It certainly was raised with me several 
times at the SARM convention in the spring. I think the position 
that we’ve stated has been very clear, and SARM, I think, 
agreed with it. But other than that, I can’t say anything more 
about it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, on that vital issue was there a 
concern expressed by the association of rural municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I think that goes without saying. If 
you’ve read The Rural Councillor . . . You said you read it all 
the time, including my speech, which I appreciate very much, 
and I hope you read the next one because I’ve got a better one 
in there next time. 
 
Certainly they’ve raised it. We’ve talked about it much and a 
lot. And, you know, I suppose the bottom line is that their 
concern is certainly — has been and will be, continue to be, in 
regards to variable rates. I think Mr. Thiessen, who is the 
president of SARM, has expressed himself several times on 
that, and certainly our views and his views are very much 
similar. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, thank you for that information. 
I’m glad that you discussed some issues with the R.M. And in 
respect to your speeches, you can go nowhere but improve in 
the next one. 
 
So I ask you though, Mr. Minister, I ask you Mr. Minister, in 
respect to variable rates though, SARM is opposed to it, SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) is opposed to 
it, farmers generally are opposed to it; I ask you, have you 
issued a public statement in respect to your opposition to 
variable rates. You, as minister of rural affairs, have you issued 
a statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don’t know how many times we’ve been 
before the committee, including myself, and certainly we’ve 
stated very vividly our position against variable rates. You 
know, if you’ve listened or been to any of the meetings, you 
would know that’s true. I don’t think that . . . unless you’re in 
favour of it; I know we’re not, and we’ve stated that many, 
many times. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Do you on this vital issue join with any of the 
representatives of SARM to make a presentation to the federal 
cabinet in respect to their possibility of revoking the approval 
that was given to the institution of variable rate? Did you ask, or 
did you join, or did you initiate the possibility of going to 
Ottawa and making a submission? 
 
And if you didn’t, which is very likely you didn’t, are you 
aware of whether any department of government did, in fact, 
intervene on behalf of the farmers of this province in respect . . . 
urging the federal government. Obviously it didn’t work 
because they allowed it to go forward. But can you give me 
details of whether you joined with the SARM representatives, 
go to Ottawa and make representation to the federal cabinet. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3478 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As you know, we’ve presented arguments 
to the CTC (Canadian Transport Commission). No, I have not 
joined with SARM to go to Ottawa to make a presentation to 
the federal cabinet. I don’t know of any group that went and 
appeared before the federal cabinet. Certainly we’ve made our 
position very, very clear, and we will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just a sec. I just have a couple other matters 
that I can wrap up. I have another rural development page, it’s 
called. I just want, in respect to the rural development 
corporation, Mr. Minister, we passed the Act allowing for the 
development of rural corporations. Could you update us as to 
the number presently operating in the province. How many of 
the rural development corporations . . . I know that a few really 
got initiated prior to the implementation of the legislation. Can 
you bring us up to date as to how many there are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I can, Mr. Chairman. There’s three now 
already in operation, the one at Wood Mountain, the one at 
Dana radar base, and the one up at Meath Park called 
NORDCO (New Opportunities Rural Development 
Corporation). There is about 16, I believe maybe even 18 other 
groups now, of communities that are looking at forming RDCs; 
I believe six of them are just about ready to sign up as a rural 
development corporation entity. There is another . . . We’ve had 
RDC meetings on here right now, and EDC (Economic 
Development Corporation) meetings and there may be some 
more come out of this again, but there’s 16 about to be signed. 
There’s 16 we’re working with, and that includes about 135 to 
140 municipalities. We’ve already signed up three, and I 
believe that probably within a year there’ll probably be 15 to 20 
of them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Within your guide-lines, you indicate that there 
has to be a minimum, there has to be a minimum of four 
adjacent municipalities, one of which must be a rural 
municipality, in order to form a rural development corporation. 
I notice in respect to the details in funding that you set out here 
is that year one, you’ll give 75 per cent of the operating costs 
and survey costs to a maximum of $25,000; year two, you have 
a formula and year three, four, and five. 
 
My question to you really, in respect to the funding there: I 
want to know the size of these development corporations can 
vary, and, for instance, you say in year two, 75 per cent of the 
operating costs to a maximum of 50,000. Does it matter 
regarding the size? In other words, if it goes just to the 
minimum size, do they get the same amount, or if they’re a 
larger corporation — in other words, take in more 
municipalities. Is there any adjustment made that for the larger 
size, or is this the set amount that is scheduled for regardless 
just to each and every rural development corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a set amount no matter 
what the size is; the more communities in, the more funding 
that have to draw on. 
 
We haven’t set any variable type of rates in there or anything 
like that because we wanted to get it up and running. I suppose 
down the road we may look at  

something like that, but right now it’s set up a set rate for all. If 
there’s four municipalities in, or six or eight, it’s still the same 
amount of funding. It’s available to the same all over the 
province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Do you think that makes a lot of sense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we have some with four, 
and we have some with eight in them; we haven’t had any 
complaints from any of those that’s joined. We now also have 
another one that could have about 10 or 12 in, and because of 
the large drawing area they would have from, they feel — they 
haven’t voiced any opinion anyway — that it wouldn’t be 
sufficient to do what it’s supposed to do, and that’s get them up, 
get them running, and do some consulting work, market studies, 
and all the other things that go with rural development 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to ask you, Mr. Minister, in respect 
to the municipal employees’ superannuation plan, I understand 
that that was a separate plan. Can you indicate whether that was 
previously administered under the jurisdiction of your 
department and whether it continues to be administered under 
your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I think if you looked at the estimates you 
know where it went. But it was under our department; it is now 
under Department of Finance where all the other pension plans 
are. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, before the 
change was made, was there consultation with the employees 
— the municipal employees — under that plan that is 
transferring it from under the jurisdiction of the department 
separate and apart to the Minister of Finance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I believe it’s administrative. It’s the same 
people went over with the board to administrate it over . . . 
under the Department of Finance. It just — that’s where the 
investment part is. I think you understand it probably better than 
I do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As a lawyer you should, 
anyway. And therefore . . . but it went over there. It’s under 
Department of Finance, and there was consultation with the 
board members before there we met with them. Even after that I 
was personally involved with meeting with them at least twice 
now. It is under there. I believe they’re satisfied that it’s going 
to be run independently, yet under the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you for what I suppose one could 
consider a compliment that I know more than you about it, but I 
don’t think that it’s a great compliment because you know 
nothing about it, so it doesn’t take much more to know . . . to be 
better than you. 
 
But seriously, though, this is of concern. And I want to ask you 
whether you have had any letters from the employees who are 
affected by the transfer and have concern in respect to the 
transfer of this pension funds under the jurisdiction, and 
separate and apart, as a separate fund to the Minister of Finance. 
And God knows what will happen when it gets into the Minister 
of Finance’s hand, because you know his financial genius. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding was that we  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3479 
 

haven’t had any requests from any of the employees in regards 
to a concern about it. They also . . . that it was an independent 
body; it went over, under Finance. And I believe that’s why 
they felt that it was . . . that it’s still the same group 
administrating it, only under Finance, and it really hasn’t 
changed nothing except under a different department. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have had correspondence from employees 
that have been affected. I’m not going to disclose individuals 
because of the witch-hunt, but: 
 

. . . the recent transfer of municipal employees 
superannuation plan under the auspices of your department 
directly affects me, a rural municipal administrator. In 
view of the fact of this transfer is a fait accompli, I 
realized there is nothing we can do. It is apparent that your 
government answers to none other than yourselves and is 
accountable to no one. I demand that the present 
superannual commission board be retained and that you 
assure myself and all other administrators in this province 
that our pension funds will be kept autonomous from the 
department’s funds and that the strictest accountability of 
pension funds be made. 

 
There is concern, Mr. Minister, and all I can say to you again, 
that you didn’t do your job. 
 
Surely you would have some contact with the employees that 
are affected and are concerned. They have written to this 
government, and they have written to the Leader of the 
Opposition. And your handling of pensions and the teachers’ 
pension, which has been dealt with here, leaves a lot to be 
desired. 
 
(2215) 
 
So I want to raise that concern with you. If you ever have the 
occasion to meet with the employees affected, you might 
explain to them why you didn’t consult with them, because they 
would like to know. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you have no knowledge in respect to that 
item, again, as with most of the others, I want to close by saying 
that I am concerned in respect to this government’s actions, in 
respect to rural Saskatchewan; there has been a massive 
decrease here in the budget. There’s really a basic deceit in even 
comparing the figures because there’s 57,700,000 last year; this 
year it’s reduced to 54,469,000. 
 
But you throw in another item here and that is payments to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — a cut of 
$414,900. You’ve decreased it by that. You added it in. It 
wasn’t there last year, so what it does is increase the appearance 
of the size of your budget and an apparent decrease in the 
amount of the deficit. 
 
I can only say to you, a real disappointment on this side that 
some of the major, major issues that are facing the farmers of 
Saskatchewan and rural communities, that you have not even 
been informed. You have no knowledge in respect to the effect 
of the white paper on taxation by Wilson. You have done 
nothing in respect to variable rates. You have cut massively 
here the budget items and  

the grants to the rural municipalities. You have decimated the 
ferry service of this province — and my friend wants to deal 
with that. You have cut massively the municipal financing, 
financial management services; you have cut massively the road 
services; you have cut massively, as I said the ferry services; 
you cut substantially the grants to rural Saskatchewan, rural 
development; and also you have even cut grants to community 
economic development, even though you’re indicating that so 
many more are coming on board — all through this budget that 
you have massively cut. 
 
All I can say, Mr. Minister — as you said yourself, not me — 
that they’re going to have to increase their taxes to maintain the 
services, or they’re going to have to cut services. And I say that 
both is happening. And I think that you have demonstrated here 
that you’re not on top of the issues in respect to the concerns of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You weren’t concerned enough to deal with some of the very 
vital issues. And so I can only close, Mr. Minister, and I would 
hope that in the future that what you promised to the people 
before when you first were elected — and how soon you forgot 
it — that you would consult. That’s what you said you were 
going to do, and this government has totally and completely lost 
any consultative process with the people of this province. 
 
You hold up your hands and you say, oh, if they raise it with 
me, maybe I’ll discuss it. A pitiful display here this evening — 
a disappointing display, because I had pretty high regard in 
respect to you before I had the opportunity to cross-examine 
you in respect to your performance. And I’ll tell you time is 
passing and, Mr. Minister, I’m prepared to let these go. I would 
like to stay here for a week and drill you through this, but I’ll 
tell you, I think the picture if fairly clear, because I’ll be able to 
send out these estimates to the R.M.s across this province. I’ll 
send it out to the employees that you know nothing about their 
pension fund being thrown over to that Finance minister that 
has no credibility left in the management of the fiscal affairs of 
this province. 
 
I also just want, in closing, to ask you whether you made any 
representations in respect to one other thing — and very close 
to my constituency — and that is whether you can convince the 
Premier not to cut back, as he has intended, the funding to 
PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) in Humboldt 
which has done another service to rural communities. There’s a 
great concern. 
 
The Alberta government announced this year that they were 
dropping out of the funding completely. The Manitoba 
government indicated that they would intend to continue the 
funding of PAMI. The Minister of Agriculture indicated that 
this year it would be cut back substantially and will not, in 
subsequent years, be funded. And so I ask you: has anyone 
raised that with you, and did you make any representations to 
the Premier or to anyone in that cabinet whether we should, in 
fact, keep that PAMI in Humboldt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well there’s one thing I want to say just 
before I wind up, with a couple of other comments. But it is 
very, very clear that I sit at the cabinet table and I  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3480 
 

talked many, many times about all the different issues out there 
in rural Saskatchewan, and certainly PAMI would be one of 
those issues that we would discuss. 
 
I just want to make it real clear when you talked about the cuts, 
as you put it, to rural development. And I want to make it 
absolutely clear that you understand that, number one, there was 
a 10 per cent increase in regravel; number two, the maintenance 
program that’s been in place for years increased from 1 to 3 per 
cent; the unconditional grants remained the same, and the 
conditional grant formula was not changed; the heavy haul 
formula was not changed. It’s just so that everything remained 
basically the same as last year, or some increases, and so, 
therefore, that is why most rural — and I think all R.M.s — 
were fairly satisfied with the budget as it was. And I will 
continue the consultation that I’ve started a few years ago and 
will continue to work with them in regards to not only to this 
year’s budget but next year’s budget and on in the future. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Just a few short questions. And I guess 
on behalf of the constituents of the member from Kinistino, as 
well as the constituents from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. And it 
has to do, Mr. Minister, with the operation of the ferries in this 
province. 
 
And I’d like to ask you specifically about the closure of Fenton 
ferry and the subsequent re-opening of the ferry. And I would 
like to know, in terms of costing, how much it’s costing to 
operate that ferry now. I’d like to know if it’s leased under a 
lease arrangement, or if it’s rented by the month, just what the 
arrangements are with that. And I would like to know who is 
leasing them, and how long the contract is for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understand is that it will cost in the 
neighbourhood of about $15-odd thousand to operate it for the 
year. 
 
Let me see, the operator of it is a Mr. Melvin Evans, who came 
forward and made an offer to operate it. We did contact the two 
R.M.s up in there and offered the same type of arrangements to 
them. They weren’t interested. I believe that it’s been operating 
ever since — and I’m not sure of the date, early . . . late June, 
early July; oh, June 29, it is here — and that it’s continued to 
operate as of right now. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, is there any kind of a 
long-term contract, or is that just for this particular season? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just this season. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Can you tell me how much the cost to 
operate it would be for the months of July, August, September 
and October under the previous arrangements that were . . . 
when it was operated by your department? 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It normally costs around 10 to 12,000 per 
month to operate it, and normal season is, I believe, six to seven 
months, so it runs anywhere from 70 to $80-some thousand. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m not sure I understood. You’re saying 
it cost around $12,000 a month to operate and that was for a six 
month period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I believe last year that our figures were 
$76,000 for between six and seven months. So it’s between 10 
and $12,000 a month. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — What other costs are your department 
picking up that are not being paid by the . . . what other costs do 
you have other than . . . that are not showing here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The only cost we would assume is if there 
was a major repair such as a cable or a tower or something like 
that. That is the only cost we would incur. There’s been none to 
date at all. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Something doesn’t jive, Mr. Minister. 
You’re paying this gentleman $15,000 for four months to run 
that ferry. From what I understand in the book here, there are 
about 9,000 people going across that ferry, which generates 
revenue, at $1 a vehicle, of around $9,000. That comes to a 
figure of around $24,000. 
 
You tell me that you’re not picking up any costs at all, and it 
costs $12,500 to operate under your administration. Can you 
explain that to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well this gentleman’s operating it 
himself, so I don’t . . . his costs would certainly be down. He’s 
doing his own operating, where we would be hiring not only 
operators but stand-by operators and part-time and maintenance 
people and all the other stuff. So there was a cost built in. Also 
if maintenance would occur, we’d have to send somebody out, 
probably from Regina, to do it. Those costs are all built in in the 
system. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, are you telling me that you 
aren’t picking up any maintenance costs, and at the figure of 
$12,000 a month there was no depreciation? There was 
absolutely no other costs, and you’re picking up not one other 
cost in terms of the operation of that ferry, and that your only 
costs are the $15,000 paid to Mr. Evans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there could be . . . 
(inaudible) . . . I said we would pick up any major cost to date. 
To date there’s been no major costs, and the major costs are 
such things as the tower, such things as the cable. Those are 
what we call major types of costs; there’s been none to date. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Who’s paying for putting that ferry in or 
taking the ferry out in the fall? And who pays for putting it in in 
the spring if it goes in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The launching and the removal of the 
ferry will be the responsibility of Mr. Evans. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, when  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3481 
 

we sit in estimates next year if it’s in the spring and if I ask you 
if you have any intentions of operating the Birch Hills ferry, the 
Fenton ferry, the Cecil ferry and all of the ferries in the area that 
affect both Mr. Saxinger’s riding and my riding, and I can say 
to you that he’s got many constituents . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’d ask member not to use 
other members’ names. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m sorry. I apologize. The member from 
Kinistino, if I referred to you by name, Mr. Member, I 
apologize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t guarantee that there 
would be whatever, but we have looked at them. I would say 
that the services, the ferry services that are there, we believe are 
needed. We will look at the Birch Hills ferry crossing — the 
ferry crossing itself — how it’s worked in the private sector. 
This has been sort of a private sector operation. We’ll review it 
at the end of this year, and then we’ll make our decision after 
that. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I certainly hope, Mr. Minister, you 
will review the situation. I want to share with you the feelings 
of the constituents of the member of Kinistino and as well as 
the constituents in my riding, and they are very adamant about 
having that ferry service maintained. Whether it’s run under 
department head or whether it’s run under private operation, 
I’m thinking, is not really that much of a point right now with a 
lot of those people. 
 
What their concern is, that you are going to pull those ferries 
out of the water this fall, and that you are not going to put them 
back in the water next spring, and that there’s going to be added 
to cost to them by having to drive all the way around to 
whichever particular place, and haul farm machinery from here 
to there and other places and make, in some cases, distances in 
excess of 25 miles in order to get to the other side, and in some 
cases even more than that. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, have you had any consultation 
with the farmers in that area or with the municipal governments 
in those areas in terms of that service? 
 
(2330) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well as you know, I had consultation this 
spring. You are aware I was up there and met with both R.M. 
councils, twice in fact, and our intentions is not — at least right 
now our intentions are not to discontinue the service, and we 
will review it to be sure that it has served the needs of the 
people and served to the best financial response to the 
government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: I just want to close, Mr. Minister, by saying 
that if you had been consulting, and if you’d been talking to the 
people in the rural areas you say you’ve been, you would have 
never closed down that ferry service earlier this summer. And I 
think you know that. 
 
We talked earlier today about the lack of consultation by 
members on your side, and this may be a small item to you — 
it’s a small dollar item in the whole scheme of the  

provincial budget — but I tell you that it’s a big concern to the 
farmers out there. And I know that you and the member from 
Shellbrook or from Rosthern don’t feel to be too interested in an 
amount of maybe only 15 or whatever thousands of dollars it is. 
And in terms of this one it’s not a great deal of money, but I 
want you to know that I’ll speak for the member from Kinistino 
and from the other members around there, and I’ll speak long 
and hard if you have plans to remove ferry service anywhere in 
that area. That’s service that is badly needed by those farmers 
and by those people that live in those small communities, and 
they’re just not going to accept you taking a service that used to 
be a 24-hour service supplied by the former administration that 
you cut back to a half day service and then charged the dickens 
out of them when they’ve got to get across with their farm 
equipment late at night. And I just say to you that the cut-back 
of that service is bad enough, but the total removal of it will be 
totally unacceptable, and we’ll be talking about this further, I’m 
sure, in the next estimates if that does, in fact, happen. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 12 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in regards to item 12, there’s one item that 
— a number of items that have been deleted, and one was the 
grants to the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 
And the administrators’ association was previously $6,000, and 
that has been completely cut. I wonder for what reason was that 
discontinued? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we had consultation with 
SARM and the administrators association, and we had made 
other arrangements to assist them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, just one question. You 
consulted with them, and I suppose you’re saying they asked 
you to get rid of the grant that they were receiving. I doubt that 
very much, but you said you made other arrangements. I 
wonder if you would elaborate on the other arrangements, other 
than giving them nothing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have agreed that 
we would help them with their convention in regards to the 
banquet and that, which is always done. We’re just going to do 
it in a different manner, that’s all. 
 
Vote 43 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Rural Development 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Are there any questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I’d like to thank my officials for the 
information they supplied me and for the work they’ve done 
over the last year. They’re great people. They’ve done a good 
job, and I appreciate very much their back-up and their service 
that they’ve supplied to only to myself but to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

3482 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I join with the minister to thank 
the officials for this evening. I know there was some 
embarrassment with the inability of the minister to relate 
information. But I thank the minister also, Mr. Chairman, for 
the information that he provided. I think the concern, as I 
indicated to him, we’ve made our point and I thank him for the 
information he provided. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:38 p.m. 
 


