













































August 27, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 27, 1987 

 

 

2115 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this is the third interim supply 

appropriation Bill. 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $287,170,100 be 

granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 

ending March 31, 1988. 

 

I’ve advised the hon. opposition critic that I’m advised that the 

only one exceeding the one-twelfth or less, where in previous 

interim supplies we’ve done more than the one-twelfth, is the 

legislative amount of $30,000 for additional postage costs, 

again for legislature. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I am tempted to make the 

speech I made last time because the member from Regina South 

really wants me to make it, but I think rather than doing that I 

will simply mail him a copy of it and he’ll be able to read it – or 

to any of his constituents who may request to receive it. 

 

The minister is correct, Mr. Chairman. He did inform me that 

there was a slight additional amount of money beyond the 

regular one-twelfth. This one-twelfth is a normal procedure. We 

have never, in this session, stopped the passing of the interim 

supply Bill on the basis of one-twelfth. The money needs to be 

there to pay the wages of people who work for the government 

and to provide funding for municipalities and so on. But I might 

add that the money is also in this one-twelfth being provided for 

what still is continuing to be a massive government advertising 

program, much of it not necessary – money that could have 

been better spent on other good purposes like dental care 

programs and so on. 

 

We make those points in the estimates, and we’ll be asking the 

ministers all the questions that must be asked as to how much 

money is being spent, who’s benefiting from these 

expenditures, which advertising firms, and so on. I would far 

rather there be less than one-twelfth in some of the departments 

so some of the money be held back for a day further in the 

fiscal year when they could be better spent. But nevertheless an 

interim supply Bill needs the one-twelfth, and we certainly are 

going to agree to it. 

 

The other point I want to make is here we are passing an interim 

supply Bill for the sixth month of the fiscal year. Now that is 

extremely unusual. It’s never happened before, and it’s only 

being done now, and it has to be done, because the budget 

didn’t come in till June rather than in March or late February – 

but usually in March as it usually has. We’ve made that point 

before, and I won’t take the time of the House to make that 

point again. I think the record is there, and the public knows 

and the public has expressed concern not only to my colleagues 

on this side of the House, but I’m sure to all the members on the 

other side of the House. 

 

It is only my hope and my wish that they have gotten the 

message so that the next fiscal year, when we are about to go 

end this one and start the other one on April 1st, we will have a 

budget in place, delivered in this House, debated or in the 

process of debating; so that the school boards and the 

municipalities and non-profit organizations and other groups 

that depend on government to redistribute the wealth of the 

province, so that they can operate so that the budget is timely, 

so that they don’t have to wait again, so that they know where 

they stand. 

 

But also in the spirit of that same argument, Mr. Chairman, I 

want to close by saying we’re going to agree to the passage of 

this interim supply Bill now and expeditiously, for the sake of 

those people and those kinds of organizations who rely on this 

funding and must have it and must know that they are going to 

be able to get it so that they can plan appropriately and get their 

very important functions and their jobs done. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to be very 

brief because my colleague has on previous occasions covered 

off the various areas of our concern. But I think one of the 

things that should be pointed out here is our problem in being 

able to deal with this present Minister of Finance. 

 

Here is a Minster of Finance who last year indicated that he was 

going to have a $389 million deficit, and brought in a deficit of 

$1 billion in addition. And what we see today, he indicates that 

he wants appropriation of part of the budget. But not only is he 

asking for one-twelfth of what is appropriated, but he hasn’t 

apparently even completed bringing in his budget. Because he 

presented to this House his budget, and then a week, or about 

two weeks ago, he stood up in this House, or at least one of his 

ministers did, and said, I want to have further taxes on the 

people of this province because this is not really the budget; I’m 

continuing to extract more money from the people of 

Saskatchewan. And so what he did is to add on some more 

taxes in respect to the licence fee and the registration fee, and 

he taxed the people of this province another 18 million over and 

above what he had in his budget. 

 

What I’m saying to . . . I’m saying to the people of this province 

that Finance minister lost his credibility and everybody in 

Saskatchewan knows it. For him to stand in this House, the way 

that he has mismanaged this province, and to continue in office, 

is absolutely a disgrace and an insult to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — As my colleague has said, here we are sitting 

on August – the 64th day of the sitting of this House; we’re 

almost into September. And this outfit across the way is saying 

we’re going to be managing the province. What a farce, what an 

incredible farce to be putting forward that these people are in 

charge of anything. 

 

And so I say in approving this here, because many of the 

municipalities and the school boards and so on require  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2116 

 

their money . . . But I want to make it perfectly clear to the 

people of this province that this Minister of Finance is 

incapable of continuing in that office, and what he has done is 

to ignore the people of this province and this budget and now is 

continuing to tax 18 million on licence and registration, 

subsequent increases in liquor and beer – additional revenues. 

 

So when he brings in a budget, it doesn’t mean a thing to this 

legislature. It didn’t mean a thing when he went into the 

election, when he said at 389 and then he spent another billion 

trying to get you birds elected. And today, even today he hasn’t 

learned his lesson, because he has brought in his budget and he 

is scorning the people in this legislature by putting in additional 

taxes outside the purview of the budget. 

 

And so I say, we will support it, but the management of the 

affairs of this province leaves a lot to be desired. To think that 

we’re into September and we haven’t even passed the budget. 

And the Minister of Health sits and laughs. He thinks it’s funny. 

The only reason that we’re sitting here with this here 

appropriation is the fact that you wouldn’t face the people in the 

normal time of the year. That’s the reason that we’re here. 

We’re here because you’re trying to slide it through in the 

summer-time when people may not be able to pay attention to 

it. 

 

And so I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that while we’re going to 

support the appropriation, we have many misgivings in the 

respect to the affairs of this government, the increased taxes 

outside of the budget, and the disrespect for all of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan in providing a budget in an orderly fashion as it 

should have been in March or in February, so that we could be 

. . . and the people would know, and would have the full amount 

of money. 

 

So we’ll support it. But let it be clear that this government has 

lost its credibility with the people of this province. They’re 

incompetent, they’re wasteful, they can’t manage – and that’s 

the short of it. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank 

the hon. member from the Quill Lakes for his usual contribution 

to the high level of debate in this Assembly, and his 

statesmanlike approach was obviously, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

the first step in his leadership campaign. I know most hon. 

members on this side of the House wish him well in his 

endeavours. I know, Mr. Chairman, that as leader of the party 

opposite, if he ever girded his loins and screwed up his courage 

and did what he really wanted to do when he tried to dump the 

Leader of the Opposition a few years back, I would hope that 

the hon. member really, really put his money where his mouth 

is, Mr. Speaker, and jumps into the leadership race. I know that 

. . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Could I have order, please! Order, please. 

Order. I’d ask all members, please, to try to contain their 

enthusiasm from both sides at this time, please. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — 

 

Be it resolved that towards making good the supply 

granted to Her Majesty in account of certain expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

1988, the sum of $287,170,100 be granted out of the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $41,063,800 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 

March 31, 1988. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the sum 

of $41,063,800 be granted out of the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1915) 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that the 

resolutions be now read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the resolutions 

read a first and second time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 

 

That Bill No. 35, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year Ending on March 31, 1988, be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, and under rule 

48(2), I move the Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 20 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2117 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, just 

before the supper break we were talking about the one form of 

job creation undertaken by the government of the minister 

opposite, in terms of creating jobs – patronage jobs – for his 

former political colleagues. However, we won’t pursue that any 

longer this evening. Everybody in Saskatchewan knows that 

this is probably the most patronage riddled government in the 

history of the province, and the amount of money flowing into 

the pockets of Tory hacks and friends is probably 

unprecedented in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, as the minister responsible for . . . however, 

minister responsible for the Department of Human Resources, 

Labour and Employment, development, I wonder, sir, if your 

department in 1986 or 1987 . . . or whether there is any in the 

budget for 1987-1988, for payments from your department to 

pay for the Coopers & Lybrand consulting study re the 

government reorganization. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the answer 

is no, we haven’t paid anything to Coopers & Lybrand. 

 

We have a little unfinished business from earlier this afternoon, 

and that is that . . . and the member opposite continues the 

evening talking about patronage, and he even raises the former 

member Rousseau, now in London representing the province of 

Saskatchewan. And this is not . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. I did make the ruling 

just at 5 o’clock that we would try to stay more with the topic. I 

know the topic was raised at that time. I did not rule it out of 

order. So I would like you to answer the question and let’s just 

continue on from there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, you may 

have made the ruling before 5, but it certainly was forgotten by 

the member from Rosemont who carried on. And if he’s going 

to talk about Rousseau, I want to talk about Johnson, their MLA 

who was defeated and served in the position before Rousseau 

did. It seems that’s fair. 

 

I have a list this long in reply to his allegations of patronage. I 

won’t read it here – I respect your ruling – but it is a very long 

list. It’s a very, very long list, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

The question here is . . . I will abide by your ruling and not talk 

about NDP patronage if they will abide by the ruling, and that 

seems fair. And so, therefore, I won’t, and I will see if they can 

follow a ruling for a change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The answer to the question is, no, we haven’t paid anything. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Did you say, no, we haven’t paid any? Is that 

your answer, that your department, the department responsible 

for, paid nothing for, and paid out any amount whatsoever for 

the Coopers & Lybrand consultants sum? Was your answer, no, 

we did not pay any? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, my 

paymaster tells me that we haven’t received a bill, and we 

haven’t paid a bill because we haven’t received one. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I ask the minister: did Coopers 

& Lybrand carry out a consulting study in regards to your 

department? Did they carry out a consulting study, and are you 

anticipating the bill from Coopers & Lybrand? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The answer is, yes, there was a study in 

our department. The answer to your second question is, we 

don’t know if we will receive a bill. We are not certain whether 

the Executive Council is handling the bill for that or whether 

it’s paid by each individual department. At present we have not 

received the bill. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I ask the minister: are you saying 

and telling the people of Saskatchewan that your government 

doesn’t know who is going to pay the bill for Coopers & 

Lybrand, that the government hasn’t made up its mind, despite 

the fact that they commissioned a study? Are you saying that 

they commissioned a study to study government reorganization 

and didn’t know who was going to pay them? Do you expect 

anybody to believe that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — From what I can gather, excellent work 

has been done by this firm and their bill will be paid either out 

of the right pocket or the back pocket or the chest pocket – not 

the left pocket. The left doesn’t pay bills from that point of 

view, but it will be paid out of one of the pockets. It will be paid 

by the taxpayers. And I can’t tell you exactly which form it will 

be paid out of, but it will be paid out of the supply that we vote 

here regularly and out of the budget. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, do you happen to know who the 

authorizing agency for the contract was? Who contracted 

Coopers & Lybrand, and precisely, how you see them being 

billed for the services they have rendered? Has your department 

submitted a bill? Do you know if the Executive Council intends 

to submit a bill? 

 

Since you sit on the Executive Council, it seems to me that you 

would probably be someone who would have access to that 

kind of information, or in fact, if you’re saying that there was 

no budgetary items to your knowledge, am I to take it that in 

fact there was nothing in your department budgeted for this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The answer, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is 

that our department did not specifically retain these people to 

do a study of our department. As part of the overall review of 

the government, they appeared one day and did their work and 

left and wrote a report. 

 

And I’ve had a glance at the report. And I don’t have a copy of 

the report, and when it’s made public, you will get a copy the 

same as everyone else, and if it’s not made public, you won’t. 

And as you know, the decisions and discussions of Executive 

Council are not matters of public record, and I won’t go into 

what Executive Council did. 

 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2118 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m not asking you to reveal all 

the internal discussions within Executive Council. I am asking 

you about decisions that Executive Council took. Those 

decisions, sir, are in regards to public spending. They are open 

for public scrutiny, and you are incorrect when you say they’re 

not. 

 

What I’m asking you is: if you do not have any item budgeted 

to pay Coopers & Lybrand for their study, where would one 

look to find the budgeted items, to find that budgetary item 

which would pay for the study on government reorganization? 

Where would I look to find that in the budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I think you should look to the Premier 

and his estimates; he’s overall in charge of the government. 

And simply put, we are not going to give you an explanation of 

things that we do not control in our department. We have not 

budgeted for it, we have not received a bill, and should we 

receive a bill, we would be prepared to pay our fair share. But 

as you indicate, we don’t have any money, so maybe they won’t 

get paid. I don’t know, they’ll have to worry about it. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well I wonder, Mr. Minister, given that you said 

that the department has done good work, and it is obvious from 

the state of affairs in your department, there’s certainly some 

question as to whether or not they did good work or not given 

what’s happening with your department. I wonder could you 

tell us, has the Coopers & Lybrand group made any 

recommendation in regards to the study they did that affects 

your department. And I wonder if you would tell us here tonight 

what those recommendations were, if any, and how did they 

affect the question of job programs and employment 

development in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well they gave us some suggestions and 

we are looking at implementing them. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well I wonder if the . . . I wonder, Mr. Minister, 

if you’d be so kind, given that you’re consuming large amounts 

of taxpayers’ money when you, yourself, admit you pay over 

$50,000 a year in personal income tax, I wonder if you’d do 

your job and tell the people of the province precisely what kind 

of recommendations they put forward and which 

recommendation it is that you are considering. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well to say to the member opposite, 

we’re considering all of the recommendations. But on behalf of 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, I was, as you were, elected to 

apply our judgement, and we have a greater duty on this side of 

the House, being the government, to use this judgement wisely. 

And we will give all of those recommendations consideration, 

and when government has decided which of those 

recommendations are beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan, 

we will either advise you through ministerial statements or 

through a press release or through regulations that you will read 

as soon as they are published. In the usual manner, you will find 

out. And we have really no greater duty to you as a member to 

advise you of the government’s decisions than we do to the  

public, and the public will be informed when we’ve decided. So 

there are some useful suggestions and they will be implemented 

and they will save the public money. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I shudder, Mr. Minister, I shudder when I hear 

you say they will be implemented and they will save the public 

money because, given your government’s records of saving the 

government’s money, we’ve gone from a surplus budgetary 

position in this province to a $3.4 billion debt, which is your 

record when it comes to saving the government’s money. 

 

Mr. Minister, you say that you are elected to exercise your 

judgement and the public is paying you to exercise your 

judgement. And with all respects due to you, sir, I think the 

government certainly has got a bad bargain in terms of persons 

who are elected to exercise that judgement in dealing with 

yourself when it comes to the question of job creation. 

 

I have here ads, Mr. Minister, that deal with the question of job 

creation, that deal with the whole question of your government 

and yourselves judgement. And I refer to a document from 1985 

called Partnership for Progress – “Working Together to Build a 

Stronger Tomorrow,” and under that there’s employment. I’m 

sure you’re familiar with this document. And there’s a picture 

of a worker with a hard hat working in one of our publicly 

owned potash mines so that the benefits will accrue to the 

people of the province. 

 

It talks about employment development strategy, and it goes on 

talking about the next five years and the national perspective 

and the annual rate of unemployment in Saskatchewan and how 

the rate of unemployment has been rising and rising in 

Saskatchewan. And here on page 18 of that document under the 

title “Saskatchewan Strategy: The Next Five Years,” there is a 

little part which says: 

 

A five-year plan of action for the first of these – education 

and training – has been proposed earlier in this document. 

 

The government wishes now to propose a corresponding 

five year plan of action to address the second and third 

stages of employment development – transitional 

programs and long-term economic growth. 

 

And I want to remind the minister, this is a 1985 document and 

it’s talking about a five-year plan for job development. And it 

says: 

 

To finance and direct this plan, the government is creating 

a new Employment Development Fund. $600 million will 

be allocated to this Fund over the next five years, 

beginning with $120 million in 1985-86. 

 

And then it goes on to talk about that in 1985-86 the money will 

be allocated in the following way. And at the back of the 

document it says: 

 

For further information call or write: The Hon.  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2119 

 

Gary Lane, Minister in Charge of Employment 

Development Agency, Room 345, Legislative Building, 

Regina, Saskatchewan. 

 

Now $600 million was promised by your government in the 

employment development fund to treat the problem of steadily 

rising unemployment in this province. That was 1985; that’s not 

so far ago. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you tell us what happened to your 

government’s promise to put $600 million into the employment 

development fund? In fact, Mr. Minister, could you tell us 

where the employment development fund has gone and why it 

doesn’t even appear in this year’s budget estimates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I remember the 

Partnership For Progress report very well. As a matter of fact, 

I drove past the Santa Maria nursing home in Regina yesterday, 

and I saw a sign that said Partnership For Progress, 48 nursing 

homes beds being built there at Santa Maria. And there you 

have some of the employment development fund – people 

employed to build care homes for senior citizens. 

 

The same sign stands in front of St. Paul Lutheran Home in 

Melville, which is in my constituency, and there’s a 30-unit 

addition to St. Paul Lutheran Home in Melville. There is part of 

the employment development fund, and I might say it was a 

long time in coming. 

 

I recall that under the NDP government, the city of Melville 

actually had a reduction in nursing-home beds – an actual 

reduction when the old wing closed and was not replaced. And 

it took until now, and, as a matter of fact, on September 28 of 

this year, there will be the official opening of the addition to 

replace the beds that were closed by the NDP government many 

years ago. So Melville will now be getting back to the number 

of nursing-home beds that it had before the NDP started 

reducing the number. 

 

That fund has been spent in many ways. Every day I drive past 

the Wascana Hospital – Rehabilitation Hospital – spent on 

health, $54 million on the Wascana Hospital. And on the 

Wascana Hospital, a $54 million expenditure that no one on 

your side of the House remembers, notices, seems to care about, 

it’s forgotten. Do you realize that $54 million is a substantial 

expenditure for a hospital, and if that hospital were built, in 

parts of Saskatchewan, it would be a monument. It would be 

noticed by every person. But you don’t want to talk about that. 

You don’t want to talk about rehabilitation of workers. You 

don’t want to talk about that because it’s in Regina, and all the 

jobs are going to your constituents. 

 

So there you have the employment development fund. Money 

has been channelled back to the departments. We no longer 

operate, out of my department, a massive fund of that nature. 

Each department is using it for education or for health. And 

there you have the explanation. 

 

And the member from Moose Jaw talks about St. Anthony’s. I 

believe he’s very interested in having that nursing home 

proceed. I can point out that it will proceed. 

 

An. Hon. Member: — When? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — When, is what the people of 

Saskatchewan were asking, and you ask, when? When, is what 

the people of Saskatchewan were asking for many, many years. 

 

And I recall the first political speech I made. It was for the NDP 

when the candidate, John Kowalchuk, fell ill in 1975, and he 

asked me to go and speak in Neudorf, Saskatchewan, and he 

had a prepared speech. He had a prepared speech in 1975, and 

the prepared speech denounced the Liberal government for 

closing the hospital in Neudorf, Saskatchewan, and promised 

them a nursing home. And it still isn’t there. So, when – when 

is the question, when? 

 

These are the kind of promises that were made by your 

government, and when, is: we will build it very soon. But you 

had many, many years. How long was your constituency 

represented by an NDP? And why isn’t it there now? That’s the 

question. So when you say “when,” it will be done when 

possible, and that will be in the very near future. In the very 

near future, you will have the nursing home in Moose Jaw, not 

because you as the MLA have earned that, but because your 

people need it. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, well, Mr. Chairman, we talk about 

digressing from the topic, and there’s a . . . the question, and 

there is, I think there’s a very good reason why the minister 

stands there and liked to talk about everything else under the 

sun except the question. 

 

And the question was very simple, Mr. Minister. In 1985, 

Partnership For Progress promised $600 million for an 

employment development fund. Now in 1985, plus five years 

will take us to 1990 – that’s five years, that’s five years. I know 

your Minister of Finance probably can’t add that way, given his 

record of addition and mathematics in this province, but surely 

you who are a highly-trained lawyer and someone who pays 

$50,000 a year in income tax, surely you can add 1985 and five 

to come up with 1990 together. 

 

In those five years, your government promised $600 million, 

and it’s signed by the Minister of Finance, the Hon. Gary Lane. 

That’s what this document says. He promised $600 million for 

the employment development fund. Now for the people of the 

province who haven’t had the opportunity to look in the budget, 

I defy them should they pick up a copy of this budget to find 

where there is – not just the $600 million that you and your 

government promised the people of Saskatchewan – but the 

employment development fund. Not only have you not lived up 

to your promise of $600 million for jobs for Saskatchewan 

citizens, you’ve done away with the vehicle that was supposed 

to deal with those jobs, which over and over and over again, in 

budget speeches and in hundreds of thousands of dollars of ads 

which you plastered all over this province, that you promised, 

you promised the people of Saskatchewan $600 million for 

jobs. 

 

You have failed to carry out that promise. You have failed to 

carry out that promise. You have abolished the  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2120 

 

employment development fund. There is no employment 

development fund with $600 million despite the fact that you 

were going to carry this over a five-year action plan for jobs. 

 

(1945) 

 

The question to you is, Mr. Minister, was it you who decided to 

do away with the employment development fund, or was is your 

. . . was it the Premier, was it Executive Council, or in the 

Coopers & Lybrand study to which we’ve already referred? 

Was that one of the recommendations that you are going to save 

Saskatchewan people money, that you’re going to save the 

people of Saskatchewan money by not putting money into 

employment development, something which you promised to 

do for five years, two years ago, in another Conservative 

promise broken? Is that what happened? You broke your word 

again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Some of my colleagues indicated that 

question wasn’t worthy of comment. I’m rather sympathetic to 

that view. The member has forgotten about the home program, 

the Saskatchewan home improvement program. I would submit 

that if you had that program and hospitals and nursing homes 

and new technical schools in Prince Albert, and you add all of 

these things together, you have an expenditure in excess of 

$600 million. It is not 1990 yet, or whatever year you’ve 

decided the five-year plan will end on. But when we have gone 

through that full five years, $600 million will be a small sum 

compared to what will be spent in this province, and that will be 

spent primarily on health, education, seniors, and justice, and all 

of those things are essential in this province. 

 

The Premier has already advised you that the home program has 

created 17,000 jobs in this province. I have already pointed out 

to you this afternoon, after you boasted about creating 9,000 

jobs per year, that our average is running at 12,000 jobs per 

year. I really don’t know what you would expect. The 

government does not work miracles but this government is 

efficient. This government does what has to be done. This 

government does what is right. This government has principles 

and they do not revolve around socialism. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, the question, very simple: Mr. 

Minister, did you make the decision to do away with the 

employment development fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The employment development fund is 

allocated as part of my department. We’re talking here about 

estimates, about a budget. We’re talking about accounting. It’s 

a question of accounting, where you allocate the money. This 

year it’s not allocated in my department, it’s allocated in the 

departments that will be spending the money on employment 

development. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, well, that’s interesting. Mr. Minister, 

where would one go to see the $600 million that’s been 

allocated? And why was it that you talked about as one of the 

four pillars that along with health and education and something 

else, that you were going to build jobs through the employment 

development fund? You abolished it. You don’t have any 

money for job development in that  

fund. 

 

You are the minister who’s mainly responsible for employment 

development. And are you trying to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that you’re drawing down a salary that makes 

you pay $50,000 a year or more in income tax alone and you 

don’t have any money to administer? That when it comes to 

responsibility for employment, you don’t have any 

responsibility for employment development, and that it’s some 

other minister, and that you’re drawing your salary through a 

façade and a sham? Is that what you’re trying to tell the people 

of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well you will find the expenditures in 

the blue book, pages 16 to page 100. And in there you’ll find all 

of those expenditures that we’ve referred to. 

 

I don’t really know why the member opposite has such a dislike 

for people like myself who pay income tax. The member 

opposite always wishes to tax the rich and because he wishes to 

tax the rich . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Aren’t you rich? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don’t know if I’m rich; I’m certainly 

not poor. But he should like people who have incomes that are 

large and incomes that can be taxed and used for expenditures. 

Expenditures is something that the member opposite clearly 

enjoys – spending government money. And I do my share to 

contribute towards it. And certainly my salary as a cabinet 

minister is quite clear, and I don’t pay that large amount of 

income tax on my cabinet salary. 

 

I was not like the NDP. I saved for leaner years and have some 

savings. The NDP government squandered in the seven fat 

years, and now we’re in world economic times that are leaner 

years, and there is nothing saved. Well the legacy of the 

members opposite is Crown corporations with debt and a 

Heritage Fund that is fictitious. And that’s the legacy we are left 

with. 

 

And personally, I saved my money when I earned it. I paid my 

taxes, and I saved the balance. I am not ashamed of paying 

taxes. I’m not particularly happy to pay gigantic amounts of 

taxes, but I do pay them as a matter of duty. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, once again you’ve failed to 

answer the question. Your government did away with the $600 

million employment development fund. You can look all you 

like through the budget and you won’t see $600 million 

dedicated to employment development in one kind of fund or 

another. 

 

And if you’re saying that it was given to somebody else, then 

you’re drawing your salary . . . you’re drawing your salary as 

the minister responsible for employment. The people of 

Saskatchewan are certainly getting a bad deal when they’re 

paying you to do something that you don’t have any money to 

do anything with. 

 

However, it’s no wonder that you want to talk about everything 

else under the sun except employment development and your 

government’s record. I mean, you can talk about the $50,000 

that you pay in income tax or  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2121 

 

how hard you worked. 

 

And by the way, by the way, in regards to how hard you work, 

Mr. Minister, wasn’t it true that you yourself said you’re a 

self-confessed parasite on the people? Didn’t you say that’s 

what lawyers were – that they were self-confessed parasites that 

didn’t earn their keep and that you were taking money out under 

false pretences? 

 

It seems to me that in one of your forays into some sort of 

folksy humour, you’ve kind of slandered the lawyers of this 

province by calling them all parasites. Or is it just yourself 

that’s the parasite and is taking money under false pretence? I 

think maybe the lawyers on this side would certainly like to 

know. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, the $600 million that you promised for 

jobs and didn’t deliver, is not the first time, is not the first that 

you or your government have broken promises that you’ve put 

down in writing. I refer right now to an ad that I have here from 

1982, and it’s got your picture on it, and it says: 

 

Elect (your name – and I know it’s not the custom to use 

people’s names here – so your name) the progressive 

alternative. There’s so much more we can be. 

 

I just want to read, Mr. Minister, of promises you made to the 

people and how it relates to job employment and the fact that 

they haven’t got jobs in this province because your government 

hasn’t kept its promises. 

 

In 1982 you personally, with your picture on it here, promise to 

roll back the 20 per cent gasoline tax, sales tax, to reduce 

provincial income tax by 10 per cent, to remove the 5 per cent 

E&H tax. And that was all part of your plan to stimulate 

investment in the province and create jobs. You haven’t carried 

out any of them. 

 

Government management – to ensure efficient management of 

the Crown corporations and provide service at cost to the 

public. Well the cost of the public in this province that your 

management of the Crown corporations is $3.4 billion in debt 

and a $2.3 billion debt on Sask Power alone. 

 

It says here that you promise to protect consumers by Public 

Utilities Review Commission. Where is it? Is that another one 

of your promises broken? 

 

It says that you’d open the books on government business. And 

we have your Justice minister saying, we’re not interested in 

freedom of information, we’re not going to open the books. 

 

So there you sit, there you stand during these estimates and not 

answer any of the questions put forward to you – simple, 

straightforward questions. It doesn’t matter what we on the 

other side ask, you find some smart-aleck remark to try to 

answer back, some smart-aleck remark. We know where that 

gets you, Mr. Minister. We know where your smart-aleck 

remarks get you. 

 

To establish freedom of information – that’s another one of 

your promises. Because the people of this province  

want to see where their money is going and what your 

government’s plans were, particularly when it comes to job 

creation, because that was your number one priority. 

 

It says, concern for people – real families can count on a 

Progressive Conservative government to provide mortgage 

interest assistance. You carried that out, I’ll grant you that. 

 

Reduce taxes, another promise broken. And to hold the line on 

utility costs, another promise broken. Funding for health and 

education will be increased. It was increased, but not with the 

rate of inflation and not to meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. But to get to the point: 

 

. . . rewarding permanent jobs will be the major emphasis 

of the Progressive Conservative development strategy. 

You know, there is so much more we can be. 

 

And it’s got your picture here and it’s signed as a progressive 

alternative. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, since you put your name on this kind of 

document and made it public and that you promised that you 

would have an employment development strategy for this 

province, where is it? Where is your employment development 

strategy, and why is it that you did away with a $600 million 

employment development fund, and why have we seen 

unemployment in this province double since your government 

took office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The question, Mr. Chairman, is: are we 

still on the topic? That’s the question. 

 

The question of where lawyers fit into society, I could probably 

understand. And you will notice that socialists in their 

manifesto talk about the means of production, and, therefore, 

we have some common agreement that the most elementary 

forms of our society, the most necessary, are the means of 

production. And that’s where we differ. You wish to have the 

state own all of the means of production. 

 

When I refer to lawyers and politicians and other elements of 

society, you are talking about people who are not involved in 

primary production. You are talking about people who provide 

services to those people who provide primary production. 

 

Our differences are so great politically in that you believe in the 

means of production being owned by the state, for the state, the 

people working for the government. 

 

Now on the other hand what we are looking at is the means of 

production owned by individuals, the people. People working 

for themselves, with a government to govern them, not to own 

them. That’s the difference. 

 

And when you talk about who is a parasite on society, the only 

parasites that I can think of are democratic socialists. That’s the 

only that I can think of . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2122 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Everyone else pays their way. Lawyers 

operate in a free market economy, and they’re paid what people 

think they are worth. And if people think they are worthless, 

they starve or they go broke. And there are lawyers who go 

bankrupt. Other lawyers are considered to be worth more and 

are paid more. And usually lawyers are judged by the amount of 

business that they have, and certainly I stand proud against that 

standard and have been a long-standing member of the law 

society who has never been accused of any dishonesty or any 

sharp practices. 

 

You talk about election promises in 1982, and when one makes 

a promise or a prediction on how they would govern, it has to 

be based on some facts. And one of the facts of that prediction 

and that article that you read was made on, was based on the 

facts that the NDP government said at the time, we have a $1 

billion in our Heritage Fund. And if you assume that to be 

correct, that there’s $1 billion in the Heritage Fund, then it is 

quite possible to reduce taxes. 

 

However, you said, why didn’t we open the books. We did open 

your books, and what we could find was an atrocious 

management mess. And tell me, why did the shredders in this 

building work continuously? Why did people shred documents 

after the 1982 election? Because you as a government at that 

time had much to hide. You tried to have the people believe that 

there was $1 billion Heritage Fund. 

 

And then you say, well the Conservatives didn’t keep every 

promise. Well maybe we didn’t keep absolutely every promise. 

But I could tell you this, that we kept about 95 per cent, and that 

is a pretty good track record considering that the world changes 

from day to day and from year to year. And the economies of 

the world, the economics of our life, and the lives of people in 

this province, in Canada, in the world, change from time to 

time. However, you wouldn’t understand that, so I’ll leave it at 

that. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well I find it, Mr. Chairman, somewhat 

amusing to decide . . . have the Minister of Human Resources 

and economy decide what I know and I don’t know. 

 

We were talking about the $600 million employment 

development fund, which a long time ago I asked him: was it 

the minister who made the decision to do away with it? He still 

has refused to answer that question. He’s refused to answer 

every reasonable question put to him. So maybe we’ll have to 

start asking some unreasonable questions, ask him about things 

he doesn’t know about, like adding two and two together, doing 

things like that. Because obviously he can’t do his own 

arithmetic. 

 

Here in the estimates, he talks about the Heritage Fund, 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund, and when he inherited it, there 

was an awful mess, and that there was no money in the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. And if people in this province 

were to look at the records that are contained – and they’re all 

public in the estimates, put forward by  

governments – you would find a record in this Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund that absolutely contradicts what the minister just 

said. 

 

Now I don’t believe it’s because the minister is a stranger to the 

truth. I just think that the minister doesn’t know what he’s 

talking about when it comes . . . he doesn’t know what he’s 

talking about when it comes to employment development. 

Because if he did know, he’d be able to answer some very 

direct and straightforward questions put to him. 

 

But I would just remind the minister that in ‘85-86, for 

example, the total budgetary revenue for the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund was $826,775 times 1,000. It’s doesn’t take very 

much to add three zero’s on that. You will see that the Heritage 

Fund was more than $1 million. It was getting closer to 1 

billion. And if you go back, you will see that in the back of this 

book, for the year when the NDP was in power, the balance 

books when the NDP was in power, that the Heritage Fund had 

those kind of revenues in it. 

 

Tonight, Mr. Minister, we just passed a Bill of interim supply 

which took, I believe, 41 million out of the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund. While you and your party go around and try to 

persuade the citizens of Saskatchewan that the Heritage Fund 

was empty, that there wasn’t anything there, the facts once 

again speak for themselves. And it’s those fact, sir, that you are 

a stranger to. The truth may be relative in instances in politics, 

but the facts will speak for themselves. The facts, in terms of 

your performance in government, will speak eloquently, 

particularly when it comes to the next election as it did in the 

last election. 

 

Because while you talked about, in your diatribes against the 

socialist hordes, or whatever, that their day was done . . . and I 

remember the speeches between 1982 and 1986 when you and 

others of your ilk would go on in your flights of fancies and 

your right wing ideological meanderings, while you were 

getting out there in right field with Madsen Pirie and the Adam 

Smith Institute and Maggie Thatcher. While you were doing 

that you were also destroying the economic and job 

opportunities for people in this province. 

 

Now I’m asking you again, sir, a very straightforward question. 

Did you, as Minister for Human Resources, Labour and 

Employment, make the decision to do away with the $600 

million employment development fund? Was that your 

decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the member opposite, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, talks about the last election and the election before 

that and looks forward to the next election, and he will be 

looking forward to the election after that and the election after 

that, and will be looking forward to many, many elections. I 

didn’t really hear him say that he was going to win the next 

election. And I look forward to it as well. But when you really 

get back to who is right or wrong, who is right or wrong here in 

this political discussion, you should really check. October 20, 

1986 was the last major play-off game and I recall the score was 

38 to 25. And it’s the score that counts. I would submit that the 

better government won. 

 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2123 

 

Therefore, it’s rather strange that you refer to Margaret 

Thatcher and how unsuccessful she is as a political leader and 

in running a government. It seems to me that if you will check 

the records, her record is three and zero, and she has yet to lose 

to your socialist colleagues over there, and she will probably 

retire the champion – undefeated. 

 

In answer to your question that did I make the decision to 

transfer the employment development fund back to the 

department, the answer is, I was part of it and it was the right 

thing to do. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, would you tell the 

people of Saskatchewan why you decided to abolish the 

employment development fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We didn’t abolish the fund, we’re just 

not doing a separate accounting of the fund at this time. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — No, Mr. Minister, that’s not true. There is 

nowhere in this budget estimates, as there was in last year’s 

budget estimates, an item called employment development 

fund. Once again, once again you are not telling the truth to the 

people of the province. Just as you said, we didn’t do away – 

what was it? We didn’t terminate the . . . No – we didn’t abolish 

it, we terminated it. Once again you are up to your 

jiggery-pokery with your tongue, and it’s going to get you in a 

whole pile more trouble. 

 

Now you have done away with the employment development 

fund. There is no item in this budget called the employment 

development fund, as there was in last year’s employment 

development fund. Why did you do away . . . You said you had 

good reasons to do it. Why did you do away with the 

employment development fund? What good reasons were there 

to abolish a $600 million job creation fund? 

 

Perhaps you’d like to elaborate on that for the people of this 

province. You abolished the fund. Why did you do it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the question has already 

been answered. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — No, Mr. Chairman, the question has not been 

answered. The question was, why? The first question that the 

minister answered: did he? He answered yes. Then he said he 

had good reasons for abolishing the employment development 

fund. I want the minister to tell us why he abolished the 

employment development fund. What good reasons were there 

when we have the highest unemployment rate, particularly 

among young people, in the history of Saskatchewan? Why did 

you abolish the employment development fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the question has 

already been answered. I could only repeat that the member 

should drive past the nursing homes in this province and the 

hospital projects, and the Wascana hospital at $54 million. He 

should probably go drive around the province, look at every one 

of the signs, add up the sums on the signs, take into account that 

this is a $600 million fund over five years, which would be 

what? 

 

An Hon. Member: — $120 million an year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — $120 million a year. Thank you. That 

was very helpful of you. 

 

At $120 million it doesn’t take long for a $54 million hospital 

and a $12 million Northern Institute of Technology to add up to 

that kind of money. So all I can say is that the members 

opposite should drive around the province, look at those signs 

that say “Partnership for Progress,” add up the dollar signs that 

are on those signs, and they will get to a sum in the range of 

$600 million when the appropriate time has expired. I believe 

the member from Moose Jaw North will be able to add St 

Anthony’s on to the list. And so you have to be patient and wait 

until the five years are expired. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Just a final little question on this. Mr. Minister, 

are you saying you spent $600 million and that the fund is 

therefore depleted? Is that what the impression you’re trying to 

leave with the people of this province? Did you spend $600 

million out of the fund, and is that why the fund’s been 

abolished? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No, I told you, for accounting . . . Hello. 

There, that’s better. Thank you. Now that I’m no longer the 

deputy minister, I’m back to being the minister, I can answer 

the question. 

 

I’ve indicated to you that this is a matter of accounting, and 

those funds that were lumped together as the employment 

development fund are being used in the departments, and that 

the business of the government is carrying on as usual. 

 

And I don’t know what you want us to do – bring a pile of 

money here and stack it on the centre of the floor and say: there 

it is; look at it; there is $600 million. That’s not how we operate 

in the legislature here; we tend to deal in figures and allow the 

banks to deal with the cheques. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s obvious to everybody in 

Saskatchewan that you’re trying to hide the fact that you 

abolished the employment development fund; that it is not an 

accounting procedure; that you have, in fact, given up on job 

creation as the number one priority of your government. 

 

In fact, I would suggest that in about the middle of the summer 

of 1986 when your poll trend line decided that agriculture 

would probably earn you more votes than talking about jobs . . . 

because I know in my own constituency of Regina Rosemont it 

was about the middle of the summer of 1986 that the 

Conservative candidate was left out there high and dry because 

he certainly wasn’t winning any brownie points when it came to 

talking about your job record – that, in fact, that that decision 

was made. 

 

I still think and submit, Mr. Minister, however, that the actual 

decision to abolish jobs was yours, and so that you as the 

minister responsible for employment, now have to bear the 

brunt, have to bear the brunt of the rising unemployment rate in 

this province and the kind of economic hardship being wreaked 

upon the people of  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2124 

 

this province. 

 

However, I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can explain to the 

people of the province why it is that employment has dropped 

in this province and that unemployment has risen in this 

province since 1982? Perhaps you’d give us . . . If, in fact, if 

what you’re saying is true – that you’ve created all these jobs, 

and you’ve created all this wealth, and that the free enterprise 

system is the way to go – why is it that your free enterprise 

system has not produced the jobs for the people of this 

province? 

 

And why is it that in 1981 when Saskatchewan was number one 

in job creation, why it is that you now have been down that long 

and slippery slope into second place and into third place, and so 

that provinces in which us socialists play a more important role, 

because we recognize the need that the government has to lead 

the way in job creation – why is it, Mr. Minister, that your 

so-called and vaunted and much defended by yourself free 

enterprise system isn’t able to deliver the goods when it comes 

to job creation in this province? 

 

And why is it that between 1971 and 1981 the unemployment 

rate in this province never rose above 6 per cent, and between 

1982 and 1986 it’s never gone below 6 per cent in this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have 

the labour force statistics – some of them I gave to the members 

earlier – and that was that Saskatchewan since the election of 

our government, has increased the labour force by 15 per cent, 

or 66,000 people. In comparison, British Columbia was up 13 

per cent; Alberta, 7 per cent; Manitoba, 11 per cent. So in the 

last five and a half years the Saskatchewan labour force has 

increased by 15 per cent; British Columbia, 13 per cent; 

Alberta, 7 per cent; Manitoba, 11 per cent. 

 

Now that bears further analysis. You will note that Alberta’s 

increase is only 7 per cent and it probably has something to do 

with the world’s economy in oil. 

 

You’ll notice that Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, all 

produce grain. Saskatchewan produces half of the grain in 

western Canada – about half in Canada, as a matter of fact – and 

Manitoba produces very little grain and very little oil, so they 

would not be affected as much by a downturn in agriculture or 

by a downturn in oil. 

 

Yet Saskatchewan, which produces 15 per cent of Canada’s oil, 

half of the grain, Saskatchewan led the four western provinces 

in job creation in the labour force with an increase of 15 per 

cent; Alberta was lowest with 7 per cent because of oil; British 

Columbia at 13 per cent; and Manitoba at 11 per cent. And so 

even when oil, potash and grain – oil and potash, they don’t 

have much of it in Manitoba and wouldn’t know what to do 

with it, considering the people they have in charge of potash 

over there . . . But in any event, when you compare that, 

Saskatchewan compares very well with the other provinces in 

western Canada. 

 

(2015) 

 

And so standing on the record, the participation rates are up; 

there are more people working in Saskatchewan now by many 

more people than there were five years ago. Five years ago the 

actual – this is employed people in this province – 420,00 in 

April of 1982; employed people in July of this year, 475,000. 

There are 55,000 more people working in Saskatchewan today 

than they were when the NDP were defeated. And I submit that 

is progress. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well once again, Mr. Minister, you are the ones 

who have been praising the virtues of free enterprise when it 

comes to job creation and how all you great capitalists over 

there are going to create jobs. 

 

I wonder if you’d explain this little news story to us – headline, 

“Spending down 21 per cent”. It’s from the Moose Jaw Times 

Herald. It’s a Canadian Press story. It says: 

 

Capital spending by large corporations in Saskatchewan is 

expected to fall 21 per cent in 1987, says a survey by the 

Department of Regional Industrial Expansion. It’s the 

biggest decrease in any province (the biggest decrease in 

any province). The survey of capital investment plans was 

conducted by the Department during April and May on 

315 large companies, and excludes spending by smaller 

firms as well as housing, agricultural, fishing, and direct 

government expenditures. 

 

The survey shows capital spending by large corporations 

across the country will increase 9 per cent to 26.5 billion 

this year. The increase is evenly divided between 

manufacturing and other spending. The largest increases 

are in electrical electronics and machinery, food, beverage, 

and all metallic minerals, forest products, trade, finance, 

and communication. Decreases will occur in oil and gas, 

pipeline and transportation companies. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you have gone up time after time talking 

about how the . . . that your free enterprise approach to creating 

jobs and creating investment in the province is working. 

Perhaps you can explain to the people of the province that your 

large capitalist friends who control the capital pools in this 

country are not increasing their spending in Saskatchewan, 

under a Conservative government friendly to capitalism, but, in 

fact, here in Saskatchewan are decreasing their spending by 21 

per cent, while their increasing their expenditure by 9 per cent 

across the country. 

 

And I expect, Mr. Minister, if you explore that statistic a little 

further, you will see that there’ll be an increase in capital 

expenditure by large corporation, including in socialist 

Manitoba, and that capital investment will create jobs. 

 

Why have your large capitalist buddies bailed out on you here 

in Saskatchewan, decreased their spending by 21 per cent while 

they’re increasing to 29 per cent across the rest of the country to 

create, hopefully, some spin-off effects in terms of jobs? 

 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2125 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, it’s an 

interesting discussion going on here about the merits of 

capitalism or the merits of socialism. And I challenge the 

member opposite to show me the Detroit wall, or the Chicago 

wall, or the New York wall, or the Toronto wall, or the wall in 

Vancouver. There is no wall to keep people in the United 

States. There is no wall to keep people in Toronto. There is no 

wall to keep people in Regina. We do not have walls in free and 

capitalist countries. But I could show you the Berlin Wall. 

 

And so you talk about the merits of socialism. Then one of the 

great advantages of socialism is that there is a lot of 

employment building walls to keep the people from escaping. 

That’s one of the great job creation projects of socialists. Why 

is it that China is trying to go to a free market system? Why is it 

that China is trying to go to a free market system? Why is it that 

Russia is considering the same? Why is there such a difference 

between East and West Germany? I can tell you that . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And the member opposite asks: do I 

have any ideas about Saskatchewan? Yes. We are part of the 

world, and we have to compete in the world, and we have to 

look at other parts of the world and take their best examples. 

And you’re submitting to us that we follow the worst examples 

in the world – the worst examples. 

 

I have a cousin who works for Fording Coal, a corporation that 

you would despise because they’re owned by CP (Canadian 

Pacific). And he has been travelling in and out of China for 

many years. And the greatest revolution that China ever had 

took place in one year – the year that they allowed farmers to 

farm for themselves rather than for the state. He said he came 

back the following year and you wouldn’t know it was the same 

country. There were farmers who had money. There were 

farmers who were buying consumer goods. 

 

So I think the world examples settle the argument. There is no 

discussion. The world argument settles the dispute over which 

system is best. 

 

In the month of June, unemployment rate in Regina was 5.5 per 

cent. That, in the very words of your former leader, is very near 

to full employment. I grant you that the figures weren’t as good 

in Saskatoon as they were in Regina, but could it be that in 

Regina there was an upgrader being built at that time? Could it 

be that in Regina there is a $54 million Wascana hospital and a 

nursing home? Could it be all those things? I think it’s quite 

possible. 

 

When you talk about capital investment, it’s quite possible that 

investors were scared off. If you recall, we had an election last 

October. No investor with any ability would consider investing 

in this province when there is any danger of the NDP forming a 

government. And there was some danger, but the danger has 

passed. And I expect that in the next four years the stability will 

lead this province to greater prosperity. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I’ve been sitting here with a 

great deal of interest listening to the philosophical discussions 

that we are having. I would ask the members to try to get a little 

bit back on the specifics of Human Resources, Labour and 

Employment. And although I’m  

very interested in China and all this kind of thing as well, I 

would ask both the questioner and, certainly, the minister to try 

to be a little bit more specific and to the topic, please. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairperson, the question I had asked that 

led to the minister’s wanderings were in regards to capital 

spending by large corporations, which according to his 

reckoning will create jobs, and the fact that it fell by 21 per 

cent, or is expected to fall by 21 per cent in 1987. 

 

Now the election, to my recollection, was held in 1986. They 

formed the government prior to 1987. I take it then that what 

the minister is saying is that the election of 1986 led to the 

scaring away of capital investment out of this province. He 

says, and I think it’s only fair, he said that if it was scared away 

by the thought of an election of an NDP government . . . I think 

what has happened in fact, are the opposite has been proved. In 

1987 it’s expected to fall by 21 per cent. I guess the only 

conclusion that we’ve got is that capitalists around the world 

knew that people like the Minister of Human Resources, 

Employment and Labour were going to be in charge, and said: 

no way, Jose, don’t want my bucks in Bozoville; I’m not 

putting into Saskatchewan with these people in charge, not with 

the kind of record budgets and the kind of economic 

mismanagement that these people have built up. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister mentioned the fact that there were 

going to be walls built, that we didn’t have to build walls. Well 

I may suggest to the minister that maybe he should start 

building some walls around this province to try to keep in the 

people who are desperately leaving this province. They are 

leaving here, since the last two years, they are leaving here in 

droves. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have here the out migration by family status 

from your own Saskatchewan bureau of statistics. Between 

January and July of 1987, a total of 13,555 people left this 

province, sir, and they left it because the Tories were in power. 

And they knew this was the land of no jobs because your 

government broke its commitment – your government broke its 

commitment to spend $600 million in job creation. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you confirm the fact that there were 

13,555 people left Saskatchewan between January and July of 

this year, and that between January and July of last year, an 

additional 15,493 people left the province, for a total of close to 

30,000 people – just a little bit less than 30,000 people? Are 

those figures from your own bureau of statistics accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I believe that it 

was Vince Lombardi, but I could be wrong, famous football 

coach, who said, statistics are for losers. And I’ve heard a lot of 

statistics this evening. 

 

As far as I can ascertain, the population of Saskatchewan was 

very nearly 1 million people in 1931. Statistics verify it; my 

grandfather told me that; he was always honest with me. And I 

think we can accept that in 1931, the population of 

Saskatchewan was very nearly 1 million people. 

 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2126 

 

It took from 1931 to 1984 for us to get over the 1 million mark. 

And finally in 1984, we show a population of 1,006,900 people. 

That has gradually grown to 1986, we have 1,021,000. And so 

our population is gradually growing. It is ageing and it is 

growing. These are two interesting factors. An ageing 

population suggests that you have fewer people in the 

work-force as a percentage, and yet our work-force is growing. 

So if we’re really going to deal in statistics, I would submit that 

form 1931 to 1984 is a long time for the population of 

Saskatchewan to not show any substantial growth or to recover. 

 

And I won’t even blame the NDP who were government for 

most of that time, from 1944 until 1981, for all of that problems 

during that period of time. But even when this province made 

money in the ’70s, our population did not go over a million 

people. And so where are all those sons and daughters? And I 

suggest that most of them are in Alberta and British Columbia, 

and that’s why the population of British Columbia is nearly 4 

million people and Alberta is over 3 million people, because 

they did not have a socialist government in those provinces 

during that period of time. 

 

And in addition, they toyed with a socialist government in 

Manitoba . . . or in Manitoba they still toy with it. But in British 

Columbia . . . and it lasted three and a half years and they’ve 

never gone back to one again. And I doubt very much if 

Saskatchewan will ever go back to one either. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, once again the fantasy land 

rules between your ears. The fact of the matter is this, very 

simply, sir: you lost 30,000 people from Saskatchewan in the 

last two years. Do you have any idea how many people 

Manitoba has gained? Do you know how many people are 

fleeing the harsh, iron heel of your capitalist rule here in 

Saskatchewan? Thirty thousand people fleeing from underneath 

the jackboots of totalitarian PCism. 

 

Do you know how many people have left the province? Thirty 

thousand. 

 

Do you know how many have gone into the warm embraces of 

warm, loving motherhood of Manitoba, socialist Manitoba? Got 

any idea, Mr. Minister? I suggest you check it out. 

 

I suggest you check it out because what’s happening – using 

your own statistics – all those sons and daughters of 

Saskatchewan are going into the warm and loving embraces of 

socialist Manitoba because they know they’re going to find jobs 

there and they know they’re going to find security for their 

families there. And they know they’re going to find economic 

well-being in Manitoba because the socialists in Manitoba care 

about people, while you drive people out of the province and 

drive capital spending out of the province, because you care for 

only one thing – your narrow right-wing views of the world, the 

Madsen Pirie vision of Saskatchewan where everything is in the 

hands of that great all-encompassing god called dollars and the 

market-place. That, Mr. Minister, is the real world. The real 

world is that we have lost people – 30,000 people – because of 

your economic policies. 

 

(2030) 

 

The question I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, is: given that in the 

last budget brought down by the present Minister of Finance 

that the number one priority is no longer jobs, in fact, that jobs 

have been relegated to almost the bottom of the heap in terms of 

government priorities, the number one priority seems to be now 

the selling off of Saskatchewan’s resources and of its 

industries? But given that jobs are no longer your priority and 

that you’ve been stripped of the money from the employment 

development fund, how is it that your government plans to 

create jobs to bring back some of the 30,000 people that have 

been lost in the last two years, the majority of whom are 

between the ages of 20 and 35 – 20 and 35, i.e., the prime of the 

labour market, those with new ideas, those with the initiative, 

those with the enthusiasm of youth who you are driving from 

the province? 

 

How do you propose to bring them back, and how do you 

propose to put them to work, and how do you propose to 

promote their economic well-being of themselves and of their 

families, given that you have had all responsibilities for this 

matter, in reality, stripped from you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t have a 

wall around this province. People move in and people move 

out. Some people want to experience other parts of Canada and 

other parts of the world. I may wish to move out of this 

province some day, and I would hope that I would be allowed to 

do that. 

 

And I certainly do acknowledge that I have had a hand in 

having some people moved to Manitoba, and I understand that 

their civil service has gone up under the NDP from 13,000 to 

18,000. It’s the big growth industry in Manitoba. And their 

deficit grows in addition. And members opposite are touchy 

about the Manitoba deficit. Manitoba receives nearly as much 

in equalization as this province runs up in a deficit and still has 

a deficit. Saskatchewan stands up on its feet and takes care of 

itself, while Manitoba lives on the federal government trough. 

 

If you will look into the civil service of Manitoba – this is why 

the NDP are so grouchy – you . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Can we have both sides of the 

House please be quiet. I cannot hear the speaker. Mr. Minister 

. . . Order, order. I don’t believe the minister finished his 

statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, I’ll be brief. I was just 

concluding that there are friends of the NDP that are now 

working in the civil service of Manitoba, and I am pleased that 

they’re serving in the Manitoba civil service rather than in our 

civil service. And that’s why their numbers are going up over 

there. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well I find it disgusting, Mr. Chairman, that the 

minister responsible for Human Resources, Employment and 

Labour in this province makes jokes about the fact that his 

government has heartlessly and cruelly thrown people out of 

work. And he has just admitted he threw them out of work, that 

his government has thrown them out of work because they were 

members  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2127 

 

of the New Democratic Party. And if that isn’t the kind of 

Fascist totalitarianism that we’re seeing coming out of the 

Madsen Piries and the Grant Schmidts of the world, I don’t 

know what is. Here he says, you can’t be an NDP member in 

this province if you want to work in the civil service because 

he’s going to fire you and send you to Manitoba. And that’s 

what he said. That’s what he said. 

 

You know, Mr. Minister, it is no wonder, it is absolutely no 

wonder that, given your insensitivity, given your heartlessness, 

given your slimy little view of the world, sir, that we have here 

columns written about you by people like Dale Eisler from the 

Leader Post. It’s no wonder that you need five executive 

assistants to try to put a gag on your face. You’ve just admitted 

to the people of this province that you’re sending people to 

Manitoba, that you’re firing civil servants because they hold 

NDP memberships, or may support the NDP party. 

 

Now leaving aside for the moment, leaving aside for the 

moment how you and that social service Gestapo that was built 

up by my predecessor in Rosemont, give and leave aside the 

fact that you love to keep track on people, leave aside the fact 

that you’re going to put people’s personal records that are held 

now in the Crown corporations and will put them out to the 

private enterprise sector, leave aside that – you’re partly in 

charge of that – I wonder, sir, given your statement in regards to 

employment development and that it’s okay to fire civil 

servants if they’re NDP members . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I cannot hear the speaker. I 

will ask everyone to be quiet so we can hear the speaker. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, is it any wonder that people like 

Dale Eisler . . . And I happen to think . . . I want to say this, Mr. 

Minister. I want to say this with sincerity. I don’t like to see 

public figures savaged in the way that you’ve been savaged. I 

happen to think that John Conway, in the article he wrote in 

Briarpatch magazine, that your party hanging you out on a pole 

and allowing the public to turn the blow torches on you to roast 

you alive, is probably correct, and that you’re the victim of 

some kind of cruel political joke. I don’t like to see public 

figures held out and roasted like that, but when I read things 

like this about your . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I cannot hear the speaker 

again. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — It goes like this, Mr. Minister, August 13, the 

Leader-Post column by Dale Eisler: 

 

On and on it went. Schmidt bounced from one political 

faux pas to the next, leaving controversy and 

embarrassment for the government in his wake. 

 

Privately, he was ordered to bite his lip and choose his 

words carefully. These kinds of statements simply could 

no longer be tolerated. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, I think it’s time, and I think it’s 

time your government did more than tell you to bite your lip. I 

think it’s time that your leader cut your tongue  

off when it comes to saying things . . . coming to have you say 

things like: we fire the civil servants of Saskatchewan because 

they hold NDP memberships and we’ll send them off to 

Manitoba. 

 

And I am going to make this prediction, Mr. Minister. And I’m 

going to make this prediction. Given that you don’t take job 

creation very seriously and that you don’t tell the truth about 

what happens in your government, and you’re there as a 

lightning rod and as a cruel political joke on the people of 

Saskatchewan, I want to say this to you, I want to say this to 

you . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I cannot hear the speaker again. I 

will ask for co-operation once more. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the Minister of Health 

wants to enter the debate and defend the kind of statement just 

made by the Minister of Human Resources and employment 

development, that in fact it’s okay to fire Saskatchewan civil 

servants if they hold an NDP membership – if he’s declared 

open season on them – then perhaps you would like to go to 

Meadow Lake, sir, and tell the civil servants in Meadow Lake 

that if they hold a membership in the NDP, or if they support 

the NDP, it’s open season on them. Perhaps you’d like to tell 

them that. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s obvious from the government’s record that 

you have given up on employment development as part of your 

overall economic strategy. That’s okay. If that’s the political 

decision you made, you’ll have to live with that political 

decision. 

 

But the other kinds of decisions you are making, reflected by 

what you’ve just said in regards to Saskatchewan’s civil 

servants, aren’t okay because that’s not just a political question, 

sir, that’s a question of political morality. That’s a question of 

democracy and of democratic freedom. That goes to the very 

heart of the right for people to hold differing political views and 

not be penalized in this for differing political views. 

 

You do very well, sir, to talk about those countries with walls 

around it, and you try to make a big political issue out of that. 

Well I tell you, sir, your attitude, your attitude towards people 

of alternative political views in this province are exactly the 

same as any other totalitarianism regime. You, sir, would fit in 

well with the old commissars of Stalin who fired people, quite 

literally, just as you fit in quite well with those of the junta in 

Chile or those of the contras in Nicaragua. Because one thing 

that they have in common, one thing that they have in common 

is that they do not like the march of human progress represented 

in country after country by the political movements of the left. 

And the one thing that they have in common is that they resort 

to is repression. 

 

And it’s the same kind of repression, whether you’re fired from 

your job as the junta as just done with 24,000 teachers in Chile, 

to the same kind of repression if you’re a civil servant in 

Saskatchewan. And the thousands of civil servants that you 

have laughed here tonight about, that you think it’s okay to fire 

them and send them off to Manitoba. 

 

And I want to say, sir, I want to say, you may be a joke in  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2128 

 

terms of your party, you may be the political brunt of a joke 

being played on yourself, not necessarily to your understanding 

as part of a greater political game in terms of the back benches 

and in terms of, excuse me, the front benches of your party, but 

I want to say, I want to say the people of Saskatchewan, when it 

comes to your personal record, do not think you’re a joke, do 

not think you’re a joke. They think, sir, that you are a menace to 

their jobs, to their job security, and to their economic 

well-being, and now, by your own tongue, to their political 

well-being as well. 

 

And I think that the honourable and decent thing for you to do 

is resign your portfolio. And I will certainly be trying to urge 

my colleagues to reduce your salary to nothing or $1 so that you 

won’t have to pay the $50,000 in income taxes which you have 

admitted here is what you paid last year. I think, sir, I think 

you’re a disgrace to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, how do I reply 

to that? Could I possibly . . . Would the member opposite, after 

he calls me all of those names, have the decency to at least stay 

and hear the reply? No, he doesn’t. 

 

I could not possibly get to a level so low as to reply to all of 

that. It’s not possible. 

 

We have civil servants in this province that do an excellent job 

and nobody ever asks what their politics is. We only ask that 

they do their job. But when I have a deputy minister who works 

against me, who cannot tell me how much it costs per year to 

run Valley View, then I have no choice but to have no faith in 

that deputy minister. And it turns out that that deputy minister is 

now the deputy minister in Manitoba. They have faith in that 

deputy minister and that’s their business and it’s not my 

problem. 

 

But certainly, I can stand in this legislature and hold my head 

high and say that that deputy minister was a friend of the NDP, 

and I have proof of that. And we only expect government 

workers to work for the government, not to campaign for the 

government, but to work for their pay cheque and to do the job 

that the public expects – to carry out the policies of the 

government. There are civil servants that have outlived three 

governments, six ministers, by doing their job. But if a civil 

servant does not do their job, they cannot be kept. 

 

And I can tell you that I have dismissed a civil servant who I 

believe to be a Progressive Conservative because that civil 

servant was not doing his job. And I will dismiss anyone – 

Conservative, Liberal or NDP – if they do not serve the public 

and if they do not take good care of the taxpayers’ money. But 

if there’s a civil servant, as I have had, who have cost the 

taxpayers their weight in gold, I will not keep them. And that is 

very simple and I think that’s all the public expects. 

 

(2045) 

 

And that is how we operate as a government – good 

stewardship of the public treasury. And that’s all we ask for. 

We do not ask that people go out and campaign for  

the government, as in 1978 when my father was a crop 

insurance adjuster and the NDP president phoned my father and 

said, you’d better get out and campaign because you have a 

government job. Well, I won’t repeat in this House what my 

father told him to do with that job. 

 

And we do not operate that way. We do not expect civil 

servants to campaign for the government; we expect them to 

work for their pay cheque and to take good care of the public’s 

business. And that’s all we ask. If they’re working against the 

policies of the government, if they are not trying to carry out the 

policies of an elected service, then I don’t care what party 

they’re in, they have got to go and that is a very fair way of 

operating. And there are thousands of civil servants in this 

province who have nothing to fear, who do their job – we are 

very pleased with what they do – who will be with this 

government longer than I am, longer than my colleagues, who 

will be with this government until they retire because they are 

good at what they do. 

 

Now the member opposite is gone so there is no need to 

respond the lowest form of debate I have ever seen in this 

legislature. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I’d 

like to direct the minister’s mind to the women’s secretariat and 

his responsibilities concerning the women’s secretariat. 

 

The Women’s Secretariat Act, Mr. Chairman, requires the 

minister to co-ordinate policies and programs and activities of 

the Government of Saskatchewan relating to the status of 

women. It also says that in carrying out these responsibilities, 

the minister may provide any assistance that the minister 

considers appropriate to improve the status of women in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I just basically wanted to set out what the objects of The 

Women’s Secretariat Act was. And I also want to state, Mr. 

Chairman, that a very serious problem has developed over the 

last few years – the years that the PCs have been in government 

– a serious problem that affects all women in Saskatchewan. 

And that problem is that while the PCs may say they are 

advancing in the interests of women, they are doing an entirely 

different thing. In fact, Saskatchewan’s lagging far behind other 

provinces, and Saskatchewan is falling behind. And even worse, 

Mr. Chairman, the PC government has been cutting and 

slashing programs that have a direct benefit to women. 

 

For example, funding to transition homes. Women who are 

fleeing violent situations, in many cases life-threatening 

situations, are finding that the funding for transition homes are 

being cut. They are being left out in the cold, Mr. Chairman. 

Funding for the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission has 

been cut. One-third of complaints to the Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Commission, Mr. Chairman, are complaints on the 

grounds of sex discrimination, and yet the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission’s funding has been cut by 15 per 

cent. 

 

Welfare reform has affected many single parent mothers who 

are struggling to make ends meet. Education cuts,  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2129 

 

health cuts, they all affect women, and they affect women very 

drastically, Mr. Chairman. And I am led to the conclusion, after 

seeing all the cuts that have taken place in the recent budget, 

that women just don’t count with this government, Mr. 

Chairman, they just don’t count. 

 

The PC government has failed to implement real affirmative 

action for women in the public and private sector – I mean 

effective affirmative action, not simply paying lip-service to 

affirmative action. It has failed to implement the principle of 

pay equity in the public service to ensure that women get equal 

wages for work of equal value, or beyond the public service, in 

fact. It has failed to protect women across the province from 

life-threatening situations. It has reneged on these 

commitments, Mr. Chairman. It has reneged on its 

commitments. 

 

In one area where this government thinks it has forged ahead, 

Mr. Chairman, in the area of pensions for home-makers. What it 

has done is so lacking in thought that it will prevent or seriously 

retard progress in achieving a national plan. And it does nothing 

to solve the poverty that exists today amongst seniors, Mr. 

Chairman, nor will it help those who really need it 25 years 

from now. Those people who cannot afford to contribute to the 

plan today will not have the benefit of it 25 years from now. 

 

The government also pats itself on the back for incentives to 

small-business women, and I say, good, to these incentives. But 

the fact of the matter is these incentives are meaningless to the 

vast majority of women in Saskatchewan. It helps the new 

entrepreneur class of women, and that’s good. We’re not saying 

we shouldn’t do that, but it does nothing for the vast majority of 

women in this province. 

 

In education the PC government has come up short, Mr. 

Minister. The provincially and federally funded Regina Plains 

Community College bridging program, which began two years 

ago, was the first of its kind in Canada. It was designed to help 

women enter or re-enter the work-force by providing 

counselling, pre-trades and pre-technology courses, and skills 

upgrading classes. 

 

Since then, Mr. Chairman, similar programs have been 

established across Canada, but this program was recently cut 

and eliminated. And other educational programs in our 

technical institutes have been cut. And women are by far the 

largest group affected by these unthinking, wrong-headed cuts. 

Reorganizations of colleges and institutes is clearly forcing 

people to drop out of their chosen courses and to abandon 

career plans because it becomes very difficult for women to 

move families to another location, especially if it’s a single 

parent, Mr. Chairman, in order to take courses. 

 

These Draconian measures by the PC government to reduce 

their $3.4 billion deficit – a deficit that was created by them 

through mismanagement and by give-aways to big 

out-of-province corporations – these Draconian measures, Mr. 

Chairman, will push women further into job ghettos and force 

them to continue in low-paying jobs. Cuts in education are a 

major stumbling block for women. 

 

Health cuts are another example of the PC attack on women, 

especially on low income and poor women, Mr. Chairman. The 

health cuts by this government, the move to privatize the drug 

prescription plan, the move to privatize dental care, hospital 

waiting lists that are longer than ever before in the history of 

this province – all these regressive government actions are 

devastating, and they put new stress on the women of this 

province and their families. 

 

Women bear the brunt of government cuts in many areas, 

especially health cuts and changes to the prescription drug plan. 

Women who make up the largest portion of working poor can 

ill afford to pay up front drug costs for themselves and their 

children. Women who work in our health care system are being 

overworked and burning out. While the government funds home 

programs and establishes gas taxes, women, seniors and 

children are being hurt. And this government simply does not 

care about the plight of the majority of women. 

 

When the health care system is cut back, women get hit with a 

triple whammy, Mr. Chairman. First, they tend to be the health 

care workers, and they’re losing their jobs, like the dental 

therapists, and they’re burning out because of understaffing. 

Secondly, women and their children tend to be the heaviest 

users of the health care system. And when health care is being 

cut back, it reduces their access to health services, Mr. 

Chairman. And thirdly, I might add, women pick up the loose 

ends when government inadequately funds health care services. 

They will be forced into traditional roles, caring for the elderly 

or the sick, when these individuals should be receiving 

professional care. 

 

And let’s take a look at the area of violence against women. 

Let’s look at the area of violence against women, Mr. 

Chairman, or wife beating, to be more precise. In 1984 the PC 

government made great pronouncements on family violence, 

especially on wife beating. And the Hon. Pat Smith, then 

minister for the then women’s secretariat, explained that wife 

battering was absolutely dehumanizing. That was strong words 

. . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Point of order. I believe it is not the 

custom in this House to refer to members by their name, but 

rather by their position. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. 

 

Ms. Simard: — These were strong words for the minister to 

use for media consumption, Mr. Chairman. But has this 

government done . . . but what has this government done for 

victims of abuse? This year’s funding for transition houses has 

been frozen, and no funds were made available for new shelters 

despite the urgent need. 

 

The provincial Association of Transition Houses of 

Saskatchewan estimates, Mr. Chairman, that 4,134 women and 

children have been turned away in the last two years to 

insufficient shelter space. Near 50 per cent of all women and 

children fleeing from desperate situations are being turned away 

from existing shelters, Mr.  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2130 

 

Chairman. 

 

This government has reneged on its commitment to women. 

And the Regina Transition House, for example, has been cut 

back by 14.5 per cent, and I find that totally unacceptable. And 

this government continues, Mr. Chairman, to ignore those 

women and children who are turned away from transition 

homes – some 4,134 women and children in two years – 4,134 

women and children, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And if we look at other services for women in crisis, for 

example, the Mobile Crisis and Crisis Intervention Services 

provide immediate support and counselling in cases of domestic 

disputes and other crises, Mr. Chairman. The Mobile Crisis 

Unit in Prince Albert was hit with a 28 per cent cut-back. In 

Regina, it was slashed by 14 per cent. And the Saskatoon Crisis 

Intervention Services was cut by almost 10 per cent. The 

Regina native women’s family workers program was cut by a 

whopping 38 per cent. Other native family service programs 

across the province were also severely slashed. The Family 

Service Bureau, which provides support services and 

information referral and counselling in Regina, Saskatoon and 

Moose Jaw, all received small decreases. And in the area of 

sexual assault services, the Regina Women’s Community 

Centre and Sexual Assault Line was hit with a 13 per cent cut. 

Saskatoon, Battlefords, and Lloydminster were held at zero. 

 

The government – there’s no question, Mr. Chairman – the 

government is systematically shutting off the avenues open to 

women to enable them to leave violent relationships. And we 

can’t forget about the grave situation of day care in this 

province, Mr. Chairman. Last year only 5,524 licensed child 

care spaces were available in Saskatchewan. And when we 

consider that there are 72,000 children aged two to five in this 

province, and that in 1985 the participation rate in the labour 

force of Saskatchewan women with children aged three to five 

was 64.9 per cent – 72,000 children and the participation was 

64.9 per cent. It is clear there is a desperate need for an increase 

of spaces in our day care system. Provincial cut-backs are 

threatening existing day care facilities; for example, the 

University of Regina day care. 

 

While the federal government, Mr. Chairman, is interested in 

setting up a cost sharing, child care system with the province, 

the Saskatchewan PC government is resistant to the idea. And 

once again women and children are not a priority for this 

government, and once again they don’t count with this 

government. 

 

And as far as wages for women are concerned, Mr. Chairman, 

this government has done nothing to ensure that women earn 

equal pay for work of equal value in this province. Women’s 

participation in the labour force is expected to increase 75.1 per 

cent by the year 2000. Seventy per cent of all minimum wage 

earners – 70 per cent of all minimum wage earners are women, 

and many are single parent mothers. And yet all we have, to 

date, all we have to date, Mr. Chairman, is the promise of this 

minister to look into the concept of pay equity. 

 

(2100) 

 

And with respect to minimum wage, let’s look at the statistics 

with respect to minimum wage, Mr. Chairman. They only say 

they will monitor it. That’s what this government has said. It 

has said it will monitor minimum wage. But most people on 

minimum wage are women, Mr. Chairman. It’s primarily 

women that earn minimum wage in this province, and minimum 

wage is a poverty wage. So when the PC government says that 

they feel the minimum wage is adequate, they are voting to 

keep these women working at a poverty wage, and they’re 

voting to keep these women and their children in poverty. 

 

In its minimum wage survey of 1985, the provincial 

government estimated that some 30,000 people earned a wage 

near the minimum, while approximately 10,000 earned the 

minimum wage only. According to the 1985 study, 70 per cent 

of those earning the minimum wage are women. Some of these 

women have dependants, and in 1985 statistics the Canada 

poverty line for a single person was 9,719 per year or 810 per 

month. For two individuals, a single parent and a child, it was 

12,815 per year or 1,068 per month. 

 

So a worker making the minimum wage for a 40-hour work 

week would earn approximately 756 per month. So a mother 

with a child who’s earning minimum wage – and most of the 

people on minimum wage are mothers, or women, many of 

them being mothers – is earning something like $312 a month 

below the poverty line, according to 1985 statistics. 

 

I think the government should be aware of that when they talk 

about monitoring minimum wage. They should be looking at 

those women who are out there trying to support dependants on 

minimum wage, and the fact that they are living substantially 

below the poverty line. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, is also denying women basic 

rights in the work place. The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission, whose largest portion of cases deal with 

discrimination on the grounds of sex, received a cut of 15.7 per 

cent at a time when the commission has a backlog of cases. 

Because of this backlog the commission was ordered last 

December to withdraw two sexual harassment complaints. 

Speedy judicial process could not be guaranteed. 

 

But what do they do? They cut it back by 15.7 per cent, even 

though a substantial amount of the complaints to the Human 

Rights Commission are complaints brought by women. 

 

And I submit, Mr. Chairman, that this is another example of this 

government’s disregard for women’s rights and dignity. 

Similarly, the imposition of fees for legal aid will undoubtedly 

cause serious difficulties for women. Women who are poor, but 

not poor enough by the government’s definition, will be forced 

to pay fees as high as $400 for legal services or forgo legal aid. 

 

Legal aid clinics in Saskatchewan open over 1,000 divorce 

cases, over 700 maintenance order cases, and almost 1,000 

custody cases per year. The overwhelming – the overwhelming 

majority of these cases are cases filed by women. And many 

women who seek legal aid are  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2131 

 

women who are fleeing violent situations and life-threatening 

situations. They are in constant turmoil, having to look for new 

homes, new furniture, and get their life together so that they can 

start afresh. And what the PC government has been telling them 

of late, Mr. Chairman, is that they will now also have to pay for 

their legal services to aid them in getting their life together. 

 

This government allows flagrant discrimination against women 

in our correctional system, a situation which is a source of some 

shame to many women in this province. The lack of adequate 

medical facilities, community training residence, educational 

program, and a family visiting area for the 83 per cent of 

inmates who are mothers is yet another example of this 

government’s lack of respect for the rights of women. And 

finally, this government has been silently reorganizing the 

functions in government which serve the interests of women 

since 1982. And in the process, Mr. Chairman, I submit that 

they’ve been downgrading issues relating to women. 

 

In 1986 the women’s secretariat, which was a free-standing 

agency which was to co-ordinate government policy, research 

and planning on matters of importance to women, was 

dismantled. We understand it has lost staff positions and was 

moved into the unwieldy Department of Human Resources, 

Labour and Employment. The employment equity branch of the 

Public Service Commission was also dismantled and moved 

there with a loss of staff positions. 

 

This government has not made the interests of women a 

priority. More and more women will be more isolated because 

of a lack of support services, Mr. Chairman, more will be 

forced to return to the traditional role, and many will be faced 

with a greater sense of hopelessness as more and more 

opportunities become unattainable or are lost altogether. 

 

And this government has lost communication and contact with 

some of the major women’s groups in this province, and I think 

this is a strong indication that women do not have the 

confidence in this government to pursue issues pertaining to 

women that it should have. And I think it’s a strong indication 

that this government has mismanaged matters relating to 

women. 

 

When your government was first formed in 1982, Mr. Minister, 

there was a women’s division, and it existed independently of 

the labour standards branch and reported directly to the deputy 

minister of Labour. It acted as a real advocate in the promotion 

of women’s issues in the public and private sectors, and it had a 

great deal of support from the mainstream women’s groups all 

across the province. But in March of 1983 it was dismantled. 

 

Mr. Minister, when I look at what has happened to the women’s 

division over the years, your government’s political shuffling of 

the division from one department to another, separating it and 

trying to bring it back together again, I’m very concerned. I’m 

very concerned with what has happened. 

 

You have taken a women’s bureau that was unique  

amongst women’s bureaus in Canada – it was referred to as the 

strongest women’s bureau in Canada, and a model across 

Canada – and it played a real and a vital role both within and 

outside government in improving the status of women. And 

you, Mr. Minister, have seriously impaired its ability to be as 

effective as it should be. 

 

As far as we can tell – and it’s very difficult to tell because 

there’s been so much shuffling going around that it’s difficult to 

ascertain what the real situation is with respect to the agency 

that is supposed to be looking after women’s rights – but as far 

as we can tell, it only has half the staff it did before. And I’m 

not criticizing the staff, Mr. Minister, because I know that 

they’re very hard-working and dedicated people, but you have 

made it almost impossible for the women’s division today to 

meet its mandate and perform the responsibilities assigned to it. 

 

An analysis of what your government has done to the women’s 

division leaves us with only two conclusions, Mr. Minister. 

Was this another example of incompetent PC bungling? Or was 

this a deliberate attempt to destroy the advocacy of women’s 

issues in government, and a deliberate attempt to limit the role 

of an agency, clearly designed to improve the status of women 

in this province? Did you do it deliberately, Mr. Minister, or did 

you do it through incompetence? Either conclusion is 

frightening – either conclusion is frightening. 

 

You divided up the women’s agency into three – the women’s 

division between three agencies, and in the process of doing 

that, you cut it by some 27 per cent in the budget. But as a result 

of public pressure, some 60 national women’s groups across 

Canada and in the province of Saskatchewan, you patched it 

together and called it the women’s secretariat. But you never 

gave the women’s secretariat the power that it needed to go out 

and publicly lobby with respect to women’s issues and to 

advance the interests of women in this province. You never 

gave it the power it needed. 

 

In two short years – but even so, in two short years you’re 

reorganizing this agency once again. And this agency has now 

been amalgamated with the unwieldy Department of Human 

Resources, Labour and Employment, lessening, once and for all 

– and I hope I’m wrong about this, Mr. Minister, but it appears 

to me that this . . . that for once and for all you’re lessening this 

administration, under this administration, the role of 

government with respect to women’s issues. 

 

And I ask you: what’s the logic to all this, to start out with one 

agency, divide it up in three, put it back into one, and then send 

it off to another department? While you’re spending your time 

reorganizing and shuffling this agency around, you’re not 

getting on with the real business, the real business being to 

protect the rights and advance the interests of women in this 

province. And I have to seriously ask myself the question 

whether this reorganization isn’t your government’s method of 

downgrading the role of your government with respect to 

advancing the interests of women. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have intelligent, competent women in that 

organization. And I would like to see you quit tying their hands 

and give them full mandate to perform the  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2132 

 

jobs that have to be done, and to improve the status of women 

in this province, and the right to speak out publicly on issues. 

 

I have a specific question for you, Mr. Minister, at this point, 

which I will ask. Now just a second, I’m having a little 

difficulty locating it here. Now what I would like to know, Mr. 

Minister, is how many positions there now exist in the present 

women’s division? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I could give a 

long reply to the preamble to that question. I’m going to resist a 

long reply. Simply, what I can say is that this government has 

been very sincere in trying to further equality for women. I 

agree that progress could be faster. If we knew how to have 

progress move faster, we would; we’re trying our best; we are 

making strides in many areas. The member opposite 

exaggerates the problem. 

 

In reality here we are changing 6,000 years of culture in 15 

years, and I expect that, you know, if you look at how far 

women have come in the last five or 10 years, great progress is 

being made. 

 

Specifically to the question, we have nine positions in the 

women’s branch of the department. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, why were women’s groups in the 

province and members of the Saskatchewan Advisory Council 

on the Status of Women not informed of the reorganization of 

the women’s division . . . or the women’s secretariat, rather? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, women’s groups 

were informed of the decisions that the Premier and cabinet had 

made. There is nothing unique about this reorganization. The 

government cannot go out and ask everyone whether they want 

something changed or whether they want a reorganization. 

There is nothing unique about this in the women’s division. 

Their labour was reorganized into this department. Indian and 

Metis affairs were reorganized into this department. Senior 

citizens were reorganized into this department. And we believe 

that it is a good move and will be to the benefit of the groups 

affected by the improvements being made by this department. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you said there were nine 

positions. How many positions were there in the original 

women’s division and then subsequently in the women’s 

secretariat? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, there are 

positions and there are positions. We all know that in the 

Department of Labour, under the NDP, it was a department 

where they used to hire their . . . or hide their young and 

budding politicians, and therefore we find that when we operate 

a Department of Labour without all the political operatives in it, 

that we can operate with fewer people. 

 

So at the time the NDP operated, the division had 18 

individuals. I cannot tell you how many were necessary and 

how many were on political activity. We now have  

nine positions, and none of them are involved in politics; they 

are all furthering the cause of women’s issues. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that there were 

women working in there who were doing political activities? Is 

that what you’re saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m saying in the days of the NDP the 

department of labour was riddled with people doing political 

activity. 

 

Ms. Simard: — You obviously have absolutely no proof of 

that, Mr. Minster. I suggest you’re doing those employees a 

disservice, but then I expect you to make a statement like that. 

Now, Mr. Minister, you obviously have cut the women’s . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Order. I would ask the 

members please to calm down so that the member can ask her 

question. 

 

Ms. Simard: — That’s an easy excuse . . . Can I have some 

order please, Mr. Chairman. The member from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden is shouting across at me, and I can’t ask 

my question. 

 

Mr. Minister, that is a pretty poor, feeble excuse for cutting the 

women’s division by 50 per cent to say that they were playing 

politics and we didn’t need them – pretty weak, pretty weak, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

The other . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I’d ask the members please 

to contain themselves. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you said that women’s 

organizations were contacted with respect to reorganization. 

What women’s organizations were contacted, and when were 

they contacted, before or after the reorganization? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The department of labour under the 

NDP had people like Bob Sass, and Larry Brown was there, and 

the member for Saskatoon Fairview, is it? – Fairview, 

Saskatoon Fairview, was the deputy minister of labour and you 

know . . . 

 

At the time they probably were non-political, and you know, 

they just happened to join the NDP recently and become 

partisan, you know, within the last few months. So I don’t think 

anybody would believe that, and we all know that the 

department of labour was riddled with NDP politicians waiting 

to find a seat to run in or do other things within the party. 

 

I think that you weren’t listening close enough when I said that 

women’s groups were informed of the changes that cabinet had 

made in the department and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — So they were informed after or before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I said informed of the changes. I didn’t 

say that we asked for anyone’s permission. The Premier 

reorganized the government, reduced the  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2133 

 

number of cabinet ministers, and interested groups were 

informed as to the new situation in the government and how 

new departments would function. 

 

With respect to women’s issues, I’ve been minister, what, for 

about eight months now. I know you’ve taken a dim view that I 

was not an expert when I was appointed, and I know you were 

an expert of the Human Rights Commission when you were 

appointed to your . . . and I know you were quite neutral, and 

that you were not a member of the NDP in those days. 

 

So you know, I know we aren’t all without fault. But 

circumstances being what they are, the government was 

reorganized. As I go on in this portfolio, I hope to accomplish 

many things with the help of the capable people I have there. 

They have come up with many good ideas, and you will see 

considerable progress in the next few months. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, with respect to your comment 

about individuals in the Department of Labour, perhaps some of 

these individuals, like my colleague, the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview, took one look at the mess that this 

government was creating and decided it had to become 

politically active. It’s you that drove them to it. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you had said that women’s organizations 

have been contacted, or informed of the reorganization. 

 

Mr. Chairman, could I have some order, please? 

 

An Hon. Member: — The member for Souris-Cannington is 

making too much noise. 

 

Ms. Simard: — That’s right. 

 

Mr. Minister, you had said you’d contacted women’s 

organizations, but you refrained from telling me which 

women’s organizations. And you didn’t tell me whether you 

had contacted them with the intent of consulting them, getting 

their input into it, or whether you just informed them. 

 

Now I suppose I could interpret your comments as to the effect 

that you just informed them, but I’m asking you to clarify 

whether that’s, in effect, all that you did, or whether you were 

consulting with these individuals. And which organizations, Mr. 

Minister? Which ones? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I’ll answer the question for the 

third time. We informed all of those people that we thought 

would be interested, and we informed them that the department 

had been reorganized. And we tried to contact everyone that we 

thought had an interest in the reorganization. And if we left 

anyone out, we apologize, but we tried to locate every group 

that we thought was interested. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Is it possible for the minister to provide me 

with a list of agencies that were contacted by him? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — It might be possible, but I don’t really 

see that it’s relevant. We tried to contact  

every one that had an interest. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Obviously, Mr. Minster, you don’t want to 

provide us with the list, because you haven’t contacted the 

organizations that you should have. That’s why you’re not 

forthcoming with that information. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would also like to know how many positions 

now exist in government which serve the interests of women? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well we don’t differentiate between 

serving women, serving men, serving male children, serving 

female children. And so I believe we have about 13,000 

positions in the government – they serve men, and they serve 

women, and they serve children, senior citizens. That’s about as 

close as we can calculate. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Are they any positions in the labour standards 

branch, for example, which remain designated to serve the 

interests of women? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — They all have the responsibility in that 

branch, as I indicated, in the public service, of serving men and 

women in Saskatchewan. And if there’s an issue that relates to 

women’s issues that arises in labour standards, they will try to 

solve the problem. And they may refer it to our department, or 

the branch with respect to women’s issues, for guidance or 

assistance, or just to advise that this is a problem, and we then 

try to get solutions to the problems. 

 

So I really don’t know why you want to cut such a line between 

men and women and try to divide them, and separate them, and 

categorize them. We could have all lived in this province 

together, and the government serves men, women, children, and 

everyone in this province, and I don’t really know why you 

want to keep dividing everybody into categories. Maybe it has 

something to do with the socialist idea of a class system, but we 

don’t believe in that kind of division. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Now you’re getting absolutely ridiculous, Mr. 

Minister. The fact of the matter is: the women’s division has 

been cut from 18 to nine people, and I’m trying to find out 

whether your government has seen fit to put them in some other 

department, working some place else. I’m giving you an 

opportunity to come forward and tell us whether or not you 

have designated any other positions as pertaining to women. 

 

Obviously, you haven’t. Obviously, you only have, specifically, 

nine positions that work in the area of, specifically, women’s 

issues. To pass this off with a trivial remark, such as you made, 

is absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Minister. We’ll never get through 

these estimates if you continue with that attitude. 

 

Now I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, whether it’s true that the 

employment equity branch of the Public Service Commission 

was disbanded this past May? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I know the member 

opposite is easily offended. I would try not to offend the 

member opposite, but I know her propensity to be  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2134 

 

offended easily. 

 

In the Government of Saskatchewan, slightly over 50 per cent 

of the employees are women, Women in management are 21.3 

per cent, which is up from . . . depends when you want to go 

back . . . a year ago it was 17 per cent, two years ago it was 12 

per cent, three years ago it was 9.8 per cent, and in March of 

1981 it was 7.7 per cent. And so we’ve come from 7.7 per cent 

in women in management to 21.3 per cent women in 

management. You can see that we are moving fast towards 

more women in management in the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and it’s not tokenism – powerful positions. 

There are women here in this Chamber that hold powerful 

positions, more powerful positions than the member opposite 

will ever hold. 

 

(2130) 

 

And the progress has been quite good, and will continue to be 

good. And we will have more and more women in management 

because we are emphasizing for women that they interest 

themselves in skills that lead to management. In education, we 

encourage women to go into administration, commerce, 

engineering. 

 

In the Department of Highways it’s hard to have women in 

management; there aren’t many in engineering, so we 

encourage women to go into those things. Business 

administration, those are the kind of skills that are required and 

women are being educated in that area, are graduating, are 

quickly moving their way through the system. And you can see 

the progress from 1981 – 7.7 per cent, tripling to 21.3 per cent 

have women in management doing an excellent job, a very 

excellent job. And it is because these women are doing an 

excellent job that they are moving up in the ranks of 

management in this government. So we agree that it is not 50 

per cent as yet, but I expect that in the not too distant future, as 

that trend continues, that we will get closer and closer to 

women being 50 per cent of the managers in this government, 

and you will see more of them in upper management. 

 

So on this side of the House, as the government, we don’t just 

speak and talk in . . . we don’t deal in rhetoric, we tend to deal 

in action. And that record, you will have to admit, is a very 

progressive record. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, the minister obviously didn’t 

answer my question. He deliberately tried to avoid it because he 

knows what the answer is. The answer is, yes, the employment 

equity branch of the Public Service Commission was disbanded 

this May. That’s the simple answer, Mr. Question. That’s what 

the minister should have told me, but he chose not to. And I 

suggest the reason why he chose not to say that, Mr. Chairman, 

is because he is ashamed of that move on the part of the 

government. 

 

Now my next question to the minister – having answered the 

other question for him – is that while the positions were deleted, 

Mr. Minister, from the employment equity branch, it has been 

stated by the member from Weyburn that the function was 

absorbed  

by the Human Resources department. The positions were 

deleted, but the function was absorbed by the Human Resources 

department. Could you please comment, Mr. Minister, and tell 

us just how this function was absorbed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, in reply to 

the question on the absorption of the employment equity 

function, the Public Service Commission has made some 

progress in employment equity. We feel that the new 

Department of Human Resources, Labour and Employment can 

do more in that regard. We have a co-ordinator who was the 

former head of the women’s secretariat. We have, in our 

branch, Indian and Metis affairs; we have senior citizens; we 

have women; and we have labour. We have a co-ordination of 

many functions that are interrelated. 

 

And while we have just received this responsibility, we expect 

to make progress. I have better things to do than come to this 

legislature as an elected member just to bide my time, and I 

want to see some change. I expect there will be improvements, 

in particular, with respect to hiring more handicapped people. 

We have shown considerable improvement with respect to 

Indian and Metis people; I had the statistics here the other day. 

We have made considerable improvement – in the last five 

years the number of people of native ancestry has gone from 2.4 

per cent to 5.2 per cent of the public service; the physically 

handicapped has gone from .7 per cent to 1.2 per cent – both of 

those have virtually doubled. As I indicated, women in 

management has virtually tripled. And we feel that it’s the 

proper place in the Department of Human Resources, Labour 

and Employment for employment equity co-ordination. And 

while we’ve just received this function, we hope to get it 

running very efficiently, and see more progress in the next few 

months. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t want to deal with two 

things in my last question, so I will deal with one now, but it 

pertains to your response – not this recent one, the earlier 

response in which you said there was a total of 21.3 per cent, or 

something like that, of women in management in the public 

service. 

 

Well I want to bring to your attention, Mr. Minister, that that 

includes women in management and professional classification. 

Professional may not necessarily be management. It also 

includes, Mr. Minister, feeder positions. That 21 per cent 

includes feeder positions. So the figure isn’t, the figure isn’t 21 

per cent; it’s closer to 17.6 or 8 per cent, and that’s just a point 

of correction, Mr. Minister. In case you didn’t have that 

information, I thought perhaps you should. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to now refer specifically to the advisory 

council, and I want you to tell me who the members of the 

advisory council are, when they were appointed, and for what 

term? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — On the Women’s Advisory Council, we 

had many appointments . . . their term of appointment expire, 

and we had a few people move out of the province – 

transferred. So we’re running short on council members at this 

time, but are actively pursuing bringing the advisory council up 

to full complement. 

 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2135 

 

The current members are: Donna Roadway, Saskatoon, radio 

announcer; Marilyn Stradecki, Balcarres, home-maker and 

farmer; Paulette Vanderlinde, Regina, school principal; Mary 

Muir, Kindersley, director of the Danny Fisher Centre for 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse. 

 

We have written the women’s groups that we thought might be 

interested – and there are some professional groups that have 

also expressed interest – to have them put forth possible names. 

We are trying to get the advisory council up to strength as soon 

as the holiday season is over so that they can concentrate on 

advising us. We expect to have more placements in the near 

future to get the council up to strength and get it operating in its 

usual function. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, is it not true that the term of the 

previous advisory council members terminated in December 31, 

1986? Now my question to you is: when were these women that 

you have named, the four or five, whatever it was, when were 

they appointed to the advisory council? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — It’s correct that the advisory council 

positions expired at the end of December 1986. Most of the 

members carried on, unofficially, without reappointment, for a 

period of time. The current members were appointed in April. 

And partly because of reorganizational changes, partly because 

of an extreme work-load we’ve had in our departments with 

getting our budgets together under difficult circumstances, and 

partly because we’ve spent the entire summer sitting in the 

legislature, we haven’t been able to fill the council positions 

and other boards and commissions as quickly as we would like 

to. 

 

You might be interested to know . . . By the way you were 

correct on the 21.3 per cent of women in management. That 

should have been women in management and professional 

positions, but certainly I don’t believe that there was any 

deception on my part. Professional positions actually pay quite 

well. And when you’re talking about lawyers in government, 

when you’re talking about women in the medical field and 

things of that nature – and agriculture, I’m reminded – you’re 

talking about professional people in high paid positions. So we 

kind of lumped that calculation together in women who are 

professional or in management. Some of them are both, of 

course. 

 

What you might be interested to know is that women comprise 

29 per cent of government boards right now, and the numbers 

are rising. As far as we can ascertain from the information that 

wasn’t shredded after the last election, women comprised 9.5 

per cent on boards under the NDP government. So there’s more 

or less a tripling there of the number of women on boards and 

commissions. And women are having much more of an active 

part in the day to day management of the government, in day to 

day policy making, and, of course, we have more women in our 

cabinet than the NDP ever had. So women are taking a greater 

part in Saskatchewan, and also, as you raised the point earlier, 

that women are becoming a majority in small business in this 

province. So I think you’ll have to agree that progress is being 

made. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the women that were appointed 

in April, I would be curious to know when they were notified of 

these appointments. And I think you should also know, Mr. 

Minister, that I don’t regard the fact that you’re sitting in this 

legislature as an excuse for not getting the women’s advisory 

council rolling. Because what you’re telling me is that the 

women’s advisory council is not rolling at this time, and it was 

the terms . . . the new council should have been appointed back 

in December or January of . . . December of ’86, January of ’87, 

but your government that was sitting around from January to 

July – January to June rather – never appointed a new women’s 

advisory council. Now when were these women who were 

appointed in April, when were they notified of their 

appointments? And is the council functioning today, or is it just 

being kept on hold until you can decide whom else to appoint to 

it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the government has been 

reviewing all boards and commissions, and we have not, during 

the course of this session, speeded to fill the vacancies on 

boards and commissions. Part of the reason for that is we wish 

to screen them to make sure that we do have more women on 

the boards and commissions. And this board, or this 

commission, is also caught in that screening process, and while 

we don’t specifically have to screen this one very close to make 

sure that we have a lot of women on the board, it’s caught in the 

entire process where we’re trying to get that 29 per cent up from 

where it is. But I’m sure the member opposite . . . I believe the 

member opposite has two children; I have two children, as well, 

and she knows how hard we have worked here as MLAs during 

the course of this summer. And I can tell you that before we 

came into this session we worked just as hard preparing a 

budget. 

 

You have children and I have children. My son is at home this 

evening with a slight concussion, and we are here working, and 

you’re suggesting we’re not working hard enough. We all 

sacrifice here, and surely we could show a little patience. The 

province’s affairs are being conducted well, and these boards 

will be completed when the people are located. 

 

(2145) 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I don’t believe you advised me, 

unless I didn’t hear it, as to when these women were notified. 

Would you please advise me of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the women that 

have been appointed, and all the women and any men that 

might be appointed to this advisory board, were all personally 

contacted prior to April. Any new people will be personally 

contacted as well. I believe the final confirmation that the 

appointment had been finalized was given some time in June. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you said that a number of 

women’s agencies have been contacted for the purpose of 

submitting names for recommendations of individuals to be 

appointed to the advisory council. 

 

I understand that there have been a number of organizations left 

off that list, for example: the Saskatchewan Battered Women’s 

Advocacy,  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2136 

 

Saskatchewan Disabled Women’s Network, the Saskatoon 

Interval House, the Saskatoon Sexual Assault Centre, Saskatoon 

Women Concerned About Technology, Single Parents Are 

Special, Big Sisters, for example. And these are just examples, 

Mr. Minister, of names of organizations and of organizations 

that have not been contacted by your department with respect to 

recommendations. And I’ve added up the list of women’s 

organizations throughout the province, and it comes to 

approximately 100. And I believe you’ve only contacted some – 

I’m not sure of the figure right off – but maybe 10 or 15 

organizations. And I want to know why some of these other 

organizations have been dropped. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the following 

groups were contacted for their recommendations: the 

Provincial Council of Women, the Saskatoon Women’s 

Network, Regina Women’s Network, the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Women, the Saskatchewan Women’s Institutes, 

the Saskatchewan Business and Professional Women’s Club, 

the Saskatchewan Women’s Agricultural Network, Immigrant 

Women of Saskatchewan, Canadian Federation of University 

Women, Canadian Consumers’ Association, Aboriginal 

Women’s Council of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 

Teachers Federation, the Law Society of Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association, the 

Saskatchewan Nursing Assistants Association, the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the Saskatchewan 

provincial Catholic Women’s League, the United Church 

women, Saskatchewan conference, and Saskatchewan Action 

Committee on the Status of Women. 

 

Ms. Simard: — The minister hasn’t answered my question, Mr. 

Chairman. Why were some of the other groups excluded? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we contacted the 

umbrella groups, and we didn’t try to exclude any particular 

group. I suppose we have to draw the line somewhere. And we 

took the most prominent groups that came to mind, and most of 

them are umbrella groups. Out of all of those groups, we should 

get many recommendations, and I don’t see any problem. I 

mean, how far do you go and to how many groups; how many 

groups do you contact? The church women in my church 

weren’t contacted – I mean, you have to draw the line 

somewhere. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you had said earlier that when 

you’re appointing women to boards and commissions and 

agencies, for example, you do a lot of screening. And you used 

the word “screening” particularly when you were talking to 

appointments to the advisory council. Could you please tell us, 

Mr. Minister, what sort of screening that you do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, because the 

member opposite is quoting me out of context, I couldn’t recall 

saying anything about screening people for the Saskatchewan 

Women’s Advisory Council. My capable assistant deputy 

minister advised me that I did use the word screening and 

advised me where I used it. It was with respect to screening all 

boards and commissions to be certain that we have more 

women represented on all  

boards and commissions. 

 

I would think that the member opposite, the member for 

Lakeview, would consider that to be reasonable, and even a 

noble thing to do, to screen all government boards with the 

purpose to make sure that we are getting more than 29 per cent 

– which is much more than 7 per cent of the past – women on 

these boards and commissions as we’re making appointments to 

keep in mind that there are women out there who can serve and 

contribute, and that we shouldn’t simply go back to the old 

boy’s network – I was going to say old men’s network; I 

suppose I would offend someone – but I suppose old boy’s 

network is an understood term. And so that we don’t simply go 

back to the old boy’s network, we are screening all boards and 

commissions to make sure that capable women get a chance to 

be on them. And I submit that that is a logical thing to do. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I may have misunderstood what 

you said with respect to screening; I understood you to say that 

you were screening applicants for the positions. Perhaps you 

didn’t say that. Hansard will tell the tale tomorrow, Mr. 

Minister, and we’ll obviously be up on this again, so we’ll have 

an opportunity to explore it further, if indeed I am correct. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you please tell me what reports and 

research of the advisory council are available? And if there are 

reports, what recommendations did the advisory council make 

for improving the status of women? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m advised that there are no reports 

made as of last year, but we are prepared to send over all of the 

reports that have been made in the last few years, and we’ll 

gather them up and send them over to you. 

 

Ms. Simard: — There were no reports made last year. Is that 

what you said, Mr. Minister? Were there no reports made last 

year, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m advised that 

last year the advisory council was holding public consultation 

meetings. At present we do not have a report as to their findings 

or what the results of their public consultation were. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, will you undertake to provide us 

with any reports that have been made, and research done by the 

advisory council, along with their recommendations, and, in 

addition, an indication of what action you’ve taken to meet their 

recommendations? Would you undertake to provide me with 

that within the . . . by tomorrow? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I have conferred with 

my officials, and we will send it to the member of he opposition 

as soon as it’s available, but they don’t believe that they can get 

that information together for tomorrow. 

 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2137 

 

Ms. Simard: — When can you get it available then, Mr. 

Minister? It shouldn’t take very long to just put . . . at least send 

me the reports. You can get them together. You must have them 

in your office, and you can just put them together and give them 

to me tomorrow. You may not be able to provide me with 

information as to what you’ve done to meet any 

recommendations in those reports. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That may take years. 

 

Ms. Simard: — That may take considerably longer, but would 

you at least provide me with the reports? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m advised that 

not all of the reports have been made public. So those that have 

been made public, we would send over to the member opposite, 

and the others would be given to her when they’re made public. 

 

Ms. Simard: — When will you send the reports to me? Will 

you send them to me tomorrow? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m advised by my officials that it’s not 

possible to have it all gathered up for tomorrow. We will send it 

to the member opposite as soon as possible. My officials expect 

to be here tomorrow morning, on the job in the legislature, and 

won’t be able to gather reports tomorrow morning. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I will be looking with great 

anticipation for those reports. 

 

I would like to know, Mr. Minister, who is the director for 

employment equity at this point in time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, at present Leah 

Siebold holds that position. I’m advised she’s technically on 

vacation right now and will be going on education leave, so 

we’ll be filling that position from within the public service 

when she goes on education leave. We don’t intend to go 

outside of the public service to fill that position because the 

incumbent is going on educational leave. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I am advised by your department 

that, by letter dated June 9, that there were a number of 

conferences that advisory council members attended – a fairly 

long list of them, stemming from April 26, ’86 to March 4 of 

’87. Seventeen conferences, to be more specific, Mr. Minister. 

 

Could you please provide me with the numbers of council 

members who attended those conferences, and would you 

please advise me whether any reports were forthcoming as a 

result of those conferences attended by council members. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I have a list of 

the conferences and their dates. That’s all of the information I 

will give to the member opposite. I don’t really attempt to try to 

compile which member of the advisory council went to which 

conference, and how many attended and what hours they might 

have kept there. I’m simply going to send over to the member 

opposite a list of the conferences that were attended by 

members of the advisory council. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 


