













































September 9, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 9, 1987 

 

 

2385 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Deficiency Payments to Farmers 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 

Minister of Agriculture and the Acting Minister of Agriculture, 

I will direct my question to the Acting Premier. 

 

My question is related to the deficiency payments that farmers 

are expecting and hoping for as soon as possible. John Wise has 

suggested that he won’t even be making a proposal to cabinet 

till October, and won’t be making an announcement till 

possibly December, and that suggests that we, as farmers, won’t 

be getting a deficiency payment until possibly 1988. 

 

And we all know the desperate situation farmers are facing, and 

we all know that we need a deficiency payment, at least, in 

October or shortly thereafter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Do you, sir, support the Mulroney 

government’s timetable, or will you instead push for an early 

payment of this deficiency payment to farmers to help get many 

rural farm families off the ground and held over for another 

year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I really don’t know quite 

how to deal with this question because it’s not something that is 

new in this House. The question has been raised many times 

and answered in one form or another, raised many times and 

answered by the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture many 

times. And he asked me if we support the timetable of the 

Mulroney government. I really don’t think, whether we support 

it or not, that there’d be much we could do about it because we 

don’t control the federal government cabinet agenda. We have 

some control on ours, Mr. Speaker, and we deal with those 

matters. 

 

Having said that, our Premier, the Minister of Agriculture for 

Saskatchewan, has done more as it relates to lobbying the 

federal government and other ministers, other ministers of 

Agriculture in Canada, and first ministers – unanimous 

agreement at the last first ministers’ conference – seeking a 

deficiency payment of some considerable – more than the last 

one, I think the words were, and with unanimous agreement of 

all 10 provinces and the federal government. And that’s been 

well publicized, and of course our Premier will be down there 

and lobbying, and has been and will continue to be, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I feel the frustration that  

many other Saskatchewan farmers feel . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Would the 

member please indicate if it’s a supplementary or a new 

question. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary question. Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I 

feel the frustration of not having a Minister of Agriculture 

sitting across from me more than maybe one or two days a 

week, and not being able to answer the questions, and getting 

no specific answers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Last deficiency payment was well planned 

around the Saskatchewan provincial election. It appears that the 

next deficiency payment will be well planned around the federal 

election — again playing politics, Mr. Speaker, with the lives of 

family farms in Saskatchewan. 

 

I ask you: do you recognize the need for a payment this fall, and 

will you push the Mulroney government to have a deficiency 

payment in the hands of the farmers by October or early 

November? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I know something of the 

frustration of the people from the agricultural community as 

well, having been one of them for several years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another source of their frustration is the 

representation that they get from the opposition. We’ve had – 

what are we at – 60-some-odd or 70 days in this Legislative 

Assembly. That member, the agricultural critic, didn’t speak in 

the budget debate. That member did not once raise the issue of 

our honey problem in northern Saskatchewan. That member has 

not once spoken out, except perhaps for one or two questions 

during estimates, and he’s talking about the frustration of 

farmers in Saskatchewan. The farmers of Saskatchewan have 

every right to be frustrated with that kind of representation in 

opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

again we see your non-commitment to anything specific when it 

comes to Saskatchewan farmers. I asked the question; I asked 

the question. Your government took claim by winning an 

election on a deficiency payment. You know the farmers need 

money this fall. Will you pledge your support by showing the 

Mulroney government verbally, in writing, whatever method 

you choose, but let farmers know that you are pushing for a 

deficiency payment in October or November? Yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing we haven’t 

done is put it in blood. There has been no one in Saskatchewan 

or Canada that has worked harder for the  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2386 

 

 

farmers and Canada than Premier Grant Devine, Premier Grant 

Devine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The member realizes 

that we shouldn’t be using other members’ names. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Premier, whose name happens to 

be Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker, there . . . he is second to none 

when it comes to representing agriculture not only in 

Saskatchewan but Canada and internationally. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Financial Support for Western Farmers 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Deputy 

Premier, whose name happens to be Eric Berntson. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I ask the question, Mr. Deputy Premier, and I 

say to you that the farm groups have met with John Wise in 

Winnipeg, and out of that almost unanimously they indicated 

that they wanted at least $3 billion for western farmers – 

western farmers – is what they’re asking. What I’m asking you 

here: are you in support of pressuring the federal government 

for at least a $3 billion payment to western farmers, and will 

you, in fact, if you are, table any communication supporting the 

western farm groups that met with the minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will leave it to the 

Premier to decide what he wants to table or not table as 

Minister of Agriculture, and correspondence with the federal 

government. 

 

I think that it goes without saying that the Premier of 

Saskatchewan . . . I think his calculation way back in 1982 was 

that in order for us to come out even, as it were, even with the 

level of subsidization that is experienced in United States under 

their U.S. Ag Bill, we would need about $7 billion in Canada to 

offset that to make it even. 

 

The Premier argued for that at that time. I think the Premier will 

argue for everything that he can get for the Saskatchewan 

farmer at this particular time, and he will settle for whatever is 

reasonable. And as it relates to the member for Quill Lakes 

getting my name right, I want to give him credit for that. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I have a supplement, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. 

member from Souris-Cannington, who hasn’t answered a 

question today. I want to ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, this is 

serious subject that we’re on, and it’s no laughing matter for the 

farmers out there. The farmers are concerned not only with 

getting a sizeable deficiency payment, as he indicated, 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of $3 billion for western 

Canada, but they’re also interested in the timing of the payment, 

as has been raised, and also in respect to the method of 

payment. There were many deficiencies in the last  

deficiency payment in respect to the method. 

 

I want to ask you: in respect to the specific changes that have 

been raised by the agricultural groups that met with the federal 

Minister of Agriculture, John Wise, are you in agreement, and 

will you be supporting the farm groups in rectifying the method 

of payment as suggested by the farm groups? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — If you’re talking about the method of 

payment of the deficiency payment, if you’re talking about the 

deficiencies in the deficiency payment that you just . . . I think 

those were your words just a minute ago. It is recognized that 

there were deficiencies in the deficiency payment, and nobody 

has recognized that more than the Premier. And he’s argued for 

some adjustment to bring some reasonable and . . . whatever 

can be reasonable and fair in making those adjustments. 

 

And he’s made those arguments in various forums, you know. 

He’s not without some knowledge of the difference in the 

impact on speciality crops as opposed to feed grain and so on. 

And he’s made those arguments, and he supports the general 

thrust of the voice of the farm groups, and he’s made those 

presentations to the federal government. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental, Mr. Speaker. You 

indicated that there were deficiencies in the method of payment 

in the previous deficiency payment. What I’m asking you 

specifically . . . And you sit there and say that the Premier, yes, 

recognizes that, and he’s making recommendations. But the 

farmers want to know where you stand. What are your 

recommendations, changes for the method of payment, in 

respect to deficiency payment? Set it out for the people so the 

farmers of Saskatchewan will know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And we do that. We do that on a 

regular basis, Mr. Speaker. Our Premier meets with . . . as 

Minister of Agriculture meets with agricultural groups – meets 

with agricultural groups on several occasions, many occasions, 

and there’s nothing secretive about it. There is the imbalance 

between cereal grains and speciality groups that should be 

rectified. 

 

But the hon. member doesn’t know a speciality crop from a post 

hole. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve very, very sure that the Premier, 

who has direct responsibility for these discussions, would be 

more than pleased – would be more than pleased – to spend as 

much time as is necessary, which may take from here to 

eternity, to bring that member up to speed. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 

say your government is doing the best you can. That’s what 

scares me. And it scares the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — I would like you to answer this question:  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2387 

 

 

what month does your government, through its conversations 

with Ottawa, what month does your government expect farmers 

will have a deficiency payment in their hands? I ask this in all 

sincerity because they are hurting out there and they need some 

indications. Right now there are many farmers going bankrupt; 

they are going through trials; they are distraught and 

over-stressed. Could you please, sir, give them some indication 

what month the deficiency payment will be received? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

obviously doesn’t understand how the country works. We can 

make representation, we can lobby, we can bring pressure to 

bear; we cannot write their agenda for them. Obviously there is 

some considerable concern in the agricultural community, not 

only in Saskatchewan but right across the country. The position 

that we have taken from the outset is that a deficiency payment 

is absolutely necessary and the sooner the better. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one 

question for the Deputy Premier on this line of questioning. Can 

the Deputy Premier please explain to the legislature and the 

people of Saskatchewan why it was, or how it was, that the 

Premier of this province was able to get a deficiency payment in 

the middle of a provincial election but can’t get one when the 

people and the farmers of Saskatchewan need one now? Why 

not get it now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — If the hon. member is telling me that 

they didn’t need one last October, the hon. member isn’t aware 

of what’s going on in rural Saskatchewan. They needed one last 

October, Mr. Speaker, and the Minister of Agriculture and the 

Premier of Saskatchewan went to bat for the people, the 

agricultural community of Saskatchewan, and he got it, Mr. 

Speaker, $1 billion — $1 billion for the agricultural community 

of Canada, the vast, vast majority of that going to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier, the Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan, has 

advanced the argument time and time again that another 

deficiency payment is needed. He has unanimous concurrence 

with all first ministers in Canada, including the Minister of 

Agriculture for Canada, and he has said we need it, and we need 

it as soon as possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Production Loans for Farmers 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question to 

the Deputy Premier. The Deputy Premier has indicated that the 

crisis in the farming community is greater today than it was in 

’86. I think he’ll acknowledge that. 

 

I want to say that during the election campaign when you were 

trying to get elected, you provided to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan in the spring of ’86 a production loan. I maintain 

that the condition of agriculture has further deteriorated. Are 

you prepared, in view of the increasing  

stress on the farming community, to also promise another 

production loan to the farmers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, those discussions are 

ongoing in our Ag caucus, and the Minister of Agriculture and 

the Premier are – is/are, one guy – is a whole lot closer to that 

than I am, and any announcements relative to a production loan 

will be, or any other support for the agricultural community in 

Saskatchewan will be made by the Premier in due course, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Accessibility to Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in absence of the Minister of 

Education, and in the absence of the Premier, I would direct this 

question to the Acting Premier, and it has to do with 

accessibility to post-secondary education. 

 

This week, as thousands of Saskatchewan students return to 

their classes, they find that they’ve had to cope with the drastic 

cuts your government has made to our post-secondary 

education system. Many students and parents have discovered 

that accessibility to higher education is no longer guaranteed in 

this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

I want to know, Mr. Minister, if you’re aware that more than 

400 young people have been denied entry to the College of Arts 

and Science at the University of Saskatchewan this year? That’s 

thanks to your enrolment quotas or to enrolment quotas forced 

on the universities by inadequate financial support. 

 

I want to ask the minister: does the minister call that kind of 

performance true accessibility to education for Saskatchewan’s 

young people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — As Acting Minister of Education, Mr. 

Speaker, I will try and respond briefly to the member from 

P.A.’s question. 

 

I think the member from P.A. should be well aware – and if he 

isn’t I would ask him to go back and review the records – and if 

he wants to do some comparisons, I suggest the best 

comparison is to take it on government versus government. And 

I would suggest that he would find, under the PC government, 

under the leadership of the hon. member from Estevan, that in 

fact the access to university post-secondary education, 

including community colleges, STI (Saskatchewan Technical 

Institute), Kelsey – the increase in the number of students has 

increased dramatically, Mr. Speaker. That’s one indication. 

 

There is no doubt that the post-secondary education institutions 

are facing some pressures with the increase in the number of 

students coming in. But, Mr. Speaker, I think it serves this 

government and this province well that there in fact are more 

people getting post-secondary education than what there ever 

was under the term of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the minister will know that 

never before have there been quotas put on arts and  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2388 

 

 

science students at the University of Saskatchewan – never 

before, and it is therefore less accessible. In addition to that 

there were 6,000 fewer people, young people, working this 

summer, and that makes education that much less accessible to 

them. In addition that thousands of young . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 

am assuming that the hon. member’s question is a 

supplementary, and if it is, your preamble is getting a little 

lengthy. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to my 

supplementary question I want to add that never before have we 

had 1,100 student positions cut. And I’m asking the minister, 

the acting minister: how can you say that you are not denying 

accessibility to higher education for many Saskatchewan young 

people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the increase in the number 

of people that are in post-secondary education would indicate 

that it in fact has not been diluted but made better. It’s not true, 

on this quota system, what the member from Prince Albert says. 

Qualifications – qualifications, Mr. Speaker, have always been 

in the various facilities within the education, and what the 

members says is simply misleading. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I’ll also direct it 

to the Acting Minister of Education. Madam Minister, your 

government has implemented a two-year budget freeze on the 

University of Saskatchewan. You know that in real terms this 

year that means a $5 million cut, and as a result of that, Madam 

Minister, the university has had no choice but to deny access to 

all students who wish to enter the College of Arts and Science, 

but have averages of less than 73 per cent. 

 

And I say, Madam Minister, that that’s a disgrace, and I ask 

you, Madam Minister, will your government now lift the budget 

freeze, the two-year budget freeze on the University of 

Saskatchewan, and provide that university with the funding that 

is necessary to lift enrolment quotas and to provide improved 

quality of education on the campus which is long overdue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the universities have 

received the same amount of moneys this year as they did last 

year. The member from the University of Saskatoon will also 

know that the increases over the previous five years were 

substantial. I would remind him to go back and look at the 

education development fund as it pertains to the universities. I 

would also ask him to look at not only the Arts faculty but some 

of the others. 

 

It’s not simply a matter of providing funding at the wish of how 

many students going into which facility, Mr. Speaker. It’s much 

greater than that. And there’s no doubt that the universities are 

facing pressures in terms of the students. 

 

They are also facing pressures in terms of setting priorities  

and counselling needs that are going to indicate to those 

students, those young adults going into university, that there is 

going to be a demand for them when they come out of 

university and, I would suggest, that type of rationalization is 

taking place within the post-secondary system now. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while everyone would like to think that 

perhaps there is a 10 per cent or 20 per cent increase in funding 

as it relates to their area, that is simply not realistic. 

 

Payment of Power Bills at Collection Agencies 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 

and it once again deals with his anti-small business decision to 

end SPC’s long-standing arrangement with Saskatchewan drug 

stores and small businesses by which customers could pay their 

power bills at these locations. 

 

I’m going to once again ask the minister a question which he 

and his government has consistently refused to answer, Mr. 

Speaker. That is: why did he decide to dump these small 

businesses without first consulting with the drug store owners 

and small-business people? And why did he only give them one 

month’s notice when he knew that it meant a loss of revenues 

for these small businesses? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, across the province there 

were approximately 800 . . . 814 commissioned and 

non-commissioned agents by Sask Power. Most of them were 

banks, credit unions, and so on. About 123 of these 

commissioned and non-commissioned agents were terminated. 

Some of them, in fact I think most of them, were drug stores. 

Most of them were drug stores in the major centres of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now members opposite would have us believe by their 

persistence in this line of questioning that if they ever got into 

office, the major thrust of their small business development 

program would be to allow Sask Power, or to compel Sask 

Power, to have collection agents in every drug store in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if you take this argument to its logical conclusion, we will 

then have all the service stations in the province as collection 

agents, then all the beer parlours, Mr. Speaker, then all the 

grocery stores, and so on. The reason that Sask Power has done 

what it has done, Mr. Speaker, is to save something in the 

neighbourhood of a one-quarter of a million dollars . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well 200 thousand plus, I don’t 

know precisely . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order! Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Two hundred thousand dollars plus, 

annually, Mr. Speaker, directly, in addition, in addition to the 

benefits that accrue though instant cash flow management 

through banks, credit unions, etc. 

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2389 

 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the arguments that are advanced by members 

opposite simply aren’t consistent with the realities of today. 

And Sask Power has made this decision and I think rightly so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Composition of the Estimates Committee 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I 

would move a motion, seconded by the member from Maple 

Creek, that the composition of the Estimates Committee be 

amended as follows: 

 

(a) by removing Mr. Martineau from the committee; 
(b) by adding Mr. Muirhead to the committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9 – An Act to amend The Gas Inspection and 

Licensing Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In dealing with 

the second reading of The Gas Inspection and Licensing 

Amendment Act, I’d just like to make a few comments. 

 

This Act, among other things, provides for the licensing of gas 

contractors, employers, and supply houses, and the bonding of 

such licensees. 

 

The Act specifies that a penal bond must be held before a 

licence can be issued to the applicant. The maximum value of 

the bond is also specified to be in excess of $2,000. The 

purpose of the penal bond is for the correction of defects found 

in a gas installation when the originator of the installation either 

refuses to make corrections or is gone out of business. 

 

In practice, such defects are corrected through the hiring of a 

second contractor by the department and charging the cost of 

such corrections to the bond. In some cases it has been found 

that the $2,000 value is insufficient to cover the cost, leaving 

the owner to pay for the remainder. 

 

This Bill will remove the maximum limit so that it can be set by 

regulation. It is planned to set the value of the bond at $5,000. 

This increased value does not place any financial burden on the 

holder of the bond since the premium is the same for a $2,000 

bond as it is for a $5,000 value. 

Moreover, this Bill will provide greater protection for the public 

through expanded coverage of corrections of defects. 

 

With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 

Bill No. 9, The Gas Inspection and Licensing Amendment Act, 

1987. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to make a 

couple of comments. As the minister has indicated, what it does 

is to increase the bond, the maximum of the bond, which was 

set at $2,000 previously, and removed that limit from the Bill 

altogether. 

 

The interesting part is that the Bill itself provided the maximum 

of the bond previously. And it is the intention of the 

government to delete that altogether and to increase the limit, 

but I presume to increase it by regulation and not by putting it 

in within the statute. 

 

All I can say in respect to that: administratively the bond may 

well have to be increased, but I think that it’s very much of a 

convenience to the public since the amount of the bond, the 

actual amount of $2,000, was within the statute, I would urge 

the minister to reconsider a possibility of putting in. He has 

indicated that they’re thinking of going up to a $5,000 limit. I 

would recommend that that be put into the statute rather than 

left wide open in the hands of cabinet. 

 

And I’m not suggesting that it would be abused, but I’m just 

saying, Mr. Minister, that within the statute it’s a lot easier for 

the business community than having to go to a statute where it 

was before and not finding it there, and then start going through 

all regulations. It makes it a little bit more difficult for the 

business community. And I would urge that if you want to 

increase the maximum, I would suggest, at least from this side, 

that it be put into the Bill rather than into regulations. We will 

be supporting the Bill with those comments. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 10 – An Act to amend The Boiler and Pressure 

Vessel Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the second 

reading of The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, among several 

other things provides for the qualifying of power engineers or 

boiler operators through the issuance of certificates after 

successfully completing of prescribed examinations. 

 

The Act further specifies that such certifications for first-, 

second-, third-, fourth-, fifth-class engineers, refrigeration 

engineers, and refrigeration plant operators’ licences be 

registered with the department annually. In consideration of the 

unnecessary need for annual registration by some 8,000 power 

engineers and firemen, and the resultant paper work generated 

in the department for this number of applicants for registration, 

I’m introducing this Bill to reduce such unnecessary activity. 

 

This Bill will not only relax the registration period from  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2390 

 

 

one-year intervals for all those engineers but will allow the 

department to handle the reduced paperwork with less clerical 

support. Moreover this change will not reduce the level of 

safety accredited to the public. 

 

Since this amendment will provide for a periodic renewal of the 

certificate, I am proposing regulations to specify that the 

renewal period will be for a five-year period. Since the work 

load for the department will be considerably reduced, I intend to 

pass on some of these savings to power engineers in the form of 

a reduced fee for renewal. 

 

Thus the success of this Bill will reduce paperwork for the 

department and for the power engineers, and save both the 

engineers and the department money. With those comments, I 

move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want, again, to make a few comments in respect to this Bill. 

As the minister indicates, it permits the engineers and firemen’s 

certificates to be renewed periodically rather than annually. And 

I have some sympathy in respect to the provision of the amount 

of administration for the numbers to be renewed annually, and I 

agree with him that it may not be necessary. However, what he 

has indicated here is that he put in a word “periodically”, which 

is such an undefined period of renewal. And again, what he has 

done is to take it upon cabinet to pass regulations defining the 

time. He indicates that he is proposing that the renewal be on a 

basis of “five-year” rather than annually. 

 

And I simply ask him again: why wouldn’t he be prepared if 

this is the goal that he is wanting to do with regulations, not put 

it into the Bill itself, rather than taking upon himself and the 

cabinet, through regulatory provisions, the setting of any length 

of time whatsoever. In other words, if he were amending it and 

taking out annually and putting in a five-year period, then there 

would be no doubt; it would be within the Bill; all of those 

affected would know. 

 

However, what we’re left with here is the minister saying that 

he’s going to go with a five-year renewal but is not prepared to 

put it into the Act. The question I ask is: why wouldn’t the 

minister be prepared to do that so that, again, the general public 

will know specifically by just reading the Act rather than 

having to go through all the regulations. It’s fine if you’re 

running a law firm to go through the regulations, but it’s 

somewhat more difficult for non-legal types to start tripping 

through all of the regulations, whereas it was in the Bill before, 

which they are accustomed to. 

 

And so I just raise that for consideration and will address that in 

Committee of the Whole. But we will generally be supporting 

the provision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second 

reading on this Bill. It’s a Bill intended to preserve Sunday as a 

secular day of rest for families and communities in 

Saskatchewan. It’s also intended to ensure religious freedom for 

merchants and observe an alternate day of rest, or those that do 

observe an alternate day of rest. 

 

Members of this Assembly will recall that in 1986 the 

government amended this Act to strength the principle of a 

common pause day. I’m pleased to say that both sides of this 

House supported our 1986 amendments which effectively 

doubled the fine levels for breach of the store hours provision of 

the Act. 

 

The amendments of last year also responded to municipal 

requests to tighten up the definition of “store” and other terms 

to strength the municipality’s position in enforcing this Act and 

their local by-laws. Since that time, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan government has intervened in a landmark case 

before the Supreme Court of Canada to protect the province’s 

right to legislate for a common day of rest. 

 

As all members know, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled last 

December that the rights of provinces to pass Sunday closing 

legislation was indeed constitutional. This government also 

intervened in key court cases involving Sunday closing in the 

province. Until recently, Saskatchewan legislation has been 

upheld. However, Mr. Speaker, very recently, on August 20 to 

be precise, the Court of Queen’s Bench of this province struck 

down our Sunday closing legislation for a reason that I will 

mention in a minute. The court decision of course also made 

invalid all municipal by-laws providing for a common day of 

rest. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are two questions here. Why did 

the court reject our existing day of rest legislation? And what 

does this Bill do to restore a common pause day? 

 

On the first point, the court ruled that while it was acceptable to 

provide in the Act for a secular day of rest, the Act should have 

gone further to ensure that this law infringed on minority 

religions as little as possible. In other words, the judge felt that 

a store owner or operator who closes their store to observe a 

day of worship on a day other than a Sunday would have to 

close on Sunday as well. The owner would thereby have to 

close their store two days each week while his competitors 

would only close one. While the court had no evidence before it 

that anyone in Saskatchewan, in fact, was suffering due to this 

absence of provision for an alternate pause day, the judge ruled 

that the entire Sunday closing legislation was invalid. 

 

So there are two major reasons for this Bill. One purpose is this, 

to restore Sunday closing rules that were in place prior to the 

court decision. This means that stores must close on Sunday 

unless they are convenience stores, so therefore convenience 

stores are not affected by this amendment. Mr. Speaker, a 

second important purpose of this amendment is to provide for a 

religious exemption clause to satisfy the religious freedom 

guarantee of the charter of rights. 

 

While we feel that this court decision may be overturned  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2391 

 

 

on appeal, we recognized that Saskatchewan is a pluralistic 

society. And I will add a personal note here, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 

been a business man in this province for many years, and many 

of the members present know that I feel strongly and support 

small business strongly. But I want to say, however, that I have 

always supported the principle of a weekly day of rest, even 

though in some cases it may not be in the narrow interests of a 

particular business. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we want to 

take immediate steps to prevent wide open Sunday shopping. 

 

So I will turn to what this Bill will in fact do. First, Mr. 

Speaker, for legal reasons it was necessary to re-enact all of 

section 121 of The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. Therefore, 

members of this House have a long Bill before them, even 

though there are actually very few new subsections. 

 

These few provisions are these: clause (1)(b) and (1)(e) in 

subsection (6) and (8) and section 3 of the Bill. Nothing else is 

changed. 

 

(1445) 

 

I’ll try to explain these few key features. The Bill states that 

small stores under 500 square metres in size may open on 

Sunday if they satisfy two conditions. The first, these stores 

must close one other day of the week; and secondly, the owner 

or operator of the store closed on another day of the week due 

to the dictates of his religion. 

 

So let me emphasize, Mr. Speaker, this will not lead to 

widespread store opening. First, the store must be small so that 

very few employees will be affected. We can’t extend this 

exemption to large stores because to do that would defeat the 

purpose of a common day of pause because opening of large 

stores on Sunday would, for example, require large numbers of 

workers to leave their families on that common day of rest. 

Secondly, the store has to close on an alternate day. And 

thirdly, the store can only open on Sunday if the owner or 

operator closes for religious reasons on an alternate day. So in 

other words no one can play games with this Bill and close on 

Wednesday, or some other slow business day, solely for 

commercial reasons. 

 

Another safeguard in the Bill is this: no one will be able to rope 

off or temporarily partition a store to get around the 500 square 

metre limit. I should add that my officials consulted closely 

with a number of city solicitors on the specifics of this 

legislation. 

 

I’d like to comment on the strong support for this Bill from 

across the province. The councils of our two largest cities have 

in the last few days passed formal resolutions calling for this 

legislation. My department has had calls from retailers asking 

for this legislation, and I have personally had calls from many 

families asking for this provision. Also retail employees, small 

business, labour and church groups have consistently supported 

the common pause day concept, and the members of the 

opposition have always favoured Sunday closing legislation, 

and at least, to the media, have indicated their support for our 

course of action. 

 

This Bill also restores authority for regulating store hours  

to the municipalities. Both the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association and the Saskatchewan chamber of 

commerce have in the past asked the government to give 

municipal councils the authority they need to indeed regulate 

the store hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me point out the urgency of this Bill. If we do 

not agree to give it immediate approval, I will be very 

disappointed. Any delay that members of this House cause to 

this Bill will mean that many employees, families, and small 

businesses in this province will not be able to enjoy the few 

remaining weekends of our summer, coupled with the 

significant disruption any delay would cause in the 

market-place. 

 

This legislation, in my view, deserves unanimous support of the 

House. It is sensitive to the alternate pause day observed by 

retail merchants of minority religious beliefs. It restores to 

Saskatchewan families and communities a common day of rest, 

and this is a valued Saskatchewan tradition. It will help small 

Saskatchewan businesses which don’t have the work-force or 

the financial muscle to compete with large retail stores. It helps 

small communities. Small-town residents don’t really want to 

see their stores closed due to competition on Sundays from very 

large retailers in large urban centres. And yet it helps consumers 

throughout the province who will continue to be able to buy 

convenience and essential items in their neighbourhood 

convenience stores. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to restore a strong 

Saskatchewan tradition, a tradition where families and 

communities can come together on a common day of rest. 

Therefore I move second reading of Bill 37, An Act to amend 

The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would want 

to indicate that this side of the House will support the 

legislation that’s before us. We support the Bill both in 

principle and as to content. 

 

I think that this support from both sides of the House is 

reflective of public opinion in Saskatchewan, public opinion 

which would hold that, although there may be some additional 

convenience for people to be able to shop seven days a week, 

public opinion would also hold a sense that it’s necessary to 

have a common day of rest to the extent that this is possible, 

given our society. And I think, therefore, that the Bill can be 

widely supported by the public and should be supported by both 

sides of the House. 

 

We’re reasonably confident that the Bill in its present form will 

provide the government with the necessary enabling or 

legislative authority to ensure that major stores will now close 

on Sundays for at least one day of the week. We’re reasonably 

satisfied that the great majority of retail workers can now look 

forward to Sunday as a common day of rest to spend it with 

their families. We’re reasonably satisfied that this Bill, too, will 

lay to rest some anxieties that small-business operators in this 

province have endured as a result of the uncertainties of the last 

year or so, given Sunday shopping. 

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2392 

 

 

We can only wonder, however, why it is that the minister and 

his government are so inclined to wait for a crisis to develop 

before . . . and to hit them between the eyes before acting 

resolutely, and in this case appropriately, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Extensive questioning in estimates of last year in April 1986, 

more than a year ago, about the soundness of the legislation that 

we are now amending, revealed a government that was 

inordinate in its defensiveness and, I would say, stubborn in the 

extreme. No amount of asking, prodding could convince the 

government to examine their legislation. Stubbornly they clung 

to the belief that the best recourse for Saskatchewan, in the face 

of challenges at that time, was to pursue expensive and 

time-consuming legal action. 

 

It has been suggested, Mr. Speaker, that the government, in the 

months leading up to the 1986 general election, was trying to 

have the best of both worlds; trying to play both sides of the 

political fence; allowing Sunday shopping de facto while 

claiming to oppose it de jure. 

 

Whatever the reasons, Mr. Speaker, the government’s 

intransigence has meant hundreds of retail workers have been 

denied Sunday as a day of rest in the last year or so. It has also 

meant expensive legal bills for some Saskatchewan cities as 

they fought to uphold by-laws passed pursuant to questionable 

legislation. 

 

And I hope the minister will have the good grace, in any further 

remarks that he may make, to apologize to the many 

Saskatchewan retail workers that have been inconvenienced by 

his government’s inaction and intransigence and make an offer 

to pay the legal costs incurred by Saskatchewan municipalities 

involved in what can now be characterized as a futile defence in 

support of futile legislation. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, again I would indicate that it is our 

intention to support the legislation, and to support it strongly. 

We may have a few minor concerns and a few concerns in 

committee, but we’re prepared to move to that stage now. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1454) 

 

Motion agreed to the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 43 

 

Duncan Andrew 

Berntson Lane 

Taylor Smith 

Swan Schmidt 

Hodgins Gerich 

Hardy Klein 

Meiklejohn Pickering 

Martin Toth 

Sauder Johnson 

McLaren Baker 

Gleim Neudorf 

Kopelchuk Saxinger 

Britton Blakeney 

Prebble Brockelbank 

Koskie Thompson 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I couldn’t hear, Mr. Speaker. There was noise 

coming from opposite . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I’d ask for the 

co-operation of the Minister of Finance, please. 

 

Rolfes Upshall 

Simard Solomon 

Kowalsky Anguish 

Goulet Calvert 

Lautermilch Trew 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The Clerk, I’m sure, is having 

difficulty hearing the response of the members because we’re 

having interruptions. So I would once more ask for your 

co-operation. 

 

Smart Van Mulligen 

Koenker  

 

Nays — 0 

 

The Bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, 

referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 37 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality  

Act, 1984 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right, 

Dave Innis, my deputy minister. Because we have no lefts on 

this side, to his right is Jim Anderson, our policy analyst. And 

behind me is Doug Moen – he’s a co-ordinator on legislative 

services – and Gail Welsh, a lawyer from our constitutional 

branch. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just, on behalf of this side of the 

House, welcome the minister’s officials, Mr. Chairman. I think 

we’re ready to proceed to clause 2. I have some questions on 

that, but none at this point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Just a couple of questions of a more 

general nature. Would the minister give a brief outline of the 

scheme of the Act in the sense that, as I understand it, it will 

prohibit all large stores from being open on Sunday, and will 

give small stores the option of choosing a day, and that the 

cut-off is 500 square metres. 

 

This, it seems to me, Mr. Minister, is along the lines of some 

previous city by-laws which were attacked on the basis of the 

cut-off. Would you care to indicate whether you think that the 

cut-off figure of 500 square metres is a reasonable one having 

to do with the size of the stores involved – question number 

one. 

 

Question number two is: do you think that it can be defended 

against legal attack on grounds of discrimination? And I’ll have 

a third question about big stores cutting themselves into little 

ones. 

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2393 

 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, regarding the 

discrimination. An overlooked fact, kind of, in the judge’s 

decision of August last was the fact that he upheld indeed 

Saskatoon’s by-law on the discrimination size. It’s very difficult 

to determine . . . You know, we’re at an age, I suppose, that in 

any legislation anything can be challenged. But in view of that 

decision, we’re satisfied that the discrimination will be upheld. 

 

As far as the size of 500 square metres, roughly 5,000 square 

feet, Ontario legislation has that in their provision, and quite 

frankly we’re using that as a model and it seems to be a good 

average size. Once you start getting over that size of a small 

store, you start getting into a larger number of employees that 

may be affected, more corporate structure rather than individual 

owners to determine, you know, their Sabbatarian exemption 

and the like. So we believe that all things being equal, it’s a 

reasonable one and can be defended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 

know some of my colleagues have other questions, so I’ll just 

direct one more. Do you feel you have solved the problem of 

the large store reconstituting itself into small stores whereby the 

fresh fruit section is one store and the canned goods section is 

another store, and so on, in the manner which was at least 

attempted under the Saskatoon by-law? And I don’t know with 

what measure of success because I haven’t examined the 

judgements with that degree of care. But it was clearly a 

method of circumventing the by-law. 

 

I ask you whether you feel you have found a way of effectively 

stopping any circumventing of the statute by the same method. 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned earlier, you 

know, we can’t predetermine or prejudge any challenge that 

might be made, but the size limit here pertains to actual 

physical size, period. And so that obviously there wouldn’t be 

any provision for a roped-off area, because if the actual space or 

unit was greater than the 500 square metres, then it simply 

would not qualify, and they would not be able to apply for the 

exemption by virtue of their size factor. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly would agree 

with the minister, although I wouldn’t put it in quite the same 

context, that one of the overlooked aspects of Justice Wimmer’s 

decision was the fact that discrimination on the basis of size, or 

I suppose an economic discrimination, was upheld in his 

decision. In many ways Justice Wimmer’s decision was a very 

good one for the province and for Saskatchewan municipalities 

on that score because it did allow, or at least gave a sense that 

that type of discrimination would be allowed, even if other 

sections of the Act were struck down on the question of a day of 

rest. 

 

My question to the minister: earlier the minister indicated the 

figure of 500 square metres was something that had been picked 

out of the air, or I guess more particularly had been taken from 

the Ontario legislation, as is the major thrust of the amendments 

that are now before us. I wonder if the minister could elucidate 

for the public by way of example, and provide perhaps an 

indication of the  

type of store, say for example in the city of Regina, that might 

be larger than 500 square metres, and those that might be less 

than 500 square metres. For example, SuperValu, is that greater 

than 500 square metres? The normal grocery stores that we 

think of, Safeway’s and so on, is that larger than 500 square 

metres, as opposed to say a Bi-Rite Drugs, is that less than 500 

square metres? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I agree with the member’s 

original observation of the court decision. And certainly when I 

used the word “overlooked”, it was not to cast aspersions on 

anybody or members opposite, but rather, I think, it was 

overlooked by the public at large as having reached that 

decision. 

 

As far as relating to size, it’s a difficult thing. I’d hate to start 

planting thoughts in peoples’ heads that they couldn’t really 

relate to. But you know, 500 square metres, 5,000 square feet – 

I suppose if you wanted to consider an average bungalow at 

being in the area of 1,200 square feet, you know, it would be 

four times larger than an average bungalow. A free-standing 

building that comes to mind that would certainly be larger than 

that would be at the Canadian Tire stores here in Regina that 

people might see as a landmark. But I’d hate to get into naming 

other things that might tend to get people off the wrong track on 

that, but I would say that about four times as large as an average 

bungalow. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, one other question for 

the minister in this vein. In determining the figure of 500 square 

metres, was there consultation, say with the city of Regina or 

the city of Saskatoon or other municipalities, to see whether or 

not the 500 square metres might need their needs in attempting 

to draw some distinction between the types of stores that they 

would like to see remain open, or enable to remain open, as 

opposed to the ones that they would like to see closed. 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we consulted fully with both 

cities, and they were in agreement with what we had envisioned 

for a small store. SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) was consulted with. And in my previous exposure 

as minister of small business, generally speaking, it was a store 

in that area that had smaller numbers of employees, certainly, 

and was a typical one-man type of owner-operator, or 

one-woman owner-operator business, rather than a 

conglomerate of public corporation which tends to be in larger 

unites. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — On that, Mr. Chairman, on that 

particular point then, the municipalities were in agreement with 

that cut-off point of 500 square metres? Am I correct in 

assuming that? 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — One further question. And just to follow 

up again on a question by my colleague, the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, are you reasonably satisfied at this point, Mr. 

Minister . . . SuperValu has indicated that it, as I understand it, 

would be looking to challenge the existing or the new 

legislation because it felt that the legislation discriminated, 

notwithstanding Justice  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2394 

 

 

Wimmer’s ruling. Are you reasonably satisfied that the 

legislation now before us and the clauses in it will, in fact, 

prevent SuperValu from carrying forward with a successful 

appeal in the courts. 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I wish that I could 

sometimes be clairvoyant so that I could get into that, but I, you 

know . . . anybody can challenge anybody. All we can do at this 

point in time is do our best. It seems, however . . . And I will 

refer to an article in the Star-Phoenix, and it refers to the Bill, 

Mr. Chairman: 

 

The Bill introduced in the legislature Friday also has 

support from noted Saskatoon constitutional lawyer, 

Howard McConnell. “That law would likely by upheld by 

the Supreme Court of Canada if it were challenged,” 

McConnell predicted, adding, “It seems to conform to 

previous rulings by the Supreme Court of Canada.” 

 

So there is an outside position from a recognized constitutional 

lawyer. We have had discussions with our Departments of 

Justice, and, you know, it was quite a challenging work-load for 

them to try to get this thing worded as best as possible that 

things would be fine, and hopefully they will be that way. I 

know that, again speaking about Ontario, theirs was upheld by 

the Supreme Court, and now they seem to be having difficulties 

again. 

 

So that you can never predict with any great degree of accuracy. 

And of course, being that this is a free country and our laws 

work the way they do, and the lawyers and the judges are sitting 

there, they take advantage of the opportunities that exist in our 

free society and do what they feel is open to them to do, I 

suppose. It keeps the lawyers busy, Murray. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Just a very brief intervention, Mr. Chairman. I 

was wondering if the minister could tell us if there is any 

interpretation of this particular Bill that would have application 

to bingo halls. 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the Act defines “store”, and 

I could read it to you, but basically store is designed as a place 

that exposes goods for sale, and I don’t know that bingos would 

qualify under that. I really don’t see the connection between 

bingos and the definition of a store. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Any bingo hall that I’ve ever seen, Mr. 

Minister, whether it’s working there as a charity bingo or in a 

commercial bingo hall, they certainly have retail goods 

advertised for sale. And it would seem to me that in the 

definition that you’ve just given, then this Bill would have some 

application to bingo halls, so I’d like you to be a little clearer on 

the definition of the display of retail goods for sale. 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll read the Act: 

 

“store” (in article g) means any building or portion of a 

building, booth, stall or other place where goods are 

exposed or offered for sale or auction. 

 

Now that’s the definition of a store. I suppose if a bingo 

operator, again, wants to challenge the validity of the Act,  

he’s free to do so, but certainly a layman’s thinking like mine, I 

know a bingo hall wouldn’t be a store. That’s for sure. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well laymen’s opinions usually have very 

little to do when there are court challenges or legal challenges 

over a Bill or a piece of legislation that a government such as 

this would pass. 

 

And certainly in bingo halls they do display goods for sale, and 

I’m not talking just about the bingo cards that are sold. There 

are various items that are sold for retail in bingo halls 

throughout the province. And it seems to me that this Bill 

would have direct application to bingo halls, and I’m 

wondering: is it the intention of the department to have included 

bingo halls, or is it something that’s been an oversight by the 

departmental officials? 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, in our opinion a bingo outlet 

is not a retail outlet. A bingo outlet is an entertainment form, I 

would suspect would be the way to put it. The charities are 

licensed to operate their bingos through our Department of 

Commerce and Commercial Affairs. And I think that our 

legislation of store is solid enough, and I don’t believe that we 

will encounter that kind of a difficulty because you’d have to 

start excluding all sorts of things – a movie hall because they 

sell popcorn or whatever. I mean, you don’t consider that as 

being a store. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I can appreciate your interpretation, but 

I suppose from what you’re saying some fellow with a . . . or 

some person with a very inventive mind could change their 

retail outlet into something that would have an entertainment 

value attraction to it and use that to disguise the sale of retail 

goods. And I’m not talking about things like concession stands, 

about popcorn and hot dogs and pop that are sold. There are 

actual retail items that are sold in bingo halls. 

 

And I think unless you define in some way the amount of retail 

sales that are coming out – and I don’t levy this as a criticism, it 

may have been an oversight – but unless you define the amount 

of retail sales that are taken out of a building in excess of 500 

square metres as you’ve described to us, there’s a chance that 

anyone who is a bit “ingenuitive”, some entrepreneur could 

devise a way so that they could, under your legislation, be 

described as an entertainment centre, and at the same time be 

conducting vast amounts of retail sales out of that same 

building. But because of what you have told me, they would not 

be covered by this legislation. 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think that the member is 

getting carried away with the whole situation here, and I won’t 

profess to argue legally with him. I think that if somebody 

wanted to play games with this legislation, or any other 

legislation, they could do that. The provision is still there for the 

municipality to charge them, and it would be up then to the 

courts of law to determine that. 

 

To start putting numbers, retail numbers, in on a 500 square 

metre store – for instance, if somebody is selling diamonds and 

somebody else is selling marbles, how can you even begin to 

put any kind of a dollar limit on it because one has no 

relationship to the other? 

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2395 

 

 

It’s the same thing in a whole host of various businesses. You 

can’t measure it by a dollar volume. You can measure it by the 

line of product sold, perhaps. To get into that you might have to 

have a list of 10,413 articles, or more or less – I really don’t 

know. 

 

All I can say, Mr. Chairman, is that I have a lot of faith in this 

legislation. I have a lot of faith in the officials that have 

designed it and put it together. And I suppose, too, that I have 

faith in the municipalities and the business people that operate 

therein that they’re not going to play games to that extent. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well our job in opposition, Mr. Chairman, 

through you to the minister, is to provide some kind of 

constructive criticism. That’s the purpose of the process we go 

through for passing Bills, and not playing games. 

 

I point out an example to you that the department should give 

some consideration to, and I used bingo halls because it’s 

something that comes to mind as an immediate example where 

there are retail sales. And I don’t appreciate the games that you 

play. I’m not comparing diamonds to marbles. I don’t wish to 

do that. 

 

I point out what I think may be a bit of a fault in your 

legislation that will come sometimes down the road. Instead of 

your offhand flippant remarks that you make about what we’re 

doing on this side of the House, I just wish you’d sit down and 

take the criticism for what it’s worth. I think the department has 

likely done a good job, and the officials have done a good job in 

trying to put together the legislation. I, for one member, try and 

point out a fault in that. If you don’t think it’s a fault, that’s 

fine. But keep it in mind for the future if you do get into trouble 

with the Bill that you’re putting through here today. 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, it was the member opposite 

that stated a relationship between square footage and sales, and 

I simply pointed out the inaccuracy of that kind of a statement. 

You can’t justify that. And it’s not a flippant remark. It’s as 

seriously made as what perhaps you honestly brought up about 

a bingo hall. And I’ve answered once or twice that I believe that 

a bingo hall is not in the same connotation as our definition of a 

store. 

 

But if somebody wants to challenge this legislation, or that 

definition, or any legislation, they have the right to do that. And 

whether it may be a bingo hall or something else, what I’m 

saying is, we can’t possibly cover in legislation an alternate for 

everything that may conceivably occur. My reaction to the 

judge’s decision on this matter was one of total surprise, 

because of all of the various articles in the legislation, to rule 

the way he did caught me by surprise, and that was my initial 

reaction. 

 

And I suppose that it’s fair to say in all the articles, they can 

challenge and overturn on any one of them. And you can’t 

possibly build in alternate provisions to cover all of the 

ramifications that could come about as a result of a legal 

challenge. 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I just want one final brief comment, Mr. 

Chairman, and that is that if that’s what you want, I think there 

are some situations that can be covered. Why wouldn’t you put 

into this Bill something to state that it does not apply to 

entertainment facilities and retail sales from those entertainment 

facilities whereby they are using as accessories to that 

entertainment? 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, it’s safe to say that we’re 

dealing with retailing and with stores. I think that the general 

public understands precisely what the term retailing and stores 

are. This is not an entertainment Bill or some other form. And 

we could find ourselves very well, by putting in exclusions that 

would indeed open up this Act, to some kind of a legal question 

by virtue of an exclusion, so that rather by limiting it to the 

definitions, as closely defined as we can determine to be legal 

and acceptable, we believe that we’re staying in a safe area. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one 

small section of the Act that concerns me, and it may not be any 

major problem, Mr. Chairman, and that is the provision which 

indicates that goods offered for sale at a public auction or by a 

transient trader, if they’re of the class of goods that are sold by 

stores that are normally obliged to be closed on a specific day 

such as a Sunday, that that kind of sale will not be allowed. But 

the exception which is made . . . And I refer you to no. 13, Mr. 

Minister. That section does not apply to used or second-hand 

goods. 

 

As I read that section, I would interpret that to mean that this is 

an escape for, say, community organizations and others who are 

involved in flea markets, or individuals who undertake to have a 

garage sale, and I don’t think that anyone would want to close 

the door on that, to enable individuals to hold a garage sale on a 

Sunday, or a Saturday for that matter – and I might say that I 

have one coming up soon – I don’t think that anyone would 

intend to close the door on that opportunity. 

 

By the same token, though, as I read that section, it does 

provide an opportunity for a transient trader to set up in town, 

say, at a local hotel, to bring in, say, antique furniture, and to 

hold a sale of that furniture and call it used or second-hand 

goods. Am I right in that? Does that possibility exist as well? 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member brings up a 

valid point in this. That section of the Act has been there for a 

long time and has not been changed. So far it has not created a 

problem. I know the type of transient trader to which you’re 

referring. First of all, you know, with regarding the garage sale 

and all the rest of it, no, clearly there is no problem nor 

intention to that. 

 

With regard to the transient trader that may come through, I 

suppose all I can offer as an explanation at this point in time is 

that they must be licensed in order to do business as the 

transient trader, and certainly they wouldn’t qualify for that if 

they intended on doing it more than just the odd time or the 

once a year that they come through or whatever, and the 

municipality would then offer them their licence. So I suppose 

that the only  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2396 

 

 

method of control would be in that licence area. So far it hasn’t 

been a problem, and I would suspect that if it became one that 

we would have to find some way to sort it out and deal with it. 

 

I think that what I would propose is that that would be one 

section that we will earmark. And perhaps at another time when 

this Act would be reopened that we could deal with it at that 

time, having had the time to do some proper research and 

discussion and consultation, and deal with it then rather than 

delay the passage of what the Act is really here for today, if that 

would be in agreement with you. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to thank the minister, Mr. 

Chairman, for that undertaking and for those assurances. I think 

that’s much appreciated. 

 

I have no further questions at this time. Again I would indicate 

that we’re relatively pleased with the legislation. We hope and 

join with the minister and the municipalities and retail workers 

and small businesses throughout this province that the 

legislation will finally close the door to widespread openings on 

Sunday, or on a secular day of rest in Saskatchewan, and restore 

a secular day of rest for Saskatchewan families. 

 

Again I wish that the province had acted sooner in this respect. 

The opportunity was there some time ago to look at the Ontario 

legislation and to see what it might hold for Saskatchewan. I 

note that as recently as last December, in commenting on the 

ruling by the Supreme Court on the Ontario legislation, the 

Minister of Justice said at first blush it would appear the 

Supreme Court has upheld the right of the province to deal with 

it, and it certainly upheld the right of the province, even if the 

legislation in this province left something to be desired. I would 

hope that the Minister of Justice is still blushing on that one, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

I have no further comments at this time. 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — I think in response to that, in fairness, we 

did believe that our Act would be upheld by the courts. And, in 

fact, the one important area was, as far as we’re concerned right 

now – but there again time will tell – this area was a surprise. It 

is very difficult to determine in advance just what area of 

legislation might be weak, if indeed any. I think that we did act 

with an awful lot of speed on this issue, when it did surface, to 

the satisfaction of all concerned. 

 

I appreciate the questions that came forward today. If there are 

no more, then perhaps we can approve the Bill and pass it. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — With agreement of the opposition, if they 

are in approval of the Bill, perhaps we could just proceed on a 

page-by-page basis rather than clause by clause, unless we had 

some specific area. It’s normal to  

do that on a lengthy Bill if you’re in agreement. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — In this instance, Mr. Chairman, we 

would agree to it. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would suggest perhaps to the minister that 

we have two clauses left and then we are finished, which would 

probably be faster than going by page. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — I would like to thank my officials, Mr. 

Chairman, and I’d like to thank the line of questioning that the 

opposition presented to us this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — If I might, I would also like to thank the 

minister’s officials for attending here today and for assisting in 

the consideration of this Bill. And I want to thank the minister 

for his assurances and for his contribution to this debate. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 37 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 

 

Hon Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1545) 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 36 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As we 

come back to the review of the services provided by this very 

important department that impacts on literally hundred of 

thousands of people directly in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Chairman, I think before moving to another topic that we 

haven’t dealt with before, there is one item of unfinished 

business that needs to come before the House. 

 

And it has to do, Mr. Minister, with the comments that you have 

made in this House regarding your former deputy minister, Con 

Hnatiuk, who by your words you transferred to Manitoba. In 

response, Mr. Minister, to questioning in the House regarding 

the cost to the taxpayers of this province for you to make this 

decision to transfer a deputy minister who was promoted into 

that position by the former Minister of Social Services, the PC 

member from Regina Rosemont at that time, Gordon Dirks – in 

response to questions about the cost of your decision, to use 

your terms “transfer him to Manitoba,” you chose in this 

Assembly, Mr. Minister, to provide the  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2397 

 

 

Assembly with what I would suggest would be slanderous 

remarks; certainly remarks that were not complimentary to the 

deputy minister; remarks that are a little difficult to understand, 

Mr. Minister, and a little difficult to understand in the context of 

a Leader-Post report on Saturday, September 5, in which Mr. 

Hnatiuk, after being contacted by the Leader-Post, is reported 

as saying, along the way he received regular performance 

bonuses, merit ratings, and positive feedback from his 

superiors. When he left the job earlier this spring, Premier 

Grant Devine sent him a complimentary letter. 

 

Mr. Minister: will you admit to this Assembly that you 

unnecessarily dragged the name of the former deputy minister 

through the mud in a style that is not terribly uncharacteristic 

with some of your previous comments and performances? In the 

period of time, Mr. Minister, these past several months, you’ve 

failed to insult very few people, and there are a number of 

people who are insulted by your dragging through the mud the 

name of Mr. Con Hnatiuk. 

 

And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would stand in this 

House today and withdraw the slanderous remarks, the uncaring 

– typically uncaring – remarks that you made in respect to your 

deputy minister. Will you stand in the Assembly and withdraw 

those remarks, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, it should be 

pointed out that I did not raise any former employees in this 

Assembly; that they were raised by the member opposite who 

started in his questioning about . . . with the line; where is 

Howie Alberts; who then raised the names of Mr. Hnatiuk, Mr. 

Spigelman and other people in our department. And certainly I 

did not raise these matters; I consider the matters closed. The 

management changes have been made; they were made because 

they were necessary. 

 

And certainly with respect to slander, that is a legal term and 

does not exist where there is truth, and I have answered the 

questions previously and given the truth. There may be 

differences of opinion as to what is the truth, but I have given 

the truth, there is no slander, and the matter is closed, and we’re 

prepared to deal with the estimates. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I, too, am prepared to deal with 

the estimates. 

 

And I point out again, when I stood in this Assembly and asked 

for information regarding the dismissal of Mr. Hnatiuk, I did 

not raise questions about his performance; you did. I asked 

specific questions about the cost to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan for you to make that decision, to dismiss that 

deputy minister. 

 

You chose to make the slanderous comments, Mr. Minister, and 

if I may paraphrase, I recall you making a statement to the 

effect that Mr. Hnatiuk was costing the province his weight in 

gold, to use your words, Mr. Minister. And I challenge you to 

repeat those statements that you made formerly in this House 

when we discussed this matter. I challenge you, Mr. Minister, to 

make those  

statement outside this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we happen to be in the 

Assembly at this time, and I’ve already answered the question. 

As everyone knows, we have complete freedom of speech in 

this Assembly and are responsible to each other. The statements 

I have made are truthful, are responsible, and I have no 

intention to retract any statements, or do I have any intention of 

repeating anything, because the questions have already been 

answered. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I think it is a blatant admission, on 

your part, of the inappropriateness of your comments – the fact 

that you refuse to repeat them outside this House. Mr. Minister, 

I challenge you to repeat those statements outside the House. If 

you are so convinced that what you said is accurate, inside this 

House and you firmly believe them to be true, I challenge you 

to make those statements outside this House. 

 

And is it not true, Mr. Minister, is it not true that you chose, you 

chose, to use your terms, to transfer the deputy minister to the 

province of Manitoba because, as a matter of fact, that he 

objected or provided some resistance to your intention to 

introduce a number of right-wing policies in the Department of 

Social Services? Will you not admit, Mr. Minister, that that was 

your motivation behind this $120,000 cost to the taxpayers 

through which you dismissed the deputy minister? And I 

challenge you to repeat those remarks outside the House that 

you made in this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the member 

opposite is suggesting that the individual he is trying to defend 

would not implement government policy, then his argument is 

self-defeating. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 

to question you on the question of the day care services in the 

province, and begin by looking at the brief that the 

Saskatchewan government presented to the Special Committee 

on Child Care in June of 1986. I’ll wait till the minister . . . I 

feel like I have his attention. 

 

Mr. Minister, in this brief the government said . . . your 

government said that: given that 54 per cent of the women in 

Saskatchewan currently work outside the home, it is vital that 

families have access to quality child care services which are 

both affordable and flexible. That is a statement that I 

personally have no problem with. 

 

I wanted to quote to you figures that are also available in this 

government report, so the government was aware of it: of the 

number of women 15 years of age and over with children under 

the age of three in Saskatchewan, in 1975 those women were 

28.4 per cent of the population in the labour force – these are 

women who are at work; in 1985, 52.1 per cent of the women 

with children under the age of three. That’s an 83.5 per cent 

increase in 10 years of women who are working, with children 

under the age of three. 

 

Children under the ages from three to five with mothers  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2398 

 

 

who are working went from 38.6 per cent in 1975 to 64.9 per 

cent in 1985. That’s a 68.1 per cent increase. And women with 

children ages six to 15 years of age in the work-force went from 

50 per cent in 1975 to 71.9 per cent in 1985 – a 43.8 per cent 

increase. That shows very clearly that more and more women 

are in the work-force, women that are parents, and more and 

more the need for adequate child care services for women. 

 

In this brief to the federal government, your government in 

1986 said: Saskatchewan has the foundation on which to 

continue developing quality child care services and options for 

delivery of those services; when your government in 1986 said, 

Saskatchewan has the foundation on which to continue 

developing quality child care. That is the foundation that was 

set by the New Democratic Party government from 1973 until 

1982. 

 

I want in this House to give credit to the New Democrats for 

starting the day care movement and making day care centres 

available, and I want to give credit to your government for 

recognizing that foundation, so that when you respond to my 

questions about day care, I hope that you will not give me the 

kind of response that you’ve been giving to other people in this 

House, where you stand up and waste the time of this House by 

going back over what you don’t think the New Democratic 

Party has done. Because in this presentation to the federal 

government, your government in 1986 recognized that we had a 

foundation for quality child care services. 

 

Now this brief goes on to say: 

 

We are committed to improvement in this area. This 

commitment is based on the following principles, one of 

which is that federal-provincial co-operation is essential to 

the development of quality child care services. 

 

My question, my first question to you, Mr. Minister, is: what 

has Saskatchewan’s position been in the cost-sharing 

discussions with the federal government that have taken place 

recently regarding child care services and the development of a 

national child care policy? Can you be specific and clear with 

me in outlining what your position have been to the federal 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I expect to be 

summoned to Ottawa in the very near future to hear the details 

of the federal proposals on day care, and until we receive the 

details of those proposals, we will not be in a position to make 

any major changes here because we would have to analyse the 

situation. 

 

Our position is clearly that day care should continue on a 50-50 

funding basis, higher if Ottawa could come up with the money, 

but we doubt very much if they will go higher than 50-50. So 

it’s cost shared, half and half, between Ottawa and Regina – we 

should say Saskatchewan. 

 

The day care situation has improved progressively and 

continuously in the term of office of this government. My most 

recent calculations are that the increase in spaces has been 49 

per cent since 1981. The spaces have gone from 3,914 spaces in 

Saskatchewan to 5,748 spaces in Saskatchewan We have 

recently allocated another half a  

million dollars for another 225 spaces. Saskatchewan has a 

commitment to assisting in child care, and there’ll be further 

details when the federal proposals are public and are 

considered. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I asked you what your position 

was regarding the federal government on the development of a 

national child care policy. A 50-50 per cent cost sharing 

funding has been in place for a long time through the Canada 

assistance plan. 

 

I’m looking at the specific comments and concepts that you’ve 

been supporting in your initial discussions. You’ve been to 

Ottawa already; you’ve talked to the federal government; they 

are now developing proposals based on discussions with the 

provinces. What position was the Saskatchewan government 

taking regarding the development of a national child care 

policy? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the three main criteria 

that we’ve been advocating for are as follows: we want day care 

to be more affordable to parents, particularly at the lower and 

middle income levels; secondly, we want to increase the 

availability of day care spaces to families requiring out-of-home 

care; and thirdly, we want to improve the quality of day care in 

every way possible. 

 

As for the details of how that will be done, part of that we’ve 

done already in this province. As for the details of the future, 

this is a national program that we are waiting for, and I would 

expect that in the next four weeks we will have further details 

on the national program. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, when you were talking to the 

federal government, did you or did you not support the concept 

of non-profit child care, or are you supporting the development 

of commercial or child care for profit centres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, when I went to school, 

profit was not a dirty word, and I don’t believe it is right now. It 

is what our economy is driven on. We certainly do not want 

anyone to exploit child care, but we don’t believe that people 

should care for children for no compensation, and so therefore, 

we are considering the various options. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan would not be subsidizing 

any day care centres that were based on a commercial nature, 

but whether commercial day care centres should be allowed in 

Saskatchewan is not yet been decided. They are common in 

Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, and other provinces, and we would 

have to weigh all the options once we see what the federal 

position is. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, you obviously have a lot of 

homework to do in regard to this issue. I would suggest that you 

pay very close attention to the research that’s been done in 

terms of the high quality of care that non-profit day cares 

provide, versus the quality of care in profit day cares. When 

people are running day cares to make money, then the quality of 

care for children suffers. 

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2399 

 

 

The research has been done for that over and over again, and 

there are many well-informed people in Saskatchewan who 

could enlighten you on this need for non-profit day care. It’s a 

crucial issue – an absolutely crucial issue to the many, many 

parents in this province who are working and who are looking 

for good child care. 

 

And it’s unacceptable to me to hear you say that the alternative 

to profit care is somehow to have people work for nothing. That 

is not the kind of plan that the people who really want good 

child care for their children are suggesting, not at all. And you 

would be well advised to listen to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I would be prepared to 

listen to the member opposite, and I have, but there didn’t seem 

to be much logic or much rational thought to considering all 

options. We have no comparisons in this province between 

commercial day care centres and non-profit day care centres. 

The non-profit day care centres still charge fees and still pay 

wages, so there are employees who are benefiting from the 

existence of those centres. We expect that the prime object of 

day care should not be the benefit of employees or owners, 

whether they’re profit or non-profit, but the care of children. 

 

With respect to the care of children, there should be some 

ability for parents to make choices on what type of day care 

they wish to have for their children, and this is something that 

we will consider to allow parents some choice. Whether a 

commercial day care can provide different services, or better 

services, or not as good services as the existing day cares, that 

is a matter to be seen. Maybe we would have to try a pilot 

project so that we would have some comparison, but at present 

we have no comparison. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before entering this 

debate, I beg leave of the Assembly to introduce two guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery is Monica Lysack, who is the outgoing 

director of the university day care co-op here in Regina. And 

seated next to her is Heather Guzik, the incoming director of the 

university day care co-op. I ask all people in the Assembly 

today to join me in welcoming these two guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 36 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, you’re talking now about 

commercial day care, and it disturbs me greatly to hear you 

saying we maybe need a pilot project here in Saskatchewan to 

find out indeed if commercial day care or day care for profit is 

in fact a good thing. Just do as the member from Saskatoon 

asked you to do; read some studies; find out. 

 

It only makes logical sense that when anyone is in business for 

profit, their primary goal is that of turning a dollar. And if you 

are earning a dollar at the expense of the children, that’s exactly 

what will happen in a day care for profit situation. It is 

inescapable that in a profit day care the staff salaries may be 

lower. They may in fact pay a similar amount per hour, but 

instead of supervising a relatively small number of children, 

that number will continue to increase and increase and increase 

until the limits are reached and, in many cases, exceeded. 

 

I make my comments about the profit day care simply to urge 

you not to even pursue that, other than if you want to study 

what’s happening in Alberta or Ontario or some other provinces 

where they have profit day care. By all means go and ask them 

how it’s working; go and look at it; see how it works, but you 

certainly do not need a pilot project here in Saskatchewan 

because it won’t work one iota better here than it does in 

neighbouring Alberta or indeed in Ontario. 

 

What is required, Mr. Minister, is simply an increase in funding 

for day cares, and I urge you to move towards universal funding 

for day cares. There’s a number of ways you can proceed there, 

but I urge you to look at universal funding of day cares. 

 

Indeed, the children that attend day cares are our future, and 

that’s not simply idle words. Obviously they are going to be the 

future generations that will be running Saskatchewan and 

indeed running Canada. Many of them will go on to very 

important positions within the world. 

 

The subsidy, Mr. Minister, has been frozen at $235 per child 

space per month since some time before April of 1982 when 

your government was first elected. Prior to that the subsidy had 

been increased in regular increments. They had not been 

increased in large, drastic amounts such as I’m urging you to do 

now; they had been increased regularly. But since April of 1982 

they’ve been frozen at $235 a month, and I ask you: how do 

you justify freezing that subsidy per child at $235? How can 

you justify that, and when are you going to move to drastically 

increase that from $235 a month to something more realistic, 

something certainly in excess of $300 per month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate if the 

member for Regina North could give us a clear indication of 

what he proposes by universal funding for day care. While we 

on this side of the House believe that those people who can 

afford child care should pay their own child care, and that those 

people who cannot afford child care should be assisted, we 

would have to have some clarification on his concept of 

universal funding. 

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2400 

 

 

I would like to point out, however, that it was this government 

who instituted a standard funding fee or a standard amount of 

$20 per space per month in all of the day cares in 

Saskatchewan, something that his government did not see fit to 

implement. So if you could explain to us what he means by 

universal funding . . . is it something different than what has 

been requested and denied by the former government, or is it a 

new concept? 

 

I can point out that this government has come up with a 

standard fee of $20 per space per month for everyone as a basic 

funding for day care centres. Then in addition there are 

subsidies for those people who require subsidies. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, surely you jest when you suggest 

that someone with a gross income of $1,500, that a subsidy of 

$235 per month is adequate. Just picture yourself. I recognize 

that on an income in excess of $50,000 per year, and with the 

wonderful garden that you and your wife grow, that you would 

not understand the hardship faced by a single parent who has an 

income of $1,500 and one or two children and finds a subsidy 

of $235, in fact, decreases very substantially from $1,500 per 

month and on. 

 

And not only has the subsidy decreased, but I point out to the 

minister that the subsidy is a maximum of $235 per child, but 

day cares are charging well in excess of $300 per child space 

simply because they have to pay their staff, they have to pay 

their rent, they have to purchase supplies. I believe the supplies 

is included in that $20 per space allotment that you were 

speaking about just moments ago. 

 

But there’s certainly considerable pressure on day cares to meet 

the criteria outlined under the licensing arrangement. Day cares 

cannot simply stack little children up in the corner or hang them 

on hooks and leave them there from the time that their caretaker 

or their mother or father drops them off until their mother or 

father or caretaker comes and picks them up. Children require 

constant attention throughout the day. 

 

Your subsidy level is simply inescapable; it’s creating a terrific 

hardship for a great number of people. Will you move to 

increase that subsidy rate, move it up to something more 

acceptable, something more reasonable and something more in 

tune with the economy of today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, just to give you an 

update on this. People tend to get emotional on this topic but 

you have to look at the facts. We subsidize 90 per cent of the 

average fees to a maximum of $235 – as a maximum – that’s 90 

per cent of the fees. Last year was the first year that the average 

fees in the province were high enough to capture the full $235 

subsidy. So when you receive 90 per cent of the fee, up to a 

maximum of 235 last year, the average fees had reached a level 

where people started qualifying for the maximum subsidy, at 

the 90 per cent. 

 

Instead of increasing the subsidy, we granted $20 per space, for 

all spaces in Saskatchewan. So you have to have a balance here 

between whether the members of the opposition want 

universality, or whether they want specifically to help those in 

greatest need. And those are  

the kinds of decisions that have to be made. And as a 

government we have to make decisions and be responsible for 

them. The opposition can ask for both, and no tax increases and 

no deficit. And it goes on and on. But we have to govern and 

we have to balance these things and provide what is reasonable 

and practical. 

 

So if the members opposite could decide what they really want 

– universality or assistance to those in greatest need, whether 

they wish to have taxes lowered or raised, whether they wish 

the deficit increased, whether they wish spending increased or 

decreased – if they could give us a final decision on what their 

policies are in this regard then we could take them into account. 

But since they have three or four policies, which are all 

inconsistent with each other, the government has to pick what 

we think is the most common-sense approach. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Ninety per cent of the funding, Mr. Minister, a 

maximum of $235 per month – it just simply is not the way it is. 

Day cares are charging . . . well many of them are charging in 

excess of 330, 340, $350 per month per child space. 

 

(1615) 

 

You are stating that you’re funding each space 90 per cent of 

the funding, but it is only to a maximum of $235, and there’s a 

great many spaces where that funding is short. That is why I’m 

asking you to increase that $235. You’re making statements that 

the $235 per month per child seems to cover virtually every day 

care space, and quite frankly that is not so and you know it is 

not so, and I wish you would not pretend that it is that way. 

 

In some instances, perhaps where the building is supplied free 

of charge for whatever reason, that may be accurate, but it is not 

in the majority of cases. So I come back again: when will you 

increase that maximum rate, that maximum subsidy, from 

$235? When are you going to increase it, and to what level are 

you contemplating increasing it to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the question is when. 

And I gave the members opposite a choice on universality or 

helping those in greatest need and they haven’t made any 

decision as yet. 

 

When we’ve made the decision we will announce it. And we 

will probably do that after we have heard the federal proposals 

on day care. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, you have said that you see our 

policies as . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’ve said you see the New Democratic policies 

as inconsistent. Let me tell you that one of the basis for our 

philosophy is: people first. And one of the most important 

things for people, for parents is high-quality child care for their 

children. It’s children that are hurting in day cares that are not 

licensed, that day cares that are not living up to the proper 

standards, that  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2401 

 

 

are not properly funded. 

 

I’ve told you how many children belong to mothers who are 

working; it’s very much increased since 1975. And we are 

talking about the need for high-quality child care so that 

children are not left in front of television sets all day long, so 

that parents are not left with the tremendous stress of going 

around this province trying to find places for their children to be 

cared for because they have to be in the work-force. That’s what 

we’re talking about. I want to be very clear with you on that. 

 

You’ve mentioned the increase in day care spaces. Under the 

New Democrats from 1973 to 1981, in eight years time, the 

New Democrats created 3,900 spaces. In the eight years of your 

government you have created 1,800 spaces. It’s an increase but 

it’s not nearly enough – not nearly enough. 

 

In this budget you created a mere 225 new spaces, in the budget 

announced this year. Child care movement estimates that at 

least, at a very minimum, there’s a need for another 800 new 

spaces in day care centres and family day care homes. I have 

very specific questions for you and I would like the answers. 

Where are the 225 new spaces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the spaces are being 

allocated. Announcements will be made from time to time when 

the allocations have been completed. 

 

Ms. Smart: — How many spaces have been lost due to 

closures? Do you know that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, there is always 

some turnover in day care spaces. There may be some closures; 

there’ll be some openings. We don’t capture any spaces that are 

closed. What we do is reallocate them to other day care centres. 

 

The statistics in last year are as follows. Increase in spaces: 

Mackenzie Infant Care Centre, Regina, 10, start-up grant cost 

$6,000; Moose Jaw Community College, 35, start-up grant 

21,000; La Co-operative Gard Amis Francaise de Regina, it’s a 

French day care, 25 spaces, start- up cost $15,000. 

 

And centre expansions: the Churchill Day care, Saskatoon, five; 

Lakeland Preschool, Christopher Lake, 10; Massey Road Day 

Care, Regina, five; Melfort Day Care, 10; Nipawin Day Care, 

10; Preston Avenue Day Care, Saskatoon, 20; Regina General 

Hospital Daycare, 10; Regina’s Market Square, 10; Sign Day 

Care, Yorkton, five; Small World Day Care, Prince Albert, five; 

University Day Care, five. 

 

At the same time there were two centres closed: Indian Head 

Child Care co-operative with 45 spaces closed in that year; and 

the Lloydminster Native Day Care Centre with 30 spaces closed 

in that year. 

 

As I indicated earlier, that if a day care should close, then those 

spaces will be allocated on the basis of need to other day cares 

or new day cares. 

 

Ms. Smart: — So in terms of the new spaces, you’re  

half-way through this budget year and you have none of those 

225 day care spaces, new ones, in place. That’s what you’ve 

told me in this House. That’s really shocking, when the budget 

said that you were providing a new, enriched day care program. 

 

I want to question you just quickly on the equipment grants. 

Are they being paid out to the day care centres now? They were 

held up for some months, even into this new budget year. Are 

they being paid out now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, as you know and 

as the members on this side of the House know, the budget has 

not yet been passed and we are operating on interim supply. On 

the basis of interim supply, payments are going out in the 

regular manner. 

 

With respect to spaces, it should be also be noted that in 

addition to the 225 spaces to be allocated this year, there’s an 

additional 350 children – and this is an estimate that we’ve got 

so far – an additional 350 children in private home day care 

spaces. So that the total increase this year would be in the range 

of 600 – getting very close to the amount requested by the 

members of the opposition. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Those private homes are not licensed ones. 

That’s true, isn’t it, that you’re referring to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, yes, those are licensed. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well then what you’re calling a private home, 

that’s a family day care centre? Is that the same thing? All right. 

 

A couple of questions about the spaces created at the northern 

technical institute in Prince Albert. How many spaces were 

created there; and how many have been registered in those 

spaces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I was in Prince 

Albert. The institute hasn’t got back to us yet with respect to the 

need there. We would have a preference though for other day 

care centres where the need might be greater, and so we’ll have 

to decide where the need is greatest. 

 

I recall visiting the United church – and I don’t recall the name 

of the United church – on the west side of Prince Albert, in the 

west flats, and they’re requesting allocation for day care, and I 

tend to think that we haven’t talked to her yet. We’ve talked 

about commercial and we’ve talked about non-profit, but I 

would tend to think that the United church day care requested in 

Prince Albert should get serious consideration as a house of 

God should be an appropriate place for the care of children. So 

we will have to decide where the greatest need is. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well of course a request from a United church 

should get serious consideration, but you’ve built a day care in 

the Northern Institute of Technology – a day care space which 

is also to be a training area, as I understand it. And you’re 

telling me that you haven’t got spaces registered there and 

you’re not going ahead with that program. That’s your newest 

institute, and the  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2402 

 

 

Minister of Education has been promoting that institute, and yet 

here’s a program that seems not to be going ahead. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the information I 

have is that the institute is doing a survey, checking for the 

need. Should the need be there, we will continue with the 

project. With respect to what Education is doing, we would 

have to check that in Education estimates. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I can’t believe the lack of planning from this 

government opposite in terms of providing people with the 

services that they need. You just seem to be going around in 

circles. You don’t seem to know where you’re going at all. 

 

I want to ask you a question regarding infant care. I would like 

to know, since the statistics show, for example, in 

Saskatchewan in 1981 that there were 6,685 children ages zero 

to one – the very tiny babies – who had parents who were either 

full-time working parents, students, or parents working 20 to 29 

hours a week . . . 

 

And I know in my constituency I have young single moms who 

are looking for space for their infants for care, because your 

government has defined a woman as employable when her baby 

is three months old, and she has to change from being on full 

subsidy with social assistance to being on employable rates, 

which are a lot lower. And there are many women who are 

desperate to find day care for their very tiny babies. How many 

infants are there in licensed care in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the information I 

have is there are about 325 to 350 infant care spaces at any 

given time in the province of Saskatchewan. This is a 

particularly difficult area because, as we know, the care of an 

infant – as I know because I have two children and I can still 

remember the care required when they were that age; and 

clearly there is a higher staff ration. It’s particularly difficult for 

a stranger to care for an infant as compared to a mother or as 

compared to relatives, so this is a particularly difficult area. The 

question is: at what stage in life does the government start 

taking part in the care of infants or children? 

 

It should be pointed out that the day-care budget, which hasn’t 

been raised here in these estimates, is approximately $13.5 

million in this province. And in addition, at the Department of 

Social Services, we pay on our welfare budget to assist for 

necessary baby-sitting related to employment, medical, 

rehabilitation, education; and we pay another $3.6 million per 

year for baby-sitting at the Department of Social Services. That 

is a fee that should really be included in the day-care situation 

because it’s specialized day care. 

 

But in addition to the 13.5 million for regular day care, the 

Department of Social Services pays out another $3,649,000 per 

year in baby-sitting, most of that for fairly young single 

mothers. And the reason we do that is because we have 

education programs for those people so that they can continue 

their education and become more self-sufficient. So that should 

not be overlooked. And so  

it’s a question of how you go about this. Would you add that 3.6 

million into infant care? I would think that it should be taken 

into account. 

 

(1630) 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well it’s very important to fund the women that 

are trying to go back to school, but it’s also very important to 

fund the development of day care through the department in an 

orderly fashion so that you can deal with all the issues that are 

coming up, such as care for children who are very tiny, such as 

help for parents that are on part-time work, such as women who 

are trying to go for the transition from training to employment. 

They go through your training programs, but they don’t get the 

money for child care so that they can afford it and get into the 

work place at the same time. 

 

There’s all sorts of problems there in terms of organizing a day 

care system that will fit the needs of the people who are 

wanting it. And one of those issues is reflected in your budget 

where you have a staff cut in the department of one person, 

from 29.6 person-years to 28.6 this year. And my understanding 

is that the positions related to the development and monitoring 

of licensed centres have not been filled, so that the staff are very 

badly overworked; even with the licensing day cares they can 

only visit one centre a year. You haven’t filled that position, the 

position of the day care worker in Saskatoon, and I’m 

wondering why you’re cutting back on staff when there’s all 

this need to develop these specialized services and to spend the 

money in an orderly and efficient and caring and high-quality 

way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we should make 

some corrections in what the member has indicated here as 

being the accuracy in all that. I’ve made the mistake of 

assuming that the information received from the members 

opposite could be accurate. 

 

A few days ago the member from Lakeview indicated that the 

Yorkton Crisis Centre had received 14,000 calls, and when I 

checked the Yorkton newspaper, the newspaper reports were 

1,400 calls – an error of tenfold. Here we have a substantial 

error. The member opposite has indicated that the age that the 

Department of Social Services considers a single woman 

employable was at the age of three months of the child, when in 

fact I’m advised our policy is that we consider that age to be 

one year. 

 

We have now under the Saskatchewan skills development 

program 2,500 people receiving an education and upgrading 

their training so that they can become employable. Most of 

those are single mothers, and in that case the Department of 

Social Services pays for their maintenance, their education, the 

care of their children, and the baby-sitting of the children in 

those cases. And there have been a few instances where there 

has been problems where the single mother has been under the 

age of 18, where we consider them part of their family, and then 

we’d look at the income of the grandparents because they are 

living at home. And that is considered part of it. 

 

Once they are over the age of 18, they are considered to be 

independent and are helped in many, many ways.  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2403 

 

 

Never before have single mothers received so much assistance 

in this province, and I really don’t know where they would 

receive more assistance. 

 

In addition, to correct some of the misconceptions that this 

government is stingy with money and day care spaces, we have 

the second highest cost to the government for day care space in 

Canada. The highest cost is in Alberta. So in the two most 

Conservative provinces, the government spends the most per 

capita on subsidized day care. And then the NDP would come 

to us and say oh, we care . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well that’s true, that’s right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No, no, that’s not true. The NDP talk. 

We act. We are the government. And the NDP try to obtain a 

monopoly on caring, but it’s only an oral caring. This 

government is into physical caring, physical caring for people. 

And that costs money; it costs effort; it takes organization. That 

is what has been done. 

 

Now I hear complaints that somehow in our department we 

have made a cut to day care because we now have 28 staff 

rather than 29. And I would say to the members opposite that 

the day cares that are in Saskatchewan have matured, are more 

self-sufficient, have more experience, require less assistance 

from our department. 

 

The development of day care does not take quite as many 

people as it once did, and the difference between 28 and 29 staff 

is hardly a significant figure. Now here we have the members 

complaining that we have reduced the administration by one 

person, from 29 to 28, when in the debates on these estimates 

they also complain about the increase in taxes, about the deficit. 

They cannot have it both ways. I submit that a decrease of one 

person, from 29 to 28, is reasonable and responsible. 

 

Ms. Smart: — It’s not reasonable and responsible at all, 

particularly given the need, and the growing need, for the 

development of rural day care for the farm families. Many, 

many farm women . . . over one-third of the farm women in 

1982 – and it certainly must be a lot higher now – have had to 

go out to work in order to subsidize their farms. 

 

And in your government’s presentation, the federal government, 

they said: we are committed to the development of services 

suited to our widespread rural population. The rural women are 

very, very anxious to have day care extended into the rural 

areas. I don’t see how you can do that when you cut back on the 

development staff in your department. 

 

I also want to point out, when you refer to Alberta, that in 1984 

the per capita spending in Alberta was $82.88; in Manitoba, it 

was $85.52 per capita for child care, and in Saskatchewan, 

$53.59 – much lower per capita in Saskatchewan. There’s a 

need for at least a 15 per cent increase in the day care budget — 

$500,000 increase is a very minimum amount. It’s hardly an 

increase at all given the tremendous demand; given the number 

of women that are looking for work; given the complications 

now with the development of part-time work and the need for 

infant care; and given, as a base for all of it, the very real  

need to have high quality care for our children and to put 

children at the heart of what it is we’re about here with 

government, because they deserve the very finest care. 

 

The money is there if you didn’t spend it on things like giving 

away the Weyerhaeuser mill and Peter Pocklington and all the 

things that we’ve mentioned here many, many times. The 

money is there; it’s just different priorities. Well, it’s about time 

to start putting people first, and children absolutely first. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the figures cited by my 

colleague opposite, if I accepted them – and for the sake of 

argument we’ll accept them – refer to per capita, not per space 

but per person in the province, or per child in the province. 

 

And if in Saskatchewan families take care of their own children 

without assistance from the government, I do not believe that 

the government should dissuade people or discourage people 

from caring for their own children. And so long as people are 

prepared to care for their own children and are not in as great a 

need as they might be in other provinces, then there’s no reason 

for the government to discourage them from caring for their 

own children. We will do everything possible to have available 

and affordable day care for all those people who need it, but 

you have to go on the basis of need. 

 

Saskatchewan is one of the few provinces in Canada where the 

rural population is still the majority. The provinces are 

Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island. And it seems that in 

the rural part of Saskatchewan there is a less of a demand for 

day care for many, many reasons. And why there is a lower 

demand for day care is because there are not as many available 

jobs for women in rural Saskatchewan where they are needed 

the most. 

 

So if we can devise ways of providing more jobs for women in 

rural Saskatchewan, where they’re needed because the incomes 

of farmers are very low these days, then at the same time we’ll 

be providing more day care spaces. But right now we have to 

get the jobs into rural Saskatchewan – something the members 

opposite don’t really understand, something they don’t really 

care much about. But it is important out there that farm wives 

have some off-farm income, but they don’t really need day-care 

centres if they don’t have jobs. That is what we have to look at. 

 

Secondly, in rural Saskatchewan there is more of a caring and 

sharing. There is more family day care then there is government 

day care. Where the requests come in, we have been looking 

seriously at priorities in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

But right now, as I see it, the greatest need, and what we should 

be looking at, would be the city of Saskatoon that has fewer 

spaces than the city of Regina and has a population slightly 

higher than Regina. And somehow we inherited it from the 

NDP was a system where most of the day care spaces were in 

Regina, approximately 1,800 in Regina, approximately 1,300 in 

Saskatoon; there’s still a disparity there. So I would think that 

on the basis of per capita, that Saskatoon is an area that we 

should seriously look at, plus those rural areas where day care is 

needed. 

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2404 

 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Before 

moving to another section of the operation of the department, 

just one final comment in your observations about day care, Mr. 

Minister. If you would take the time to listen, the need for day 

care does exist right today in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that you give some careful 

thought into how you’re going to implement these 225 new 

day-care spaces that you announced in the budget. As you’ve 

said, we’ve got the plan for 225 new spaces in the province; 

you’ve just finished saying that the need is greater than that – 

you just finished telling me that – and you’ve also told us this 

afternoon that they will be allocated some place, some time. 

 

I remind you, Mr. Minister, that we’re half-way through the 

budget year and you’ve put none of those spaces in place. And 

to steal a phrase from your cryptic way of capturing a message, 

Mr. Minister, to use one of your phrases. I am concerned that 

we’ve got 225 day care spaces for ghosts, and I hope that that’s 

not the plan that you’ve got in mind for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you will know, as well as I, that there are 

literally hundreds of non-government organizations in the 

province of Saskatchewan delivering very, very important 

social services in communities across all this province, 

hundreds of non-government organizations which are operated 

through the efforts of literally thousands of volunteers and with 

a number of paid staff offering those services, many of which, 

over a period of time, have moved from direct delivery from 

your department into community delivery. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, that is a concept of the delivery of social 

services that I strongly support. And I have some fears that you 

may, as a matter of fact, be placing a lower priority on the 

delivery of social services in communities across this province. 

 

And I would begin, Mr. Minister, by asking you: who is 

administering the non-government organization services branch 

in the department today? And would you also please advise me 

how long they have been in those positions, and if there are any 

vacant positions as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the individual in 

charge, John Labatt, has been promoted to director of the 

Regina region, and there’s been a new placement now. The 

individual may be pleased to hear this on television, if the 

individual is listening to television, because we have made an 

offer to a Gloria Tillus to take that position. 

 

I don’t believe we’ve had her acceptance, but I would hope that 

she would accept that position. She has spent 10 to 12 years 

with this government, in Parks, in student aid, in Social 

Services non-government organization branch, and has been 

promoted in this area. This promotion is quite consistent with 

the government’s concept of having more women in 

management. 

 

(1645) 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, am I to assume then with your 

answer that you’re telling me there are no vacant positions in 

the NGO (Non-Governmental Organizations) services branch? 

Is that the implication of what I’m to understand? 

 

I asked the question before, Mr. Minister. Would you mind 

responding to it, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — There’s one other vacancy for an officer 

in that division. The incumbent has gone to law school, and 

we’ll be replacing her. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well I’m pleased to see that the NGO services 

branch will be staffed and properly administered. And I hope 

the fact that we’ve had these vacancies is not indicative of a 

reduced priority in NGO services in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, there would have been a number of NGOs across 

Saskatchewan who would have taken some interest in an 

announcement made just the other day by the Minister for 

Consumer Affairs into a review in the conduct of bingos and 

lotteries and raffles and the like. Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, it 

has become a common phenomenon in Saskatchewan, in the 

last short period of time, that fund-raising for the operation of 

their services is being done through the conduct of bingos and 

lotteries and the like. 

 

There was a time, Mr. Minister, in which NGOs were able to 

provide services to the people in their communities through 

provincial government funding. And I simply ask you, Mr. 

Minister, whether you agree that it makes sense for the 

volunteers, the thousands of volunteers associated with NGOs 

in Saskatchewan, to be dedicating their time – their time that 

they intended to be used to improve the lot of life for their 

fellow men and women in their communities – to be dedicating 

a significant amount of that time to carrying out bingos and 

raffles to fund-raise in order to carry out and to continue their 

operations at the same levels that they’ve conducted them in the 

past – and, I would add, Mr. Minister, at a time in which in 

many cases for those NGOs, the demand on their services were 

less. 

 

We now have a picture where the demands on many NGOs 

have gone up, and the funding has gone down, and the demand 

for bingo time from volunteers has increased in order to 

substantiate the reductions in income from the province and the 

Department of Social Services. And I would wonder, Mr. 

Minister, whether you disagree with my sentiments that 

volunteers and NGOs should not be spending a large amount of 

their time conducting bingos to fund-raise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m not 

sure which specific NGOs – and there are over a hundred, 

maybe over two hundred when you add them all up – the 

member from Moose Jaw North is referring to. You have to 

draw the line and try to consider that there is a difference 

between service organizations and government contractors. 

 

Some NGOs are totally government contractors where we have 

contracted out services provided by the  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2405 

 

 

government to be supplied by a non-governmental organization. 

 

Other non-governmental organizations are service organizations 

who come to the government for assistance in the provision of 

services. But you have to draw the line somewhere between 

what is a service organization and what is a government 

contractor. And then you get into the question of what’s profit 

and what isn’t profit. And if three or four people on my block 

organize a non-profit corporation and then contract to the 

government and pay themselves wages, and all of the wages are 

equal to the income coming in so that there is no profit but they 

are receiving wages, is that still a non-profit corporation? 

 

What is profit? would have to be defined at some stage. Are you 

talking about dividends; are you talking about profit; are you 

talking about wages to the proprietor? So this is a very fuzzy 

area. The area of what is a NGO and what is a non-profit 

corporation gets very, very fuzzy. And I could run some very 

profitable non-profit corporations, knowing what I know about 

law and how government operates. So we really are in a 

discussion about profit, whether it is good or bad. It’s a question 

of definition: what is profit? 

 

In this case it’s a question of definition: is this a service 

organization we’re referring to, or is this a government 

contractor we’re referring to? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you will know that the vast 

majority of NGOs in Saskatchewan are non-profit corporations. 

And for your information, to put it in simple terms, Mr. 

Minister, a non-profit corporation is one that operates with a 

balanced budget. And I understand that that’s a concept that’s 

foreign to you and the members opposite in this Government of 

Saskatchewan. I can fully understand why you may have a 

difficult time grappling with that concept, Mr. Minister. 

 

Given the fact that you did not respond to my question, I can 

only assume that NGOs in this province can look forward to 

continued bingos and raffles in order to substantiate their 

money that they have to operate to provide social services to 

their fellow men, women, and children in the communities in 

which they operate around the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you and your colleagues decided to delay 

your bad news budget until the summer, it created some 

considerable problems for many agencies funded by your 

department and, in some cases, groups had to go to their credit 

union or bank to take out a line of credit in order to operate, 

because their funding wasn’t forthcoming. I ask you, Mr. 

Minister, if you’ve made any effort to cover the costs associated 

with these expenses for NGOs funded by your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we haven’t received any 

information of substantial costs. The costs of interest would be 

minimal because this government has operated on special 

warrants and then on interim supply, so the cheques were going 

out every month after the budget year had expired, so there was 

not any significant delay there. And I recall sending letters out 

to organizations saying that the cheques would be out soon. 

With respect to . . . and this discussion about non-profit 

corporations, the member . . . you know, I question the member 

from Moose Jaw North. Was he ever employed by a non-profit 

corporation? And if so, then he would understand what a 

non-profit corporation is and how they pay wages, and are those 

wages profits, or are they wages, or are they dividends? And 

that’s really, you know, what should be considered here is, 

when does a non-profit corporation become a profit 

corporation? How long does it continue in that status? So those 

are the kind of considerations we have to make. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I asked you a very specific 

question. I would appreciate an answer to the question. The 

question was: for those non-government organizations funded 

by your department who had to take out lines of credit in order 

to continue operating while your government withheld funds, 

have you done anything to compensate them for the costs in 

borrowing money in order to operate? because your government 

delayed the bringing of the budget until June 17, a record late 

time by over two months in the history of this province. You 

made that decision, and they have had to pay the price by 

borrowing money to operate. Have you made arrangements to 

compensate them for the cost of borrowing in order to operate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the member opposite should know 

that . . . and I believe the member opposite does not deny that 

he was an employee of an NGO or a non-profit corporation, so 

he should understand that my officials advise that initially we 

tried to make the payments on a one-twelfth basis. But once the 

budget year was in full process, we followed the normal process 

then and started paying quarterly. So if you receive a quarterly 

payment, that interest received on that part that you haven’t 

expended yet until the quarter comes along is also interest 

credited to the non-governmental organization. We do not take 

their interest earned or their interest paid into account. We 

believe that those sums should balance off. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I do not deny . . . There’s 

nothing to deny. I’ve been associated with non-government 

organizations, non-profit corporations, and non-profit 

corporations that operated with balanced budgets. As I said 

before, that’s a phenomenon that is strange to you, I understand. 

 

It will not come as a note of security to non-profit corporations 

funded by your department that you refuse to answer the 

question. 

 

Mr. Minister, I accept your observation that the majority of 

non-government organizations funded by your department did 

not experience outright cuts from your government this year, in 

the budget year. However, the other side of the coin is that very, 

very few got any increases. And you will understand as well as 

I, that in times of inflation to be held to zero per cent increase 

is, in practical terms, is in effect a reduction equivalent to 

inflation. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, whether you expect, or . . . Do you 

have any suggestions for those non-profit  

  



 

September 9, 1987 

 

2406 

 

 

operations which are required to continue to provide the same 

level of service, in many cases an increased level of service at, 

as a matter of fact, a reduced level of funding, because zero per 

cent increase in pure terms means a reduction in their money 

available equivalent to inflation? 

 

So as a matter of fact, the large majority of NGOs in 

Saskatchewan, virtually all have suffered, in practical terms, a 4 

per cent reduction. And I wonder if you find that acceptable, 

Mr. Minister, and whether you expect them to continue 

operating with the same level of service to the people they 

serve. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We would certainly like to increase 

payments made by the government, but that money would have 

to be found somewhere. It was necessary to increase the Health 

budget by $36 million, and there has to be some balancing. 

Inflation is at a low that has not been seen in 20 years, and is 

not a major factor in today’s economy. 

 

Certainly it is not easy for them, as it is for anyone else, to 

operate with rising costs. It’s not easy to operate with respect to 

trying to be more efficient, but you have to look at 

Saskatchewan as a whole, and you have to look at the 

agricultural economy. Farmers in my constituency are operating 

at 30 or 40 per cent reduction. They no longer pay taxes; they 

no longer pay their interest; they no longer pay their land taxes. 

 

We are trying to deal with those type of situations, and that 

means that in a province like Saskatchewan with one million 

people – we all live here together, and I believe that one time 

the motto of your party was: Sharing Together. And I think we 

have to share the economic situation, and therefore I 

compliment the NGOs for doing what they’ve doing, operating 

efficiently in difficult financial times – but they’re not isolated. 

You and I haven’t had a raise either, and we’re operating. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 

 

 


