













































August 18, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 18, 1987 

  

 

1875 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I give notice that on Tuesday next, that I'll be 

moving the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 

Saskatchewan for its continued neglect and betrayal of the 

people of northern Saskatchewan, and urges that the 

government implements immediately positive and effective 

measures regarding training and job opportunities for 

northern people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Grants to Joytec Ltd. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

minister responsible for Science and Technology. I'm wondering 

whether the minister can confirm that the general manager of 

Joytec Ltd. of Saskatoon, one Settimo Carl Zanon is also the 

minister's PC Constituency Association president. And since the 

minister's department has provided Joytec with a number of 

government grants, I'm wondering if the minister does not see this 

as a serious conflict of interest. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for his question. And I would simply point out that Joytec has not 

received any grants from the Government of Saskatchewan during 

my tenure as minister. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I'm wondering, 

Mr. Minister, even if Joytec has not yet received grants from the 

Department of Science and Technology, grants have been given, 

totalling $165,000 or more in recent history; more have been 

given. We don't know what they are presently; more will 

presumably be given in the future. And so you as Minister of 

Science and Technology, will be in a position . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I'm afraid that the hon. member is 

getting a little bit lengthy in his preamble, and I would ask him to 

get to his question. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm wondering, Mr. 

Minister, whether you do not see your position as giving 

government grants, likely in the future, as a conflict of interest 

when your constituency president is general manager of this 

Joytec firm. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I would simply answer 

the hon. member's question by indicating that Joytec is a very 

viable company, and whether or not the executive director of 

Joytec is the president of the Mayfair constituency or not is 

immaterial. 

As I've already indicated, Joytec has not received a grant from the 

Department of Science and Technology since September of 1986. 

Whether or not they will be submitting an application for grants in 

the future, I am not aware of that at this point. 

 

And I would simply point out as well, as I had pointed out to you 

in the past, that Joytec is very much involved with their golf 

simulator at this time. They have recently made agreements, as I 

understand it, with a company in Japan and another company 

called Computech to distribute these machines. And some time 

later this fall they will be into production in Saskatoon where they 

will be producing these machines for western Canada and the 

United States. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier this 

time. Mr. Premier, do you consider it a conflict of interest that the 

Minister of Science and Technology's PC constituency president is 

also general manager of a company to which the minister's 

department has supplied grants and may likely in the future supply 

grants? Do you not see this as a conflict of interest? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I'll say to the hon. member 

that our membership sales in the PC Party of Saskatchewan are 

increasing very rapidly. We have people all across the province of 

Saskatchewan that are on the membership list and we find that 

particularly true . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member would care 

to look at the record this morning, I believe on the Roy Norris 

show they were asked how they would vote in Saskatoon: 49 per 

cent said they would vote PC; 41 per cent NDP, and there wasn't a 

single Liberal. 

 

Now we're out selling memberships all across the province of 

Saskatchewan, particularly in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and I want 

to make the point to the hon. member that when we have 

companies that are expanding . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, order, order. I think 

it's a good time to go to another question. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — It's obvious that Joytec is very involved with the 

PC Party and not just with Mr. Zanon alone. I'm wondering, Mr. 

Premier, given last December's Speech from the Throne that 

promised new conflict of interest rules, and the Culliton report 

which was tabled a few days after the Speech from the Throne that 

recommended a number of amendments to existing regulations, 

you failed to implement any of those recommendations to date. 

 

My question is: will you undertake to introduce your response to 

the Culliton report as soon as possible? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the hon.  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1876 

 

member knows that in the democratic process, which is 

competitive, that you don't need conflict of interest guide-lines to 

sell memberships in political parties. Now we happen to have a 

large number of people in Saskatoon who belong to the PC Party 

of Saskatchewan. And as we find out as you go right across the 

piece, whether it's small business, farmers, labour, people involved 

in community organizations, municipal government, they have 

memberships in the PC Party of Saskatchewan. Now that is not a 

conflict of interest. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, we're finding more and more people want to 

be associated with the government, so in fact our membership 

sales are up. And I suspect we'll have presidents from all kinds of 

walks of life who belong to the PC Party of Saskatchewan and in 

fact were very proud of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to direct a 

question to the Premier in order to clarify the answers he has 

given. As the minister will know, under The Department of 

Science and Technology Act it is provided that: 

 

. . . the minister may, for any purpose relating to any matter 

under his administration . . . make grants, on any terms or 

conditions that he may prescribe . . . 

 

Now acting on that, the minister of Science and Technology, as he 

then was, made a grant to a company of which the general 

manager is the president of one of your constituencies. Now this is 

not one of your 20,000 or however many members — 40 or 60 or 

however many you claim. 

 

I'm asking now: do you see any conflict of interest in your minister 

making a totally discretionary grant to a company of which the 

general manager is the president of one of your constituencies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I'll say at the outset that you 

can sell political memberships to political parties to anybody in the 

province at any time, and the minister knows that. In fact, we are 

even getting memberships to new people who belong to new 

companies, and they may have . . . the entire company might have 

a PC membership — that is, employees, management, all the rest 

of it. 

 

And the ministers can stand up and say, well they belong to the PC 

party, they're on the executive of the PC party; therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, we wouldn't be able to have any sort economic 

association with them. What if we sold 85 per cent of the 

population a membership? Does that mean that we couldn't deal 

with 85 per cent of the population? Of course not, Mr. Speaker. In 

a democracy you're allowed to sell PC memberships. They freely 

can join the executive. They can be on executive committees; they 

can be involved in the provincial committee and the national 

committee. So, Mr. Speaker, it's not a restrictive measure to 

belong to a political party in the province of  

Saskatchewan. It might have been under the NDP . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A short 

supplementary. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Could I ask the 

co-operation of the members, please, in toning down the noise 

level and allowing the question period to go ahead in an orderly 

fashion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Short, supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I note 

from the public records that Joytec Ltd. got a grant of $120,000 in 

the calendar year ended March 1986. Did that, Mr. Premier, assist 

you in selling a membership to Mr. Zanon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 

our policies across the province of Saskatchewan are assisting us 

in selling memberships all over the place, and obviously this is a 

competitive process. So day after day after day we find that youth 

membership is up, business, rural, and urban. So, Mr. Speaker, of 

course if you have the right kinds of policies, you sell more 

memberships, and that's why you stay on this side of the House 

and don't go to that side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Uninsured Depositors with Failed Trust Companies 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier. The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company has made it 

clear that they feel no obligation to Principal Trust's uninsured 

depositors. I want to know how many Saskatchewan people had 

money on deposit in Principal Trust? How many had deposits 

above the $60,000 limit? And remembering Pioneer Trust, what 

action is your government taking to help these uninsured 

depositors get their money back? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will get the exact detail. I 

understand the bulk of the people that would have deposits in 

Principal Trust is covered by CDIC (Canadian Deposit Insurance 

Corporation) as I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. The 

question . . . please sit down. Question period seems to be just a 

little bit more lively today than some other days, so I'd just like to 

ask the co-operation of all members, on both sides of the House, to 

please tone down their interruptions to allow members to ask 

questions and other members to answer them. I'd like your 

co-operation, please — also that includes the member from Indian 

Head. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1877 

 

hon. member from Saskatoon Centre's question in which I took to 

be this: that of the people of Saskatchewan that would have 

deposits in Principal Trust, taken over now by Metropolitan Life, 

covered by CDIC, as I understand the bulk of the Saskatchewan 

deposit holders would in fact have an amount on deposit that 

would fall under the CDIC limits, but for perhaps two or three. 

Now I will stand to get the exact number when that number is 

forwarded to us from Alberta and bring that information forward 

to the hon. member. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I asked that question in the House a 

week ago. I would like to get the answer. I would like this 

question to the Premier as well, a new question. I'm reminding 

him that the forgotten people in this story are now the 3,000 

Saskatchewan residents who had purchased investment certificates 

through First Investors Corporation and Associated Investors 

before those companies collapsed in June. British Columbia and 

Alberta are helping people in those provinces with their legal fees 

so that all the investors may benefit from civil action. Nova Scotia 

is talking about setting up a special compensation fund. What is 

your government, which is clearly negligent in the regulation of 

these companies, going to do to help these 3,000 Saskatchewan 

people, many of whom have lost their life savings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 

member from Saskatoon Centre's question, we have, as indicated 

by the Minister of Finance I believe past Friday, appointed counsel 

in Edmonton to appear before the particular court hearing. That 

particular counsel appeared before the hearing and, as we 

understand, was successful perhaps in a small way in preserving 

the assets of the mutual funds in Saskatchewan, so that we would 

ensure that that dimension of it protected the mutual fund holders 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now as I indicated earlier in this House to a similar questioning, 

the RCMP in Saskatchewan is investigating, and as I responded to 

the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview . . . no, from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, pardon me, last night, that RCMP 

investigation is still ongoing. I further have been advised through 

media reports and otherwise that other provinces are now 

considering referring the particular matter to RCMPs in their 

particular jurisdiction as well. So we have looked at doing that as 

well. 

 

I think the hon. member has to realize and appreciate that the core 

issue of this particular issue, which is a large and complex issue, 

happens in the province of Alberta. That's where the bulk of the 

transactions were done, particularly the bulk of the transactions 

alleged to have been done at the head office of the various people 

within this various group of companies. And that's where the 

activity has to be taken, and the court has to determine exactly 

what has transpired in this particular case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the 

minister. The minister has told us that he's appointed a lawyer to 

protect the Government of Saskatchewan in the hearing in Alberta. 

What I would like to ask him is: what  

has he done to protect the people of Saskatchewan — the 3,000 

people who have fallen victim to your policies of deregulation and 

who you have now forgotten? Will you help them with their legal 

bills? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, that question was posed, I 

think, by the hon. member, Leader of the Opposition, perhaps a 

week to 10 days ago, at which time we indicated as our 

understanding that the various people had obtained a lawyer and 

were proceeding through the channels of the court process. He 

indicated . . . I guess it was the hon. member from Saskatoon 

Centre had posed the question: would we pick up and would the 

government pay all the legal costs of these people? At that point in 

time I indicated that the position of the government was that we 

would not pick up the legal fees for those people, and the position 

of the government has not changed from that answer. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to direct a question to the same minister. 

Mr. Minister, you're aware in the collapse of Pioneer Trust that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers were called upon because Pioneer Trust 

was, in fact, registered here in Saskatchewan, extra territorially in 

other provinces; that at the Pioneer Trust collapse that the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan helped to cover the costs of the losses 

in other provinces. 

 

My question to you: are you seeking reciprocal action from 

Alberta government, in turn, to cover the losses of Saskatchewan 

investors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We certainly would have some attraction 

to that argument. It appears that the Government of Alberta . . . It 

appears that any suggestion of that has been outright rejected by 

the Government of Alberta. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplement. I'd like to ask the minister, since he's 

surprised at the comment and thinks he could welcome it, could 

you indicate to us who in the government, and whether you have 

on behalf of the government, indeed, contacted the Alberta 

government and whether you can file a reply in respect to your 

request? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the hon. 

member that the Minister of Finance is a lead minister on this 

particular issue. He is unfortunately away this week and for that I 

would have to find out as to the nature of the particular 

investigation and the particular representations he has made, and I 

will then bring that back to him. But the Minister of Finance has 

been handling this file for about the last week to 10 days. 

 

Alameda and Rafferty Dams 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question 

today is to the Minister of the Environment and it concerns the 

$136 million political boondoggle known  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1878 

 

as Alameda and Rafferty, the projects to be carried out in the 

constituencies of the Premier and the Deputy Premier. 

 

Mr. Minister, your department had many, many months to study 

the submission put forward by the Souris Basin Development 

Authority to look at the environmental impact statement. Yet 

when you released a statement on August 11 of this year, you have 

given the public less than 30 days to wade through 18 volumes — 

nearly 2,000 pages of technical documentation. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister, is this: what's the hurry? What's the 

hurry? Won't you be reasonable and allow the public at least 60 

days — at least 60 days — to look at the environmental impact 

statement before allowing local people to make briefs to the 

hearings, and allow environmental groups in the province to be 

able to intervene in the hearings, having had a sufficient time to 

review the data? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the environmental impact study 

was released on the 11th. The official 30-day period for public 

appeals started on the 17th of August. So we put it out almost a 

week ahead of that to give people a chance to study. Then they 

have a 30-day public review period which is standardized by the 

legislation that we operate under. We don't have a lot of choice in 

that. That 30 days is set out by statute. 

 

Beyond that, we have appointed a board of inquiry. And I believe 

that board of inquiry is to be given free rein to go out and hold as 

many hearings in as many places as they see necessary. At the end 

of that time, they will review what they have heard through the 

hearing and give a report back to the Department of Environment. 

 

Overall, it will likely be very close to 60 days that they will have 

to . . . first the 30-day public period and then, beyond that, the 

hearings that are being held around the province. I believe the time 

is ample. It's as good as we have seen in any environmental impact 

study in the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, again supplementary to the same 

minister. Mr. Minister, what you said in fact is a 

misrepresentation. The public hearings to which you alluded begin 

September 9. That's less than 30 days. People have less than 30 

days. Written submissions to the Department of Environment, the 

deadline is September 16 — September 16, that's the deadline. 

And I'm wondering, what's the rush? Is it because you're trying to 

push this political project through and help the Premier and help 

the Deputy Premier pour $136 million into their own 

constituency? Is that why you're rushing these hearings? And 

won't you be reasonable and allow at least 60 days . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the man likes to use flowery 

phrases, and some day I'm going to have to get  

him to tell me what the words boondoggle mean because I'm sure 

that he doesn't understand. 

 

Beyond that, we have given a 30-day public review period and 

that's normal. It started on August 17, and it ends the 16th day of 

September. The appeal board that was put in place call the appeal 

hearings on the dates that suit them and in the places that suit 

them. And I'm not interfering with that group. They were 

appointed. They have free rein to go out and hold the public 

hearings in their own time frame. How long those public hearings 

will be ongoing, I don't know. We left them complete free rein. 

 

So don't tell me that we're rushing it. It has all the time that's 

necessary for the public to be involved and to make their views 

known to that committee. Once they're finished they'll report back 

to the department. I believe ample time is being allowed. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

yesterday you were on the Roy Norris open-line show, open-line 

show in Saskatoon, and you said that the Shand project will go 

ahead, that it will go ahead, it didn't matter what happened. The 

credibility of yourself and the perceived . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I know the 

hon. member has a great deal to say and sometimes his preambles 

tend to get a little lengthy. He has had a little preamble. I would 

like to ask him to get to the question. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, will you, in order to maintain the 

credibility of your department and to maintain the already 

damaged credibility of the committee that you have struck to 

oversee the public hearings, will you agree to a request to ask the 

committee to postpone the start of its hearings from September 9 

to October 9 — a reasonable request of a 30-day delay? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that the committee has a job to do. 

They're all busy people. They have other jobs as well as the 

hearings that they're conducting. They've been given free rein to 

go and hold public hearings dealing with this issue — certainly 

within the time frame that has been allowed. People can react. 

They've had at least a year now to make decisions of the areas they 

want to respond to in these public hearings. They've known since 

way last fall that public hearings would be held. There's no need of 

an extension of that time frame. The committee can hold their 

hearings in the places that they choose, on the dates they choose, 

and I believe that's the free rein that the public would expect me to 

give them. 

 

Collection Agents for Sask Power 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The 

minister no doubt, Mr. Speaker, has received a number of 

complaints about his decision to end SPC's long-standing policy of 

allowing SPC customers to pay their monthly bills at drug stores 

and  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1879 

 

small businesses and post offices across the province. This 

arrangement was convenient for SPC customers, and particularly 

for senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, particularly for senior citizens. 

And it provided a number of small businesses with income — 

extra income because they received commissions. 

 

I would like to know from the minister, Mr. Speaker, whether he is 

considering reversing this ill-advised decision of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation and whether he will continue 

SPC's collection agent system as it now stands? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I remember last week, one 

day, I was asked this question, and they're not likely going to want 

to hear this. But I was asked the question relative to Saskatchewan 

Power overpaying a bill at the Moose Jaw Times-Herald and that 

was the compelling issue of the day. 

 

At that time I thought that this question was far more urgent and 

compelling, and I asked her if she would please ask it, and then I 

went on and gave her the answer at that time. And I'll give the 

answer again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been a change in policy as it relates to the 

payment of bills in Sask Power. And what the policy change is, 

essentially, is that we would no longer have commissioned 

collectors, if you like, in Saskatchewan. And this would generate a 

savings of somewhere upwards of . . . directly upwards of 

$200,000 a year for Sask Power. 

 

Now indirectly there will be some more benefits to the power 

corporation because of the money management technologies that 

are available through electronic deposits and debits and so on, by 

going through financial institutions. In those areas where there is 

no credit union or bank whatever, we will continue to have a 

relationship with some agency in that particular community. 

 

The reason, Mr. Speaker, that we must do these kinds of things is 

because of the serious debt load that is being carried by Sask 

Power, approaching $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. We are still paying, 

Mr. Speaker, for power lines that were built in the ’50s, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I'd like to ask order once more, 

please. We can't have the business of the House continue if we're 

going to have chaos and disorder by constant interruptions. 

 

Bill No. 32 — An Act Respecting the Emission of Air 

Contaminants 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 

respecting the Emission of Air Contaminants. 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 17 — Development of Local Manufacturing 

Programs 

 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — It is an honour, Mr. Speaker, to rise today to 

move the following motion: 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan continue to promote the 

development of local manufacturing of goods and services, 

thereby expanding the tax base and fostering economic benefits 

to the communities affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is not a member of this Assembly, and hardly a 

person in the province, who's not aware of the dramatic changes 

that have occurred in the economy of our province. 

 

We have watched the price for grain literally crumble. 

And even though we have been able to consistently increase our 

share of the world's market, the revenues from those increased 

shares has continued to shrink by alarming proportions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen the effects of the bust in the price of 

potash so that we are left with the enormous burden of paying off 

the debts incurred to expropriate the mines, with no revenues to 

support that debt. 

 

We have watched with growing concern as the income from our 

uranium mines has declined. And now we face the possibility of 

being dealt de facto what the NDP would like to do by policy — 

the complete shut-down of the uranium industry. 

 

Oil prices have crashed from their historic highs, and only 

recovered slightly recently. 

 

Shocks to our pulp industry have also had their effects. 

 

In effect, Mr. Speaker, we have seen across the board that the 

dependence upon our natural resources, including agriculture, is 

no longer a viable economic strategy. 

 

Unfortunately, for years and years nothing was done to diversify 

our economy. Instead, the resources of this province were diverted 

into buying up the resource businesses that already existed. As a 

result, hundreds of millions and literally billions of taxpayers' 

dollars were wasted. 

 

That can no longer be the principle upon which we try to build our 

economy. Instead, we must diversify, must develop the local 

manufacture of the products we need ourselves, and the products 

we can sell to the world. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, has set about doing that. And my 

motion simply calls upon the government to continue on that 

course for the sake of our future and of  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1880 

 

our children's future. There are dozens of examples of the kind of 

work that has gone on, and the kinds of successes that have been 

realized by our government. The record of economic development 

under this PC administration is, I submit, the best record of any 

government in the province's history. And I suggest that the reason 

that this is true is because the government understands the 

complex interplay between the many areas of government policy 

and the impact of all those various policies ultimately have upon 

economic development and diversification. 

 

Let me just give you a few examples. The government's policy on 

energy resources could take one of a number of approaches. The 

approach suggested by members opposite is that the government 

should extract every last dollar out of the oil producers that is 

possible. When it is pointed out that such a policy would 

inevitably lead to the closure of many of those companies, the 

opposition says: that's okay, we'll make it up through higher 

royalties and taxes on the ones that survive. 

 

The logic in that argument is extremely questionable. But let's take 

it for the sake of argument. Let's pretend for the moment that this 

fantasy is true. We can tax oil businesses out of existence and still 

somehow manage to have higher revenues from the survivors. 

Because even if it were true, it would be a fool's policy. Under that 

fool's policy you would never be able to read this headline, 

"Calgary oil firm opens two offices in Saskatchewan." That's right. 

Northern Canadian Oils opened a field office in Maple Creek and 

a full branch in Regina. That, Mr. Speaker, brings jobs, incomes, 

and government revenues into this province, and it would not have 

happened under the NDP. 

 

How about the policy of how to treat the potash companies? After 

all, we have to build on what we have, and like oil, potash is one 

of our basic resources. Can you imagine the potash institute of 

Canada moving its headquarters from Toronto to Saskatoon under 

the NDP? Can you imagine Canpotex bringing its head office to 

our province under a government that treated them like pariahs? 

 

The right mix of policies is absolutely essential. A government 

must have thoughtful, considerate policy and cannot be driven by 

personality considerations and ideological considerations. 

 

Look at the attitude for the member of The Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker. Mow I'm not even talking about the fact that he goes to 

his local business community and threatens them with some 

unspecified retribution if they don't treat him like the way he 

thinks he should be treated. That obviously is a policy driven by 

personality. 

 

But that is not the example I am talking about. I am referring to his 

position on the Gainers bacon plant. Let me read a quote from the 

member for The Battlefords own local newspaper, the Battleford 

Telegraph. It's the editorial for December 19, 1986, and it's titled 

"Wins and losses." The bottom line the editorial states is that: 

 

The city is investing 2.1 million in Gainers, Vanguard and 

another deal and over five years it expects to reap $175 

million in return. (Not a bad  

deal.) There are those, however, who refuse to believe the 

political climate has changed. Our new MLA has suggested 

these new jobs were meant to buy The Battlefords. Does that 

mean that an MLA will only get re-elected if he does nothing 

to create new jobs because voters will feel they've been 

bought if he does. Does Mr. Anguish plan, then, to be 

re-elected by doing nothing? 

 

That's the end of the quote, Mr. Speaker. That's the end of the 

quote, Mr. Speaker: "Does Mr. Anguish intend to be re-elected by 

doing nothing?" 

 

Well we already know that he's not exactly going to do nothing. 

But instead of doing anything constructive to get jobs for the 

people of his riding, he's going to threaten them to watch out. 

That's not the kind of tactic that sits well with the people of 

Canora, Mr. Speaker, and I can't believe it sits well with the 

people in The Battlefords. 

 

Gainers is a large example, Mr. Speaker, and it is a good example, 

as is Vanguard. And I think the past MLA for The Battlefords, for 

that riding, should get a little credit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — But I also want to point out how important 

the not so large companies are. As you well know, 80 per cent of 

all jobs are created by small businesses — family businesses, Mr. 

Speaker. Businesses that are exemplified by Kiljay industries in 

the village of Buchanan, in my constituency. Kiljay manufactures 

shingles and door casings, and it provides employment and tax 

dollars. And I can tell you that the people of Buchanan are proud 

of that company, and are proud that their community can maintain 

the base for such a company. 

 

There is something else happening in many of our towns, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government can really be pleased about. As 

many people know, there is a great deal of concern in the colony 

of Hong Kong that in a few short years the control of Hong Kong 

will be transferred to the communist Chinese. As a result, many 

people in Hong Kong are looking for somewhere to start up their 

businesses and get their families re-established. Now I know some 

people speak disparagingly about these people. They tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that these Hong Kong immigrants, they're 

all the rich people taking their money out of the colony, as if they 

were robber barons or something. 

 

But let me tell you what is happening in Canora, Mr. Speaker. We 

have three fine families — not robber barons — three fine 

families. And one of them is starting up a restaurant, Mr. Speaker; 

another is starting up a clothing store; and a third one is starting up 

a stationary store. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Canora 

welcome these new Canadians with open arms. As the MLA for 

Canora, I can tell you that I am grateful that they selected our 

community to do business. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that 

they have provided jobs for local people. They have become 

involved in our community in service clubs. Their children go to 

our schools. They are becoming fine citizens of Canora, of 

Saskatchewan, and of Canada. That is the kind of local 

development that we need, that this  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1881 

 

government is committed to bringing about, and which would be 

impossible under the NDP. 

 

Before speaking today I was looking through a number of 

clippings, and I was just amazed to see all the new things people 

are doing and trying in this province. It is true, Mr. Speaker, that 

not everyone is successful, but people are really trying all kinds of 

things and lots of them are, in fact, succeeding. Like the gentleman 

in Strasbourg who invented a new food spread while working for a 

hotel and is now marketing that product himself; like the 

agricultural belt manufacturer that opened recently in Regina; like 

the $1 million, year-round resort lodge being constructed at Duck 

Mountain Provincial Park; like the 100-and-some odd, new 

advanced technology businesses marketing everything from 

satellites to educational computer programs. The list is truly an 

impressive one — from upgraders to salt storage buildings. 

 

But these successes, Mr. Speaker, have not come about by magic. 

In exceedingly difficult times we have had a Premier and a cabinet 

committed to diversification and development. And just so you 

can see how well interlocked all these things are, I will provide 

you with one more example. 

 

The minister for Sask Power, as did all the ministers, took the Buy 

Saskatchewan policy and said, now how can Sask Power be even 

a greater part of diversifying this province? And at last count I saw 

there were three separate items that Sask Power previously had 

purchased out of province that, because of this commitment, are 

now being produced and purchased in Saskatchewan. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that the commitment to developing 

local manufacturing cuts right across the government. And I ask 

all members to join me in this motion, and I urge the continuance 

of these sound policies. 

 

I move this motion, seconded by the hon. member from Rosthern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and indeed 

it gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to rise in this House 

once more and to support the motion made by my friend and 

colleague from Canora in support of the development of local 

manufacturing of goods and services in this great province of ours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are really doing is that we are talking about 

diversification. We're talking about diversification as an 

alternative to the direction which this province is going. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is committed — is 

committed — to diversifying the economy of this province. 

 

Now what do we mean by diversification? I would suggest to you, 

Mr. Speaker, that diversification means fostering an economic 

development through increased efforts to expand our 

manufacturing and our processing industries, particularly, Mr. 

Speaker, our food processing industries. We must create the 

climate in this province in  

order to do that. 

 

It means, Mr. Speaker, building on our strengths — building on 

our strengths in agriculture and our natural resources, and building 

upon the ingenuity and the aggressive entrepreneurial spirit that is 

out there in the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1445) 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will always be primarily an 

agricultural province. And we know that we have rich deposits of 

resources, such as oil, potash, uranium, and so on, that will 

literally last us for thousands of years. But we harvest our crops, 

and we haul our resources out of the ground, and then we trade 

them to the rest of the world — mostly, mostly as raw products. 

And I'll address that a little bit later on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I first of all want to recognize the fact that we are a trading 

province; in fact we are a trading nation. Exports account for more 

than 40 per cent — 40 per cent — of our annual gross domestic 

product, and trade-related industries employ about 25 per cent of 

our work-force. 

 

If the world market was stable, Saskatchewan would be in an 

enviable position, as we were up to a few years ago. But we all 

know that the trade wars between the United States, Japan, and the 

EEC (European Economic Community) have driven commodity 

prices to an all-time low. The international market-place has been 

distorted. It is now an insane, an insane market-place of subsidies, 

of subsidizing products that not too many people want — an 

over-supply of many of our products. 

 

And Saskatchewan's dependence on resources and agricultural 

products means that we've been hit harder than most of the other 

nations. We have been hit harder than most of the other traders in 

the world, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately it does not appear that 

a solution to this problem is going to be found in the near future. 

Oh, there are signs. There seems to be a light at the end of the 

tunnel, but the tunnel is so far, far, and so long — it seems so far 

away. 

 

When we hear President Reagan of the United States saying that 

something must be done, that there must be a change, that is the 

light at the end of the tunnel. But to further complicate matters, 

Mr. Speaker, we at the same time hear what the Congress in the 

United States is saying. And like a forecaster, we can see that it 

looks as if there are going to be a lot of clouds in the horizon for 

almost as far as we can see. So we are looking at some more 

problems along that line. 

 

But another perhaps bright spot — I don't know how bright it is, 

but we did have, in our own city here of Regina, the President of 

France, not too long ago. And to me that seemed as if it added a 

little bit of light, just a comment that he made in the Centre of the 

Arts in Regina, when he suggested that he was finally seeing that 

the subsidies that they were pouring into their agriculture was 

beginning to hurt his own country. He publicly recognized the fact 

that it was hurting the province of France as well, or the country of 

France. So perhaps in the  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1882 

 

long term we can see a little bit of light. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that we don't have the 

luxury of looking at this problem in the long term. We've got to 

have some short-term solutions, some short-term remedies to take 

the vacuum or to the take the place of this interim period between 

now and those long-term solutions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that the short-term 

solution for Saskatchewan, then, is to diversify, to diversify our 

economy, to do more processing, to do more manufacturing, and 

to take advantage of the strides that we've already made in the high 

technology sector. Then we'll be able to export, to trade more than 

just raw materials, Mr. Speaker; we will also become known as an 

exporter of finished products. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, I could ask the question: what will 

diversification do for us? Diversification will give us the value 

added industry, economic growth, and job creation, the elements 

we need to ensure a comfortable standard of living for all of the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when we talk about diversification, I cannot help but 

remember an incident last week, when I stood in this House and 

was given the opportunity to talk on a motion, and the point was 

made of the difference between our perception of diversification 

and the perception of the members opposite. 

 

When they had the opportunity to give this province a lead into 

this whole matter of diversification, what did they say? What did 

they say? What did they say back in the 1980s when they had the 

opportunity to do something about avoiding the position that we 

find ourselves in now? 

 

And I refer to an incident back again, Mr. Speaker, of the then 

minister of Agriculture, one notable hon. Gordon MacMurchy, 

and I would like to make a quote of the Financial Post of February 

12, 1980. And I quote the then minister of Agriculture saying: 

 

If Saskatchewan farmers hope to cash in on a growing, 

profitable world grain market, the changeover to straight 

grain is necessary. 

 

That's what he said. Mr. Speaker, that's what the minister of 

Agriculture said, ". . . the changeover to straight grain is 

necessary." Do you know what else he said? He continued on and 

said: 

 

The Saskatchewan economy is diversified enough to take the 

strain of a large crop failure. 

 

"The Saskatchewan economy is diversified enough . . ." Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I still find it very difficult to understand that kind of 

reasoning. I find it difficult to understand that a minister of 

Agriculture would get up in this House, or be quoted as saying 

something like that to the people of Saskatchewan, to the farmers 

of Saskatchewan. It's scary, Mr. Speaker, when you think that this 

is the rationale, this is the kind of thinking that they will be doing. 

I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and to this House, and 

indeed to all of the people of Saskatchewan, that there are many, 

many benefits to be had from diversifying, from going away from 

becoming a hewer of wood and a drawer of water, but rather 

getting in there and doing something with the raw products — 

manufacturing and these kinds of things. 

 

With that train of thought, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to take an 

article that I happened to be reading yesterday while we were 

going through the Justice estimates and the lawyers were doing 

their honourable thing in this House. And during that time I 

happened to pick up an older copy of the Moose Jaw Times. It's 

October 12 from the Moose Jaw Times. And there was a heading 

here that caught my attention as I was thinking about what I was 

going to be saying this afternoon, and it's entitled, "Secondary 

industry deserves priority." I'd like to quote from this article. The 

article states: 

 

Secondary industry can do a lot for a community. Take a 

look at Moose Jaw. Recently Phillips Cable opened a $7 

million plant in the Band City to provide cable to Sask 

Power and SaskTel. 

 

The article goes on to say: 

 

The new factory has done a lot more than create jobs. First, 

Phillips has increased Moose Jaw's tax base. 

 

That's one of the benefits, Mr. Speaker. It has increased Moose 

Jaw's tax base. 

 

Secondly, the plant has been responsible for creating other 

secondary industries. A case in point is Northern Reel, the 

first manufacturer of wooden cable reels in Saskatchewan. 

Northern Reel set up shop to provide Phillips with reels for 

cable. And the two plants offer youths a chance to stay in 

Moose Jaw rather than move elsewhere to find employment. 

Phillips Cable and Northern Reel represent a step in the right 

direction for Moose Jaw. 

 

Western Canada must do its utmost (the article goes on to 

say) to promote secondary industry. For too long the West's 

economy has been based on wheat and oil. 

 

It goes on to conclude: 

 

We must diversify our economy. There's no easy way to 

accomplish the objective. However, progress has been made 

in Moose Jaw. 

 

I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that progress has been made 

in Moose Jaw, but it has been made in many other communities in 

Saskatchewan — a direct result of the policies of this government 

and the policies that we will continue to implement as time goes 

on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 

benefits of these kinds of policies are felt at all levels  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1883 

 

within the community, within all levels of society, from the 

individual, to the community, and to the province as a whole. It 

permeates the fabric of the entire infrastructure. 

 

When we think of the fact that up until now mostly what we have 

been doing is taking our primary resources from the primary 

industries and then selling raw products, that is not the proper 

approach, Mr. Speaker, and we suggest that this government is 

now on a move to create secondary industries, to create more 

manufacturing and so on, because by creating secondary 

industries, Mr. Speaker, you also create the tertiary industries. You 

increase the industries that supply the goods, that supply the 

services. And it's an ongoing thing; it's a mushrooming thing; it's 

something that can feed on itself, that can grow on itself. And it's a 

mushrooming effect that is just going to have tremendous potential 

for this province of ours. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we've supported a number of programs and 

services to assist communities. We've done that, we've done that 

as a government. But by the same token we also believe that 

governments should not be the only prime mover in an activity 

like this. We do not believe that better government . . . or more 

government is better government, that the government should 

become involved in more and more things. We do not believe that 

that is the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Communities must take the initiative; people must take the 

initiative. The movers and the shakers must take hold of these 

things and start moving them on. And we believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that the people are willing, and we believe that the people are 

ready. Because the people know their attributes; they know their 

weaknesses; they know the parameters under which they can 

work, in between which they can work; and they really know that 

they will be affected by the new industries, and they will be 

affected by these new industries in a positive way. 

 

In recent years, Mr. Speaker, our cities and many of our towns 

have established economic development offices or volunteer 

economic development committees, and the results have been 

astounding. And it proves, Mr. Speaker, it proves that initiative, it 

proves that get up and go pays off. That's what it proves. 

 

And to expand a little bit about what my colleague from Canora 

was talking about just a little bit before, and I cannot help but 

mention this because I think it's a prime example of what we have 

been doing and what can be done, and that is that I would like to 

once more bring up the examples that exist in the city of North 

Battleford. 

 

(1500) 

 

North Battleford over the last little while has attracted three major 

new industries — in fact, over the last couple of years — Gainers 

bacon plant, the Vanguard recreational vehicle plant, and the High 

R Door Manufacturing plant. And I would suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that these industries that have been established in the city 

of North Battleford are proof positive, proof positive of what can 

be accomplished when a constituency is represented by an MLA, 

by a member of the Legislative Assembly that is sensitive, that is a 

hard  

worker, that is broad minded, and that is empathetic with the 

community; a member who works in co-operation with the 

community; not a member who is going to go get up and 

browbeat; not a member who is going to get up and threaten; not a 

member who is going to say to the board of trade or the chamber 

of commerce: you do it my way, you play ball with me, or else. 

You cannot, Mr. Speaker, I suggest, make headway with threats 

and intimidation. The people of Saskatchewan do not react 

favourably to something like that. 

 

I would suggest further, Mr. Speaker, that the three industries that 

I just named will mean, to North Battleford, millions of dollars 

worth of investments to the city. The member from Canora 

indicated the amounts. It will mean millions of dollars worth of 

investments in this city and almost 800 new, permanent jobs for 

the local economy and for the local residents. 

 

I'm just going to give you a few more examples, Mr. Speaker, of 

things that we have been able to accomplish along this vein, 

namely, the fair town and the fair community of Wolseley is an 

example. It's an example of a small town that has been successful 

in attracting new industry. Local business people in Wolseley and 

area got together and formed a VCC, a venture capital corporation, 

to raise financing, and now the town is home for western Canada's 

first pharmaceuticals manufacturing plant — a tremendous coup, a 

tremendous accomplishment. And by whom was that 

accomplished? By the residents, by the people of the community 

of Wolseley. And they are to be congratulated for that. 

 

I've got other examples, Mr. Speaker. I'm not going to go through 

all of them, but I would like to indicate to you that there are 

projects that are still in place and are still being brought to fruition 

through the industrial incentive program. We have 580 projects in 

over 100 communities in this great province of ours, and this 

involved over $377 million of private sector investment — $377 

million out of the private community being invested. And this 

created over 4,800 jobs. That is powerful, I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of the new industries that was created was the Wood Masters 

Enterprises Inc. from Clavet, Saskatchewan, who received 

$45,000 in incentives from government, but in so doing had to 

spend over $228,000 in order to create six new jobs. And Clavet, 

of course, is in my own constituency of Rosthern, and I'm very 

proud of them for being able to accomplish that. 

 

We have the Hoffman Lumber, and from my colleagues from 

Kinistino here, who received $60,000 in order to create eight new 

jobs at a total cost of $265,000. There are many others here from 

Canora, another one from Canora, one from Kelvington-Wadena 

that also . . . To show that we're broadminded, Mr. Speaker, one 

from Humboldt received $15,000 at a capital expenditure of 

$61,000 to create new jobs, to diversify, to get into manufacturing, 

and to do more with our raw products than just sell them down 

that road. The value-added aspect, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, very, 

very powerful. 

 

In many cases, Mr. Speaker, it wasn't just the government  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1884 

 

that did this. It wasn't just the government that created this climate. 

It as the people, the people in the communities, the people of 

Wolseley, like I suggested — Canora, Rosthern, Clavet, and all of 

these others. It was the communities that went out themselves and 

set up programs. It was the communities that offered tax breaks or 

other concessions to attract new industries. It was the people's 

decision based on their energies. And it was the people's 

perception of the future, a perception of the future that is similar to 

that of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest the people of these communities 

were willing to give up a little. That is true; they had to give up a 

little. It doesn't come on its own. But they were giving up a little in 

order to gain a lot more. That is what these people were willing to 

do. What they have gained is thousands of jobs for Saskatchewan 

and millions of dollars worth of investment for the provincial 

economy. More importantly for the individual communities, they 

have gained industries that will be taxing, that will be taxed. They 

will be tax-paying businesses injecting more money back into the 

local economy. 

 

New jobs for a community also mean a positive attitude, a positive 

attitude and more money to be circulated in a local area on 

everything from food, clothing, housing, recreation — a vast area 

of commodities. 

 

And then there are the spin-off activities, Mr. Speaker, the spin-off 

activities. A new business means supplies, and buyers will have to 

be found. The company's raw materials will have to be brought in, 

and the finished product will have to be sent out. That means 

businesses along the way for other producers, for the 

transportation company, for the transportation industry, and 

possibly for retailers. An aggressive and progressive attitude about 

economic development can initiate an upswing in the economy of 

a community very, very quickly. 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, all we have to go is touch base 

with these communities that I have been talking about, and ask 

them, ask them what their response is, and you will find what a 

kind of positive attitude can be instilled into a community. And we 

encourage all communities, Mr. Speaker, to develop such an 

attitude because it will be good for them and their people, and it 

will be good for all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I would just like to 

reiterate: we must diversify. We can do more of our own 

manufacturing and processing in this province, so we must make 

that effort. We must create that climate. 

 

Our economy, and yes, Mr. Speaker, our very social well-being 

demands it. And that is why I take a great deal of pleasure in 

seconding the motion as put forward by my friend and colleague 

from Canora. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. Both the member 

from Canora and the member from Rosthern  

seem to centre out The Battlefords constituency, in particular 

North Battleford, for some special treatment in their debates. In 

fact the member from Canora used my name specifically, although 

the member from Rosthern did not do that. But both of them made 

aspersions on my character as to threatening people in my 

constituency, which I don't take a great deal of respect in them in 

doing that. 

 

And what I'm wondering, since they're both such experts, Mr. 

Speaker, on the topic of industrial development and diversification 

in The Battlefords, as to whether or not we could have leave of the 

House that those two members would be able to answer a couple 

of questions about the diversified economy in The Battlefords 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask leave of the House to 

be able to ask the previous speaker some questions, specifically 

about the Gainers development, about Vanguard homes, and about 

the High R Doors, which I think are the three major developments 

he was referring to. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member does not in fact wish to raise a 

point of order. He wishes to ask the opportunity to ask questions 

of the members who just gave the speech. And therefore we must 

ask leave of those who were speaking out of the House. Now is 

leave granted by those who were speaking? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 

I begin my remarks today, I wish to indicate to the House that I 

intend to move an amendment to the motion. 

 

As a matter of fact, I was quite amazed when I looked through the 

blue book today and had a look at the motion as proposed by the 

member from Canora. It says to ". . . continue to promote the 

development of local manufacturing of goods and services . . ." 

 

And I took it at first to mean that this motion was proposed with a 

little bit of humour. But when the two members, the mover of the 

motion and the seconder, stood up to speak to the motion, I 

realized that they in fact are serious, and that in their own minds 

they truly believe that this government has made major moves in 

terms of economic development and diversification in this 

province. 

 

Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, during the course of my remarks 

I would like to take the members opposite back to what their 

record really is, and to remind the people in this province of the 

kind of government they've delivered and what they've done. Let's 

start with a couple of headlines that I've gone through, and I just 

want to read a few headlines for you. 

 

Construction in city half of last year's; Sask economy expected 

to lag; Sask economic growth will lag, according to the 

forecasters; Sask Housing starts drop dramatically; 

Unemployment down except in Saskatchewan; March court 

date set for houseboat bankruptcy case; Bankruptcies increasing 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these headlines are not indicative of a 

government that is creating economic activity and a  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1885 

 

buoyant economy in this province. 

 

I want to take you back to 1986 and to the Premier's little 

one-liners that the members have been quoting day after day after 

day in this House. And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as 

he travelled throughout the length and the breadth and width of 

this province with his little paint brush, this Rembrandt Premier 

we have, he was painting a picture of economic diversity and 

buoyancy and how good things were. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people in the gallery that are looking at that 

picture that he's painted are seeing quite another picture. And I tell 

you that the paint isn't even dry, and the people understand the 

kind of government that he's been delivering, the kind of 

economic diversity that he's been talking about that we haven't 

been receiving. And they understand that there's a different tune 

during an election campaign, as there is when the election is over. 

 

I note reference, when they're making their speeches, to large 

manufacturing companies. I note reference to bigness and to 

hugeness and grandiose schemes. But, Mr. Speaker, what about 

the small businesses in this province that are suffering because of 

the kind of government they've delivered? What about the little 

clothing stores that have gone bankrupt since 1982? What about 

the little confectioneries that are gone down the tubes? What about 

the mom and pop business that they don't seem to want to refer to 

when they're up making their speeches? 

 

The business community knows full well what diversification as 

well has cost. He made reference to Pocklington and neglected to 

mention Weyerhaeuser, by I'll mention Weyerhaeuser; mention of 

the Vanguard trailer plant, but didn't make mention of Manalta 

Coal; or the oil companies that this government gave a billion and 

a half dollars. I noticed that they were conspicuously absent in 

those . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Say something nice about their chamber 

for a change. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — And I will mention something about the 

chamber to the member from Regina South, if you'll just be patient 

for a couple of moments and quit chirping from your seat. And I'll 

get to it. 

 

I want to say that this government hasn't been able to create an 

environment or an atmosphere in this province that will bring any 

kind of diversity in terms of the business community, other than 

when they bought it or gave it away. 

 

(1515) 

 

You gave away a quarter of a billion to Weyerhaeuser in order to 

get a paper mill. And a quarter of a billion, I say, is a very small 

"c" conservative figure because I think you're looking at more like 

$350 million as opposed to 248. But you gave away those kinds of 

assets. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Gave away the trees. 

Mr. Lautermilch: — You gave away the forests. And what did 

you get in return? I tell you, the people don't believe you any 

longer. 

 

You gave Peter Pocklington some $20 million. What you did was 

you bought economic diversity. And I tell you, if Peter 

Pocklington thought that it was a viable business, he'd have been 

moving into here to process pork bellies. But what you had to do 

was to buy the man in, to try and buy the seat of the former 

member from The Battlefords, which you couldn't do. That's your 

kind of diversity, and that's the kind of false economy, and that's 

the kind of government you've been delivering. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to take you back to what's happening 

in downtown Saskatchewan. 

 

And the schoolteacher, the member from Rosthern, can get up and 

talk about economic diversity and business all he wants. But why 

don't you get out and talk to some of those business people and 

find out how things are really going? Why don't you talk to the 

little grocer in MacDowall who closed down a few months ago 

and find out how he feels about your economic diversity? 

 

Why don't you go into the town of Duck Lake and talk to some of 

the small business people, or in Hague, or go into your own riding, 

if you've still got the courage, and talk to your small business men 

and find out how they feel about the kind of government you've 

been delivering? You maybe want to do that. 

 

I'm thinking the only way you can go home and be comfortable is 

if you're deaf and blind, because people are seeing through you 

and they've had enough. 

 

Part of what I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, is the reason that 

the business community is suffering in this province is because of 

what they've done to the working people and how they've 

polarized capital in this province. The member from Rosthern . . . 

from Canora indicated that 80 per cent of the jobs are created by 

small business, and he's right. For once he's right. The member 

from Rosthern talks about a grant of $45,000 and a business that 

invested some $228,000 into that same business. 

 

Well members on this side don't see any problem with those kind 

of incentives. But where they have a problem is where you give a 

Peter Pocklington from Alberta some $20 million, with no 

investment, no commitment to this province, no commitment to 

the people of this province. That's what people are against. That's 

what you have to understand. 

 

You talk about thousands of jobs being created through economic 

diversification. Look at the figures. In 1981 there were 25,000 

jobs in manufacturing in this province, and the figures in 1986 are 

the same. So you tell me . . . I'll tell . . . 25,000 minus 25,000 gives 

you nothing, and that is the amount of jobs that you've created 

through your economic diversity. 

 

You and the Liberal friends that you've had in Ottawa  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1886 

 

governing for years are willing to subsidize — you're willing to 

subsidize — but who? You're willing to subsidize Pocklington and 

your friends from Manalta Coal and Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler 

and your big banker friends. That's who you subsidize. 

 

You tell me, member from Regina South, what have you done for 

small business since 1982? I'll tell you what you've done. You 

can't name a decent program, you can't name a decent program for 

downtown Saskatchewan that you've implemented. The only thing 

you've done for small business is given them the opportunity to 

find jobs elsewhere because they've gone bankrupt — record 

numbers of bankruptcies. You've allowed them to put padlocks on 

their doors. That's where you're coming from — friends of the big 

money men. But the downtown Saskatchewan businesses, the 

family businesses that grew and that supported their communities 

and worked in their communities are rapidly disappearing because 

of the kind of government you're delivering. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — The member from Regina South was 

alluding to the chamber of commerce earlier on, and I'd like to 

speak for a few moments about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I'm a member of the chamber of commerce; I've sat on the board 

of directors of the chamber of commerce. But I want to tell you 

that I don't believe that 100 per cent of the time the whole entire 

business community in Saskatchewan agrees with them. I agree 

with them on many occasions, but like every other organization 

they make mistakes. I think they're a good organization for the 

business community in this province, and I think that they're going 

to be around for a long time, and I hope to support them. But I tell 

you, I believe they're being used by your government. 

 

I want to get back if I can for a moment to why small business is 

suffering. I can recall prior to 1982 when I would talk with my 

small-business colleagues in Saskatchewan, we would talk about 

an inflationary growth in our businesses, and as well we would 

talk about a real growth — a true growth. Well I'm sad to say, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that when I'm talking to my small-business 

colleagues in Prince Albert or in Moose Jaw or wherever I happen 

to be, what we're talking now is just trying to hold on to last year's 

gross. 

 

There isn't an environment in this province any longer where 

businesses can grow and where family businesses can expand and 

increase the number of jobs — the 80 per cent of the jobs that they 

create. That isn't happening. And as well, what's happening is your 

government is forcing many employers to lay off long-time loyal 

employees who they've helped over the years through raises to get 

a decent standard of living. 

 

What your government has done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is force 

many family businesses to lay off not only family friends but 

employees, and to lay those people off because they simply can't 

afford to pay them any more and keep their doors open. That's the 

litany of the Tory  

government in Saskatchewan. And I'm telling you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the members on this side of the House are committed to 

seeing that change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — We're committed to long-term reasonably 

priced workers. We're committed to offering jobs so that people 

can raise their families and stay in Saskatchewan and afford to 

work for small businesses. That's what this caucus is committed 

to. 

 

And for the very reason that I've outlined that you've disallowed 

this to be happening in this province, I don't believe that you're 

going to be around after the next election. You may have Peter 

Pocklington coming in from Alberta, but I want to remind you that 

for the $20 million you gave to Peter Pocklington, he doesn't even 

get one vote. And it's very clear you didn't buy the people of The 

Battlefords. 

 

Have a look at the polls. Have a look at what people are really 

saying about you. Sit down and analyze the ridings where the 

small- business community is, and have a look at what percentage 

of votes you really got. Don't you stand in this House and talk 

about being the purveyors and the friends of small business, 

because you're not. You're the friends of Pocklington. You're the 

friends of George Hill. You're the friends of the Ford Motor 

Company and the banks in this country. The big oil companies, 

those are your friends; those are your friends. 

 

The statistics show it by the kind of donations you get from them 

as well, I would like to remind you. And if you look at the number 

of jobs that those kind of people create for the number of dollars 

you inject into their businesses, if you've got any business sense at 

all, divide the number of jobs by the amount of money you give 

them, even use a stupid spin-off figure, use a half a dozen or eight 

or 10 — and you're still coming up short. 

 

And you're taking the money out of the pockets of the 

small-business community in this province to do it. You've 

increased . . . you've caused business taxes to increase. You've had 

a look at the flat tax increase. You've seen the drug prescription 

plan scrapped, or nearly scrapped. You've seen property tax 

increases. You've seen the E&H tax increase, and all of the small 

family businesses in this province pay those taxes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I'm telling you, I believe they're fed up with it, and 

they're fed up with that kind of government, and that's why I don't 

believe you're going to be around after the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — If I can, I want to spend a couple of minutes 

talking bout what you've done to the working class, and how that 

has cost small business, and how that's caused the growth of the 

small-business community to deteriorate in this province. 

 

We used to have working people, Saskatchewan men and women, 

earning decent salaries and working for fair periods throughout the 

year, albeit a lot of it was seasonal. They were making good 

enough incomes to support their  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1887 

 

families, to buy their cars and their ski-doos, and keep their 

homes, buy their groceries, and clothes for their kids, and basically 

enjoy life. 

 

And I want to tell you what's happened since you've been in. And I 

think I'm a fairly good authority, because I know my clientele 

fairly well, and I know what you've done to their spending habits, 

and I know what it's cost every small business in terms of the 

bottom line because you've done these things. Men and women 

who used to make a 30 or a $40,000 a year income are now 

reduced to unemployment and even to social assistance. They've 

had to sell off what little assets they've had, and that's happened 

because you've either put them out of work totally or you've 

reduced their salaries to the point where they can hardly exist. 

 

People who were making 14, $15 an hour are now looking at 5 

and $6 an hour if they can get it. You've bankrupted those people. 

We're still looking at a $3.4 billion debt that you guys have created 

that these people are going to have to share in paying back once 

we get them to work after the next election. 

 

I say to you that this government has nothing to crow about in 

terms of its treatment of the business community, with the 

exception of a 3 or 4 or 2 per cent, the Tory hacks, and the friends 

that you have — the rich money men — the George Hills and the 

Peter Pocklingtons. But I warn you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I warn members on that side that those people don't have any 

more votes in this province until you do your gerrymander. We are 

still one person, one vote. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to just pass on a little quote from the 

. . . I believe it's the . . . Well, I can't see the paper here, but 

anyways I'll just quote it from a paper and the headline says, 

"Andrew says a bacon plant is a lesson to everyone." Well, I 

believe it's a lesson to everyone, too. I believe it's a good lesson in 

what a government shouldn't do, and I want to quote to you from 

the paper. It says: 

 

Pocklington, who said his company would not have been built 

in North Battleford if it weren't for the financial assistance from 

the government, and municipal governments as well, in a spirit 

of free enterprise promised by Premier Grant Devine . . . 

 

What Peter Pocklington was saying is that unless you took $20 

million of taxpayers money and gave it to him, he didn't see the 

plant as being economically viable. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that's this government's style of free enterprise. This same Peter 

Pocklington was running around this country saying that he wants 

government out of the pockets of the business people, and he 

wants hands-off government. But I tell you, he sure wasn't too 

concerned when it came his turn to put his hand into the people of 

this province's pocket and put out some $20 million. 

 

If you would have taken the $20 million you gave to Pocklington 

and distributed that through a fair and equitable program in the 

small business community, I'm going to tell you, you would have 

created more jobs, more economic buoyancy than one Peter 

Pocklington is  

ever going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, what you've done is you've 

created a situation where young people have to leave our province, 

and I'll read you another headline: "Saskatchewan's big brain 

drain", meaning that our educated and our young people are 

leaving the province to seek employment elsewhere because 

you've created an environment and an atmosphere where they can't 

exist. Saskatchewan, another headline from the Leader-Post, 

"Saskatchewan down by 8,422 in 1986 net migration." What 

would that mean to you? Does that mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that this government has created an environment where people can 

exist and raise their families? Is that what this headline means? I 

don't believe so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the people of this 

province, as well, don't believe. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would submit to you and to members of 

this House that the PC government has been a failure to the 

business community. Many of my small-business colleagues 

expected big things from you. We expected sound business 

management. We expected an extension of the balanced budgets 

that the Allan Blakeney government prior to 1982 . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask members not to refer 

to other members by name, but by constituency or position. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Excuse me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

former premier of this province delivered 11 balanced budgets, 

and what I say is that the New Democrat government that 

governed for 11 solid years and delivered 11 balanced budgets, 

before this record of deficit budgets, that you've created, has 

disappointed the business community. 

 

I can quote from people involved in the chamber of commerce. I 

haven't brought quotes along, but the member from Regina South 

is well aware of what the chamber of commerce feels about his 

deficit budgeting. And he should as well be well aware of what the 

other business people in this community and in this province are 

feeling about his deficit budgeting. It's a shameful specimen. It's a 

shameful display and it's not what you promised. It's not the kind 

of government that you promised to deliver, and it's not what the 

people are going to put up with. 

 

We've got mismanagement in more ways than in the business 

community as well. You guys have mismanaged from one end to 

the other. You can't run a Crown corporation, and that's pretty 

clear. Ever since you were in power every Crown corporation in 

this province has been reeling under the hands of your 

administration. You can't forecast a budget, that's pretty clear. You 

can't run a Crown corporation. And economic diversity is a 

fairy-tale unless you take hundreds of millions of dollars of the 

people of this province's money and inject it to some 

multimillionaire in order to get some small thing going. 

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1888 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 

government has been a failure. I submit to you that the people of 

this province feel that it's been a failure, and that this motion put 

forth by the member from Canora is a fairy-tale, and it's not what 

the realistic situation is in this province. And for that reason, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I would like to move a motion, an amendment to 

that motion: 

 

That all the words after the word "That" be deleted and that 

the following be substituted therefor: 

 

. . . this Assembly regrets that the provincial goverment's 

open for big business policy has failed to provide prosperity, 

economic opportunity, and jobs for Saskatchewan's people. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was 

interesting indeed to read the motion of the government. The gap, 

again, between what they way and what they do is simply 

incredible, and it's a simply incredible government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that the amendment is far more appropriate to today's 

circumstances. Prosperity, economic opportunity, and jobs are 

very scarce commodities for Saskatchewan's families and 

Saskatchewan's communities. 

 

I need not reiterate the reason for our present-day sorry state of 

affairs. I need not reiterate the comments made very ably by my 

colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake about this government's 

wrong-headed approach which is designed to provide massive 

help for the big business players but turns its back on small 

business — small business which, as has been conceded, is the 

main engine for economic growth and is responsible for 80 per 

cent of all new jobs created. 

 

But I would say that the government's heavy-handed approach and 

its central planning about the kinds of massive help that will be 

given to selected industries is more reminiscent of Joe Stalin at its 

best than reminiscent of any sound and competent government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question is: what would the government be doing? What 

should their strategy be to promote the development of local 

manufacturing of goods and services? And for me and for many 

people in Saskatchewan, and especially for Saskatchewan's 

municipalities, the question is: how should we foster economic 

benefits for local communities? 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is at least 

one area of where government initiative should be clarified, at 

least one area where the government is now muddling through, but 

where resolute leadership would be welcomed — welcomed 

indeed by small business, welcomed by Saskatchewan's 

municipalities, welcomed by local government. 

And that is the whole question of the whole matter of local 

involvement in promoting economic activity. What is the 

government's strategic plan for involving local government in 

stimulation economic development activity? What role should 

local government play in stimulating economic development 

activity? 

 

Should that role be the one which seems implicit in the legislation 

governing our municipalities, and recently espoused by the 

government's very own Local Government Finance Commission 

report . . . finance commission in their final report? And that role is 

one which discourages exemptions and financial incentives as a 

means of enticing industry to locate in a particular municipality. 

 

And that is something that is implicit in legislation which governs 

municipalities, where there are restrictions on the kinds of things 

that municipalities can do. And I assumed that those restrictions, 

and municipalities have assumed over the years, and people 

assume that those restrictions were put in place because the 

government felt that it was necessary to discourage local 

municipalities from providing financial incentives to particular 

industries to locate in a particular community. And that is implicit 

in the legislation. 

 

And that theme and that direction has been very clearly espoused 

by the Local Government Finance Commission, which makes it 

very clear that whatever arguments their might be for a local 

government to provide financial incentives to a particular industry 

to locate in their municipality are far outweighed — far 

outweighed — by the arguments against providing such types of 

incentives. 

 

Now that is one role that is espoused by the government through 

its legislation and through its finance commission report. And 

there is the other approach, and that is, should municipalities be 

encouraged to use financial incentives or bonuses to attract 

industries to locate in their particular area? Now that is the 

approach which is strongly advocated by the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade. And the question, I guess, for 

the people of Saskatchewan — what is it to be? What should be 

the role of municipalities? Should it be the role that, on the one 

hand, is clearly outlined in your Local Government Finance 

Commission report and is implicit in legislation, or is it to be the 

role which is espoused and strongly advocated by the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade? 

 

Should municipalities adopt an entrepreneurial role in developing 

the local economies? What legislative framework do you propose 

to enable the actions being promoted by the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade when he talks about communities and 

economic development? And does anyone know, does anyone 

know where the government is headed in this respect? Does the 

government know where it's headed? 

 

The people of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan's communities, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, await the leadership of this government 

because there simply is no leadership. We have a case here where 

the government seems to be  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1889 

 

headed in two different directions, and I think the direction needs 

to be clarified if we want to have meaningful involvement of 

communities and economic development in this province. 

 

There needs to be, in the first instance, some clear leadership as to 

where we're headed. And that leadership is not there. What we 

have is a seeming anarchy when it comes to the approach of the 

government, headed in whatever way seems to be popular on any 

given day. And we need to move beyond that. And the question is: 

will common sense and wisdom prevail, or are we bound to play 

the fool's game that is being advocated by the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And while you're sorting that out, and 

while the government is sorting that one out, Mr. Minister, and 

there are substantive questions involved, there are substantive 

questions involved, and I know that they like to move in a 

knee-jerk type of fashion; that they don't think things through. But 

this is one area where I would encourage them to think things 

through and to consult widely with municipalities in this province 

about what the government's approach might be when it comes to 

local municipalities, when it affects local government. 

 

And I would encourage them to consult widely with other 

provinces in Canada and with other jurisdictions about what the 

role of local communities should be. Certainly no one would argue 

that there is not a role for the federal government and the 

provincial government when it comes to shifting economic 

activity from one part of the province to another part of the 

province, or to use its resources to encourage economic 

development activity in an area which may be relatively 

underdeveloped, given the total context of the province. 

 

No one would argue that the provincial government and the 

federal government do not have the right, and do not have the 

legislative framework, and I think, indeed, do not have the 

responsibility to look at underdeveloped regions and to try and 

encourage development in those areas. But it's something else 

again to say that we're going to encourage local municipalities, or 

enable the local municipalities to set up their own system of 

financial incentives to attract particular industries. 

 

There are many questions involved about: is it fair for a local 

municipality to benefit one industry and expect others to pick up 

the cost of those incentives? Does it make sense from the overall 

provincial point of view to have one municipality, which may 

have more in the way of resources and therefore can attract 

industries, to continue to . . . or to have those kinds of industries 

located in that municipality, whereas it might be better from a 

provincial point of view to have some balance in where new 

industries are located? And I would encourage the government to 

undertake some thorough discussion and some thorough review of 

those kinds of questions before it settles on an approach, given the 

fact that right now they don't seem to have any approach, except 

whatever comes along on any given day. 

 

And while they're sorting that one out, Mr. Deputy  

Speaker, I would command to them, I would command to them, 

that a number of areas that they might move in . . . actions which 

might be well received. 

 

First, I would suggest to them that a grant program to support 

municipal economic research and development would be 

welcome. Before communities can develop realistic economic 

development objectives, they need to have a very clear sense on 

what is the current picture within their community in so far as 

economic activity. And the traditional sources such as Statistics 

Canada and assessment records, I would submit, are not enough 

— that further research is required at the local level on types and 

numbers of jobs, migration patterns, and so on, before realistic 

objectives can be set. And I would encourage the government to 

look at that type of program to assist municipalities to do the kind 

of research that is required before objectives can be set. 

 

Secondly, provincial leadership in fostering the formation of 

regional economic development corporations, I think, would be 

welcome. Economic growth and development cuts across local 

government boundaries. And an economic development, or an 

industry that chooses to locate in one municipality, may have 

implications for other municipalities. And perhaps what we'd need 

to do is to find ways, through provincial government leadership, to 

encourage municipalities and regions of this province to 

co-operate; to attract industries to locate in their regions — 

industries which may be appropriate for the kinds of strengths and 

resources that prevail in that region. And again we have not seen 

any leadership from the government in that area. 

 

(1545) 

 

We do see central initiatives arising from the ministers and their 

central planning people, but we do not see leadership from the 

provincial government which attempts to encourage local people 

to become far more involved in charting their own futures, in 

charting their own activities in so far as attracting economic 

development is concerned. And again I think that kind of approach 

and that kind of leadership — nothing heavy-handed — but 

leadership and enabling municipalities to do those kinds of things 

would be welcomed by the people of Saskatchewan, and I think 

would be welcomed indeed by municipalities in this province. 

 

I note the government has begun some very minor initiatives in the 

area of rural development in encouraging rural municipalities to 

come together, and that's to be applauded. But when you look at 

the total budget commitment for that kind of activity, it's a drop in 

the bucket. It pertains only to rural municipalities, and I would 

submit that there is far more that can and should be done when it 

comes to all municipalities of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, when it comes to regional economic development, 

does it make sense for Estevan and Weyburn to each have their 

own economic development corporations to compete with one 

another for various kinds of jobs, or should we also be finding 

ways to encourage them to co-operate to set up a south-eastern  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1890 

 

Saskatchewan regional economic development corporation which 

might then see benefits for all the communities in that area? And 

again I would encourage the government to give some thought to 

that solution. 

 

Provincial leadership would also be welcome which would enable 

the hospitality industry to generate its own revenues and to chart 

its own course when it comes to bureaus. And I would suggest to 

the government that it look at its own legislation which now 

permits business improvement districts, legislation which was 

developed and set up and enacted by the New Democratic 

government in the 1970s, and by all accords is excellent 

legislation — excellent legislation when it comes to encouraging 

businesses, encouraging businesses to take a direct hand in a 

co-operative way, but a direct hand in charting their own course in 

promoting their own development. 

 

Many of the members are aware of business improvement districts 

throughout Saskatchewan where primarily downtown businesses 

and main street businesses have come together and through the 

mechanisms provided for in the legislation have been able to tax 

themselves, to use that tax revenue to promote their own areas as a 

place to do business. And I would commend to the government, I 

would commend to the government the possibility of following 

that approach for the hospitality industry. 

 

What we see now is a situation where municipalities are in a very 

direct way providing the funding for local tourist and convention 

bureaus. But I would submit to you that those tourist and 

convention bureaus would work much better, much better, if those 

industries affected had a more direct say in what those tourist and 

convention bureaus were to do. 

 

And I would commend to you, I would commend to you 

discussion with the hospitality industry in this province — not just 

the hotels, but restaurants and others — I would commend to you 

those kinds of discussions to see if some legislative framework 

might be developed which would encourage a far more direct 

involvement of the hospitality industry in promoting 

Saskatchewan, in promoting tourism, in promoting small business. 

And that's something that you simply have not done. And it seems 

to me that, from what I understand, that what we have here is a 

paralysis through analysis and just simply a lack of guts to move 

in this matter. 

 

I would, finally, encourage provincial leadership in reducing or 

eliminating the business tax which is now exacted by many 

municipalities in this province. The business tax, we would 

submit, has outlived its usefulness. Whereas it might have been an 

appropriate form of taxation in the ’70s when business was 

expanding and business was good and there was little or no 

consideration given to business expenditures, conditions in the 

’80s have changed because of the policies of your government. 

Because of those policies, Saskatchewan's economic activity has 

taken a nosedive since 1982, and because of that, small businesses 

in this province are suffering. And because they're suffering, 

they're choosing to look at their expenditures, and one of the 

expenditure  

items that all of them have is business tax. 

 

And we simply must find ways to assist business to reduce or to 

eliminate that business tax. And it's not enough, it's not enough for 

you to take the ostrich type of approach which has been indicated 

by your Minister of Finance, which simply says that it's none of 

our business, it's a matter for business and for local municipalities 

to deal with. 

 

There's a very major player in this game, and that's the provincial 

government. And it seems . . . it's the feeling of people in business 

and in local government that if the provincial government were to 

provide some leadership on this question, we might see some 

resolution of the problem that we now face. 

 

And those are approaches that I would commend to the 

government, Mr. Speaker, before they pat themselves on the back 

about the wonderful things that they're doing. If they're really 

concerned about economic development at the local level and 

fostering economic development benefits for local communities, 

they will take into consideration some of these suggestions and 

find some ways in which to involve local municipalities in a 

meaningful way to create and to stimulate economic development. 

And if the government can commit to some of those initiatives, we 

just may help to expand the local tax bases, and we just may 

encourage prosperity, economic opportunity, and jobs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government would need to show me a lot 

more than what they have shown. They will need to show the 

people of Saskatchewan a lot more than they have shown. They 

will need to show local government a lot more than they have 

shown before anyone in their right mind would want to support 

the motion that was put forward by the government. 

 

And in the meantime, the amendment is a reasonable one, and it 

suggests that, given the current circumstances, we should not 

support the amendment . . . or the motion. I'll be supporting the 

amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to rise today and speak in the Assembly on 

this motion. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the entire issue of diversification 

is one that has obviously gained a great deal of importance, and it 

is being talked about in the House today. 

 

And I think that's doubly important, because at least we're talking 

about diversification now and we are not talking about 

nationalization any longer. And that is a big step. If this 

government has done nothing else but get the people in this House 

in Saskatchewan talking about diversification rather than 

nationalization, they've gone a long way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — You know, it seemed to be taken for granted in 

this province, and particularly by the members opposite in their 11 

years of government, that our exports  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1891 

 

and different commodities would keep on sustaining the economy 

of Saskatchewan year after year, and that we wouldn't have to do 

anything else in order to survive in this province. 

 

And I listened with great interest as the member from Prince 

Albert talked about the problems of small business, small business 

failing, and about the problems that our smaller cities and towns 

have been having in the last few years. And I also heard the 

member from Regina Victoria talk about ostriches and putting 

heads in sand. 

 

And I can tell the member from Prince Albert that the very reason 

that some of those small businesses in some of those towns and 

villages are having trouble is because for 11 years the absolute 

major industry in this province, agriculture, you people kept your 

head in the sand, because you didn't look at ways to diversify. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — You didn't look at ways to diversify and expand 

that agricultural sector which provides the dollars for so many of 

our small businesses in towns and villages. You thought that it 

would go on for ever, that nothing would change, and that it didn't 

need looking after. 

 

Well it has come home to roost. And now we must talk about 

diversification, because that 40 per cent drop in income that has 

occurred out in rural Saskatchewan, and whether you like rural 

Saskatchewan and you hoped that it would go away, it is a fact of 

life in this province. And there is a 40 per cent drop in income, and 

that income is not going back into business and towns and 

villages. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn't mean that this government is 

placing any less emphasis on those traditional strengths. As you 

know, we've done everything that we can to try and educate other 

people in this country and around the world that some of the 

practices that have been followed in trade and the dealing of raw 

commodities is wrong, and that we want back on a level playing 

field so that rural Saskatchewan can benefit and those dollars can 

flow back into the business community all through Saskatchewan. 

 

Our Premier has done the best of any person in Canada to talk 

about protectionism and trade wars and the damage that has been 

done. And that is why it is so essential that we talk about 

diversification, because those things have happened. And even 

though we're doing the best we can to come out of it, it has 

happened. And now the only alternative that we have before us is 

diversification. 

 

And that is why this government, in the last five years, has 

encouraged it, why we have worked with small business, why we 

have worked with the chamber of commerce, why this 

government was the first to institute low interest loans at a time 

when interest rates were going through the roof. 

 

I mean, we can't expect anyone in our economy to survive and 

prosper with 22 per cent interest rates. This government realized 

that from the very beginning, Mr.  

Deputy Speaker, and has taken measures to ensure that people 

were protected — that home owners were protected, that farmers 

were protected, and that small business were protected. And that is 

a far different record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, than the members 

opposite in the last years of their dying government. Because those 

facts were in front of us, and yet nothing was done about it. And it 

kind of boggles the imagination, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they 

can stand there now and talk about their preservation and 

expansion of small business when six short years ago they were 

prepared to see it all die, and do nothing about it. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we go to the value added sector, we go to 

the manufacturing sector, because those are areas that can provide 

dollars and jobs to the people of Saskatchewan. It means taking 

strength that we have here, commodities that are either grown here 

naturally or that we mine or we lumber, things that we do very 

well here in this province and give us a built-in, inherent 

advantage over other people in the world economy. 

 

We've also expanded the high-tech industries because we have a 

population which is very well educated, which understands the 

intricacies of the computer age. That is why we have a Minister of 

Education who recently talked in this House at great length on 

training the people in this province to take advantage of some of 

those value added and secondary industries which require a high 

degree of understanding, a high degree of education, and we are 

committed as a government to providing those things so that 

people can access this sector in the world economy. 

 

When you talk about Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you talk about a 

province with a relatively small population. And regardless of 

what the members opposite say in regard to multinational business 

and very large business ventures, most of the industries that have 

potential in the value added sector in Saskatchewan are relatively 

small. They match the size of our towns and villages. It doesn't 

mean that they can't trade in a world economy. But many of the 

things which have been encouraged by this government are for the 

smaller parts of Saskatchewan rather than just simply Regina and 

Saskatoon. 

 

(1600) 

 

A few jobs in a town like Central Butte, in my constituency, mean 

as much as the hundreds of jobs which SED Systems in 

Saskatoon, for instance, provides, or Northern Telecom, where 

you have hundreds of people. I'm sure that the people in Wolseley, 

which one of my colleagues referred to in an earlier address, are 

just as proud of a pharmaceutical firm employing 40 people as 

some of the hundreds of people employed in other areas. 

 

We are very proud of getting people like Peter Pocklington and the 

Bondar family to invest and build in a place like North Battleford. 

We have taken, naturally, strengths that are natural to 

Saskatchewan and built upon them. And whether it be Peter 

Pocklington or any other Canadian who wished to come into 

Saskatchewan and do business, the same opportunities would have 

been provided, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1892 

 

And I think the fact that one of our own, like Mr. Bondar and his 

family in North Battleford, had the courage and the wherewithal to 

develop a new industry in their own city in Saskatchewan with 

assistance from the Saskatchewan government, I think is 

something that other families and business men in this province 

can look to with pride and accomplishment. And I'm sure that 

there will be other similar opportunities springing up around this 

province because of the incentives program brought in by this 

government. 

 

And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that as we're going through this process 

of diversification, that we don't forget one of the long-standing 

strengths which has been in our province, and that is the 

manufacture of dry land farming equipment. And whether it be 

developed in a quonset, as it is in my constituency with a fellow 

that developed a depth control for the back of a discer, the Jeanotte 

system . . . and I've been out to their plant. There's two brothers 

there that hire a few neighbours during the winter-time, and they 

are now marketing a product all across western Canada, and 

indeed around the world, because they're in the off-shore market. 

 

Or whether it be with some of our more well-known 

manufacturers — the Morris Rod-weeder Company, the 

Degelman's, the people at Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon who I had the 

opportunity to go out with with the recent visit of the Russian 

trade delegation as they demonstrated some of the equipment that 

they make and manufacture — I think this particular sector has the 

potential to keep growing and providing jobs in Saskatchewan 

because it is a naturally occurring strength to us. It is something 

that we can take around the world with pride, and it's something 

that I would not want to see our government turn its back on. I 

know that some of the things that we've done with the Russians 

and the Czechs to encourage them to purchase our products will 

continue on because the Minister of Economic Trade and 

Development has stressed this particular area. 

 

Another naturally occurring strength, which we haven't exported 

yet, but which I'm sure will come in the future, is the technology 

that occurs with the mining of potash and uranium. The mines in 

Saskatchewan are some of the best in the world, Mr. Speaker. And 

that technology has been developed along with the private sector 

and the Saskatchewan government, and I am sure that there will be 

opportunities there in the future to market this technology because 

it is first-rate and some of the best in the world. 

 

The challenge of diversification, Mr. Speaker, part of it is letting 

the world know what you can do; letting the people out there who 

purchase products and technology know just exactly how good 

you are. And I think that is why the Saskatchewan government 

was so happy to participate with the co-operative movement in 

this province with the heavy oil upgrader. This will be one of the 

most comprehensive projects of its kind in the world. It is 

diversification at the leading point of technology. 

 

This heavy oil upgrader is going to give us the opportunity to take 

a natural occurring strength, which we have more of than anyone 

else in the world — and that's heavy oil —  

and refine it down to gasoline and other petroleum products, 

which not only can be consumed here by the people in 

Saskatchewan, but can be consumed all across Canada and North 

America and around the world. And this technology, which the 

Government of Saskatchewan is participating in with the 

co-operative movement, will be watched by people across this 

entire country and across the continent of North America, because 

the ramifications of what will happen here are very important for 

that entire industry, world-wide. 

 

And I would say that the creation of thousands of jobs in Regina 

and in southern Saskatchewan — and indeed, anyone with a 

tradesmen's ticket in this province has the opportunity to work out 

there, Mr. Speaker — is diversification at the leading edge. And I 

think that that diversification and co-operation with the 

co-operative movement is a far greater boon to this province than 

any nationalization project which could be undertaken here. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, the same applies to the paper mill in Prince 

Albert. Once again, the members opposite have decried the 

investment by the Government of Saskatchewan in co-operation 

with the private sector in utilizing a product which we have lots of, 

which I'm sure in the future we will be able to manage and grow 

better than anyone else, and that is the trees that we used to throw 

away because we couldn't make raw pulp out of them. And now 

we are going to; now we are going to make paper in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I can remember, Mr. Speaker, many years ago listening to 

one Alvin Hamilton, who was at that time the federal minister of 

Agriculture, saying that northern Saskatchewan probably had 

some of the best opportunities, the best climate for growing pulp 

poplar trees in North America. And I suppose Mr. Hamilton was 

maybe 20 or 25 years ahead of his time, but the opportunity exists 

now in this province to take something which many farmers 

consider a weed, grow it on a commercial basis, and make paper 

out of it. 

 

And that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, would have never occurred 

had we continued on the course that the previous administration 

laid out in this province. They nationalized a plant which was in 

competition making kraft pulp with many other plant in the world. 

It was losing considerable sums of money each day in that 

endeavour, and now we have a comprehensive diversified project 

which is not only going to produce pulp, but is also going to 

produce high-grade paper which is in heavy demand in the new 

technologies that we are developing around the world. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would say that particular diversification will 

mean much more in the long run to this province than any 

nationalization of a particular pulp mill could ever bring, because 

that nationalization could never bring any more new jobs. It could 

never bring any more new technology, and it certainly could not 

open up the ability to tree-farm a product which we have in this 

province and has been talked about for many years. That 

nationalization could never do that. But this paper mill and pulp 

mill, working in conjunction together, can provide those jobs and 

technology and the new opportunities that that diversification can 

provide. 

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1893 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in wrapping up, I don't think that the industrial 

incentives program that was in place in this province until April of 

this year can be said to be a failure. It has brought companies like 

Gainers to North Battleford. It has helped many other centres in 

this province provide money so that schools and hospitals and 

recreational facilities can be built. And, Mr. Speaker, that type of 

initiative must continue because, as my colleague from Rosthern 

said, there is light at the end of the tunnel with the raw materials 

and the raw products and the grain that we produce in such vast 

quantities, but it is going to be a while coming. 

 

And I always go back to the old saying: when it's tough times, the 

tough get going. And that is exactly what this government has 

done, because rather than turning our back and wringing our hands 

and nationalizing something, we, Mr. Speaker, have taken the 

opportunity to build on natural strengths here, no matter what the 

situation is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that I think economic 

development corporations that have sprung up in rural 

Saskatchewan in the last few years and the venture capital groups, 

even though they've just begun their endeavours, I think that there 

will be great things develop out of these initiatives. And I think the 

member from Regina Victoria recognizes that, that what is 

happening out there with local government when you draw it 

together and have it work in a co-operative spirit can only bring 

good to the province of Saskatchewan. And whether it be a couple 

of guys in a quonset manufacturing $30 or $40,000 worth of 

product a year, or whether it be hundreds of people working 

together in a project like Weyerhaeuser, the same principles apply, 

the same benefits accrue back to the Saskatchewan economy. And 

I believe that those initiatives with those two particular small 

groups will really bear fruit for our province in the future. 

 

Our PC government will continue to provide encouragement, Mr. 

Speaker. It will provide support and information. And we will help 

each and every community that wants those things in this province 

so that both of us, together, the provincial government and our 

communities, can diversify and grow economically. If we are ever 

to break out of the hold of an unstable world economy, a 

market-place that we cannot control and predict, then we must 

diversify, whether it be small town or large city, and the economic 

future of this province, Mr. Speaker, absolutely depends upon it. 

 

And that is why I commend my colleague from Canora for raising 

the point; why I commend my colleague from Rosthern for raising 

so many good points to continue on with this program, to build 

with it, to make it grow. 

 

And that is why I will be voting, Mr. Speaker, for the motion and 

against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's always a 

pleasure for me to rise and speak in this Assembly, and I  

would like to take this opportunity to speak for only a moment. 

 

Business is a topic kind of dear to me, and I don't propose that I 

have the same business expertise that the members opposite 

suddenly claim that they have. And so I sat with interest and 

listened to their statements that kind of seem empty and hollow 

and without sincerity and meaning, and as a result, Mr. Speaker, I 

feel rather obligated to stand in my place and comment on some of 

their statements. 

 

It's quite a change in their philosophy, all of a sudden in the last 

few months, that they stand opposite and claim to be friends of the 

business community in this province, Mr. Speaker. The Regina 

Manifesto clearly indicates their absolute disdain for the private 

sector, and resolution after resolution at the NDP conventions 

clearly support that same stand. 

 

(1615) 

 

There's no way now that they can stand in their place and try to 

fool the people in the business community of this province into 

believing for only a moment that they care, or understand 

business, they still don't understand business, and you never will 

understand business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — And there are various accusations that are 

made. Yet, Mr. Speaker, I made a note quite some time ago, July 

27, and you can check Hansard. A member from Saskatoon 

University, the NDP member, Saskatoon University stood in his 

chair and said that our government provide opportunities for, and I 

quote: " . . . your private business friends . . . " Now he admitted 

that they were our friends. And he said it in such a way that 

obviously they weren't friends of yours, and so why do you stand 

here and debate this today. 

 

My colleagues and I, Mr. Speaker, have had the opportunity and 

pleasure of opening business after business throughout the 

province in the last years in every constituency of this province. 

And even with the member from . . . the member of Quill Lakes is 

well aware that I shared the opportunity of opening up several 

businesses in Quill Lakes constituency. 

 

The member from P.A.-Duck Lake spoke a moment ago and said, 

what have you done since 1982? What have you done really for 

business? Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, this government, this 

PC government since 1982 has done more for business than has 

ever been done in the history of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — The member from P.A.-Duck Lake claims to 

be an authority on business. Well, Mr. Speaker, if he's ever around 

in business long enough to speak with authority, then maybe he 

should do so. But to claim to be an authority is just ludicrous for a 

politician to stand and claim to be an authority on business. It 

doesn't work that way. You can be a supporter, but certainly not 

speak with  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1894 

 

authority on it. He's probably the best little-known business man in 

Prince Albert. 

 

And he stood in his chair and gave us a warning. They're full of 

warnings. You know the member from North Battleford gave a 

warning to his chamber of commerce. He stands in his chair. The 

member from P.A.-Duck Lake gives us a warning. They're always 

warnings. Well we do it differently than warn. 

 

He asked some of our accomplishments. I'll just speak briefly for 

some of them and mention some of the things that have occurred 

prior, Mr. Speaker. We all remember the small business 

employment program that our government initiated a few years 

ago. And it was the first thing that started bringing about a good 

percentage of unemployment rate in our province. And it was at 

that time that Saskatchewan moved into number one in Canada. 

And we've remained in that position, either one, two, or three for 

the last five years. That's a pretty enviable record, and it was the 

small business employment program that helped get all that 

started. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — We put in place the management assistance 

program. And that did two things, the business community 

throughout the province — and they're obviously not aware of that 

program, the member from Regina Victoria certainly isn't, and it 

sounded like the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake wasn't — 

but the management assistance program, Mr. Speaker, was put in 

place to assist owners and operators of local businesses to come in 

and analyze the businesses, to see what kind of problems there 

might be occurring and how best to solve those problems and get 

on with the job of what they know to do best, and that's to create 

jobs and to earn a profit. 

 

Profit is not a dirty word to our government. Why should it be to 

the members opposite? But it does two things, that program. It 

helped the small business community, Mr. Speaker, and along 

with that it helped develop our own supply of local business 

consultants — right throughout the province. And in 1982 there 

was a great deal of difficulty. If we needed a business consultant, 

generally speaking, we had to leave the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to tell you that we have business 

consultants with actual, factual, on-the-job training, working 

experience, that could come into the majority of businesses in our 

province and really give them a hand to sort out any problems and 

difficulties that they might have. 

 

Working at the local level — the community economic 

development program that we had in our government, where we 

go out into the communities. Again the member from Regina 

Victoria was speaking that we should work with the local 

communities. Obviously he's not even aware of that program 

where we go in and work with the municipal officials; where we 

do profiles on their communities; where the statistical information 

that he was babbling about is all compiled and put into place, so 

that prospective business people can come into a community, look 

at the profile, and know exactly what they have to know about the 

community. 

And it's done by the people of the community, Mr. Speaker. Not 

done by our government, but rather working in consultation 

together with these people, putting them together, helping them to 

develop their communities. 

 

Chamber of commerce. Yes, they're famous for saying that they 

disagree with their chamber. They're getting a little closer. The 

member of P.A.-Duck Lake said that he, every now and then, had 

a little bit of respect for their opinion. But by and large they 

weren't always right and accurate. So none the less, they don't 

come out and encourage their chamber of commerce and say, right 

on; you're really doing it right. No, they'll still sit back and kick 

and everything else. 

 

Well let me tell you, we've got an awful lot of respect for the 

chamber of commerce. We've got an awful lot of respect for the 

Saskatchewan chamber, or for local boards of trade, for the 

Canadian independent business federation, and on and on. And we 

believe in meeting with them and dealing with them and doing as 

best we can in working together with them to provide the climate 

that Saskatchewan requires so that we can develop our business 

community and, as a result, the tax base, and create the jobs that 

the people need in our province. 

 

You know, when we took over, Mr. Speaker, all that the NDP left 

as a legacy for the business community was a system of grants — 

grants for this; grants for that. Mr. Speaker, the business 

community is smarter than that. Grants don't solve the problem of 

a business. They have nothing to do really . . . sometimes the grant 

turned out to be licence for them to lose more money. Because 

with the encouragement of an outright grant, a person wanting to 

start up a business said, well, it must be a good idea because the 

government gave me this money. And what happened? The grant 

was lost and so was his capital, because the planning wasn't in 

place. 

 

And that's what you need, is good consultative process and proper 

planning and proper management. That's what we've developed 

with our business community, and the business sector out there 

really appreciate and recognize that. 

 

And then they claim to be the saviour of small business now, Mr. 

Speaker. Why? So that they can come in here and put in a payroll 

tax like the NDP have in Manitoba. Don't tell me that the business 

community thinks so much of you over there. I know better. 

 

They keep . . . (inaudible interjection . . . Now the member is 

speaking from his chair, speaking about the banks. Oh, you're 

friends of the banks, you're friends of the banks. And yet what 

happens? You accuse us now of chasing them out of the province. 

Make up your mind. You never can decide what you want to do 

— one hand we're their friends, next hand we're their enemies. 

Don't you know? Why don't you stop to figure it out? 

 

But in any event . . . Sure, Mr. Speaker, we've got some major 

accomplishments in this province that we should be very proud of, 

starting with the Peter Pocklingtons of this world, who came in 

and invested a lot of money and,  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1895 

 

contrary to what they say all the time about a give-away and a 

give-away and we're buying them off, the program that Mr. 

Pocklington had was available to anybody that wanted to start a 

business in the province at the time, under the industrial incentive 

program. Just pure, simple. And there was no hanky-panky, the 

way you people always keep talking about it. 

 

Hunters in North Battleford — the recreational vehicle 

manufacturer. Just think for a moment of the diversification and 

the spin-off benefits to that community, along with the 

employment that it creates, Mr. Speaker. The upgrader, 

Weyerhaeuser. And the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, 

who said there would never be a paper mill, and none will ever be 

built, why don't you drive around and have a look; see what's 

happening up there in your constituency? You'd be awful 

surprised. 

 

The member from Regina Victoria spoke awful repetitively, Mr. 

Speaker. He kept saying the same thing over and over and over 

again. He spoke for 10 minutes on the same subject and said 

absolutely zero — nothing. He suggested local involvement; the 

government should do local involvement regarding economic 

activity. Well what does he think we're doing under the program 

that I just mentioned? We've got VCCs set up now, local 

community. 

 

My time is dragging on, so I won't dwell on it, but we do consult 

with the municipalities and their role. Unfortunately some 

officials, though, have the same narrow-minded view that the 

members opposite do, and won't listen and take to heart what they 

should. 

 

But in any event, they are obvious . . . The member from Regina 

Victoria . . . Two more points and then I'll sit down. He was 

obviously not aware that the community economic development 

program does just that — profiles the community, works together 

with the local people, puts them in charge of their own future. 

 

He's obviously not aware either . . . He spoke about the hospitality 

industry. Have you not heard of TISASK (Tourism Industry 

Association of Saskatchewan)? Who do you think worked and 

developed that? And TISASK is obviously that; it's the hospitality 

industry. 

 

Regina, Saskatoon — both have tourist and convention bureaus. 

We work with both of them. We assist both of them and they 

know that. And it works hand in hand. So you're out to lunch. You 

don't know about that either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no question that this PC government, under the 

strong leadership of our Premier, will continue to build, will 

continue to diversify, will continue to manage our economy. And 

they found something humorous about that because, as I said at 

the outset of my remarks, they don't understand. They never will. 

But we will continue to diversify and manage our economy under 

the strong vision that our Premier has, to promote — as the motion 

states, Mr. Speaker — local development to expand the tax base 

and to foster an economic benefit to our communities. 

 

I will not support the amendment, but there is no question  

that I will support the motion of my colleague. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to enter this debate. I watched the 

back-benchers enter this debate today, and so desperate were they 

to put forward some kind of a case that they brought forward the 

former minister of Small Business and Tourism. And what a sad 

case that their big hitter put forward. I would have thought that if 

their economic growth was so great that he would come forward 

with all of the indicators, indicating how the economy is growing. 

 

But do you know what he did? He went back to 1932 talking 

about the Manifesto, if you can believe it. That's his defence of his 

economic strategy in this province. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt about it whatsoever 

that the Tory myth of economic development is burst. It took $25 

million to try to sell it to the people of Saskatchewan during the 

last election, and I'll tell you, none of the people out in 

Saskatchewan today believe in their economic development. 

 

I wonder why they didn't talk about some of the mythical 

enterprises that were going to be developed as the Premier 

announced during the campaign. I ask you, where is the fertilizer 

plant? Big headlines, press releases — we're going to have a 

fertilizer plant; employ hundreds of people; make fertilizer 

cheaper to the farmers. And it dissipated; it dissipated as soon as 

the election expired. 

 

I want to say, I wonder where the chemical plant that the Premier 

said was going to be erected during the campaign, where is that 

mythical enterprise, that diversification in the economy? I believe 

that somewhere down in Lloydminster or Swift Current we're 

going to have an airplane assembly plant, during the election. 

Where is that mythical plant? 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, all that one has to do is look at some of 

the economic indicators to see how well this economy is 

performing and whether or not we're creating jobs and whether or 

not the policies of this government is assisting small-business 

men. 

 

I take a look at the budget address, and you look at some of the 

province of Saskatchewan summary of economic indicators. And 

if you look under the gross domestic product, you find that in 1986 

it went down a minus 2.9 per cent. If you take a look at private and 

public investment in this province, which is an indicator, do you 

realize that the private and public investment in 1986, the latest 

figure that we have, is down? It's down in respect to '83; it's down 

from '84; it's down from '85. Is that a vibrant economy developing 

diversification and building a diversified economy? Of course not. 

 

(1630) 

 

Housing starts — you'd think if there is economic activity that you 

would have a number of housing starts. I'll tell you, in the mid-'70s 

we had up to 11 to 12,000 units built in Saskatchewan. And do 

you know what's happened in  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1896 

 

this buoyant economy, this mythical buoyant economy in the 

imagination only, in the minds of the members opposite? Housing 

starts is even down over 1985 — 5,510 units compared to the 

previous year of 5,354. 

 

In ’82, after they inherit the government, the sound fiscal 

management of this province by the former premier 6,822. So 

housing starts are down. 

 

Let's take a look at what's happening to investment, as I said . . . 

And do you know what the headline says? "Saskatchewan may 

have the largest drop in capital spending." And if you take a look 

at Alberta and British Columbia and you take a look at Manitoba, 

you'll find investment in Saskatchewan down. "Capital spending 

in Saskatchewan is expected to decline by 21 per cent in 1987." 

 

An Hon. Member: How much? 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Twenty-one per cent. This is that booming 

economy of building and diversifying. The article goes on and 

says that: 

 

The total capital spending in the prairie region is estimated at 

$6.9 billion, an increase of 4 per cent. More than 70 per cent 

of that spending will take place in Alberta, where capital 

expenditure is expected to increase by 8 per cent. Large 

companies in Manitoba expect to increase spending by 10.6 

per cent to $876 million, which will increase 11.7 per cent to 

$840 million. 

 

And then it goes on and indicates in respect to Saskatchewan: 

 

Domestic companies are decreasing their spending in the 

province by 13.3 per cent to 652.7 million in ’87, while 

foreign firms are cutting back 42.3 per cent. 

 

That's the cutbacks. Saskatchewan may have the largest capital 

spending decrease in the country. Those are the indicators of 

economic growth. 

 

And I say to the members opposite: you can try to sell your myth, 

but the myth is over. The bubble has burst, and the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . you're exposed to the people of Saskatchewan. 

They take you for what you are. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan know that, in the past, attempts to go 

with a Tory government, as far back as the 1930s, that Tory times 

were difficult times. And that's what the people, not only of 

Saskatchewan but across Canada are determined to kick you boys 

out of office. 

 

In every poll across Canada taken consistently has put the Tory 

governments in third place. And I'll tell you any government that 

has a so-called economic development that's helping people 

wouldn't be riding in third place in the polls. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to take a look at this further myth of the 

Tories, and I want, Mr. Speaker, just to take a look at  

my constituency, what was developed during our administration, 

and I defy any member on that side to raise a comparable situation 

of manufacturing and economic development that took place since 

I was elected in 1975. 

 

I want to say that you can go into the little community of 

Annaheim, and there you have the Doepker brothers 

manufacturing. And they're manufacturing large trailers. And I'll 

tell you that community there is a small community, no rail line, 

and that was developed during and under the administration of our 

government, and that is operating. 

 

I go into the village of St. Gregor and I find Michel's tarps, 

Michel's windows, operating but started under our administration. 

I take a look at St. Gregor and I find Western Industries continuing 

to operate. I go into Watson and I find Dyna-Fab, just north of 

Watson, operating — started under the economic diversification in 

this province by an NDP government. I take a look at Wynyard 

and I find Plains Poultry, and it was our government that helped to 

bail out the Plains Poultry, get it back onto its feet, and it's 

operating and operating well. And I'll tell you Plains Poultry will 

continue to provide up to 300 jobs or more each year to the 

community of Wynyard, providing the Tories don't sell out under 

free trade and we lose that basic industry — and well, we will lose 

it. 

 

Those are some of the indicators. You can go into the town of 

Lanigan, Keen Industries, building trailers — again, started under 

our administration. 

 

I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, under this administration there is not one 

single, new manufacturing industry that was started in the whole 

entire area. There was one mythical announcement. They were 

going to, just before the election, set up a potassium phosphate 

plant in Kandahar. And they had an announcement and they had 

an environmental impact study and they had press releases in 

respect to it, and there was going to be hundreds of people 

employed. And today after the election, just like with the fertilizer 

plant, the chemical plant, what has happened? They're going to 

have nine people employed with the pilot project. A promise 

before the election. 

 

But I'll tell you, you've got to come through with your promises to 

be credible with the people of this province because they're used to 

governments that when they made commitments to the people of 

this province, they made every attempt to keep those 

commitments. And that has not been the record of the members 

opposite. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if we take a look at some of the 

disastrous results of the economic strategies of the government 

opposite, we need only look at, in my area again, is the 

Massey-Ferguson dealership in Humboldt — closed out. You take 

a look at the Farm Rite Versatile, Humboldt — closed out. You 

take a look at Englefeld, a dealership of Versatile — gone. You 

take a look at Drake — a dealership is gone. You take a look at 

Vonda Rock-O-Matic — it's in receivership today. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Gone. 

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1897 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Gone. And I say that if you want to take a look at 

some of the industries and some of the businesses that have closed 

under this administration, and I'm going to take time for the people 

of this province who may be watching — and I know there's many 

because they're concerned with the operation of this government, 

and I'll tell you, more people are watching than ever before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — This is the record of closures of this province — 

some of them: 1982, GWG Ltd., Saskatoon, closed; Bi-provincial 

heavy oil upgrader, Lloydminster, forgotten. Sheldon 

Manufacturing, Regina, closed; September 14, ’83, CIT Office 

Interior, Saskatoon, closed; November of ’83, Intercontinental 

Packers in Regina closes — 125 people let go. 

 

In 1984, Moose Jaw mall, scrapped; December 31, 1984, Dad's 

Cookie, a long-established enterprise at White City, closed down 

after 46 years of operation; 1985, Vencap Equities, Regina, 

floundered in ’85 and closed; Battlefords Venture Fund 

Incorporated, flounder in ’85; CSP Foods in Saskatoon — canola 

crushing plant, closed; Prairie Industrial Chemical Incorporated — 

chlorine packaging plant at Davidson, closed; Drapery Shop, 

Cornwall Centre, Regina, closed; Pioneer Trust, collapsed; 

Premiere Furniture Ltd., closed; Pro-Star Mills, closed; CSP Foods 

Ltd. in Nipawin, shutting down the packaging department of the 

plant and transferring it to a new facility in Edmonton; Dominion 

Bridge in Regina — 26 years in this province, 35 to 40 people laid 

off. 

 

In ’85, Native Metal Industries in Regina, the scrap steel-cutting 

enterprise — 50 employees shut out of a job; Microtel, closed 

down; Molson Brewery plant in Prince Albert, closed — 75 

people out of a job; Saskana Sausage in Regina closed four 

locations in the province; Ward Johnson Electric Ltd., in Regina, 

distributor of Frigidaire products, are gone. 

 

General Motors closes its Regina sales office, 40 people affected; 

Northern Telecom, closed one of the four Saskatoon area plants — 

124 people gone; pull out of Federated Co-ops Ltd. from a 

government-led consortium and fertilizer plant integrated co-op 

refinery — 200 million project down the tubes. 

 

Supercart — this is the one that they opened up just before the 

election. This was part of their diversification. This was to be their 

show-case. But what happened? The venture capital corporation 

invested about $1 million — lost, closed. 

 

CWA houseboat charters at La Ronge — what happened to them? 

That was a new development to tourism growth in Saskatchewan, 

diversification of the economy — closed. Central Canadian 

Drilling Company, Weyburn, closed — 23 full-time employees. 

Fresh Air Experience, Saskatoon, specialty sporting goods — 

closed. McGavin bakery in Saskatoon — closed. 

 

And then if you take a look at it, if you can believe how things 

have deteriorated under this government, their own friend, the 

architect of the Tory government's policy, the vice-president of the 

Royal Bank, one Boyd  

Robertson, who said we need those Tories elected, who worked 

with them and designed their election, do you know what he said 

the other day? He said, we're pulling out of Saskatchewan. We're 

closing out 35 to 40 employees. And the reason, he said, is the 

economy in Saskatchewan is so bad. 

 

The Royal Bank which they have handed millions of millions of 

dollars of business are even deserting them. That's the indicators 

of where this economy is going. 

 

Well let's take a look. Maybe they do have some major 

achievements. But I have looked, and I'll tell you it's hard to find, 

hard to find. Because when I take a look at what's happening in the 

climate of this province here, in 1987, if you take a look at the 

budget you see indications that there is no strategy for the 

economic development of this province, because if you look at the 

budget cuts, they aren't consistent with economic growth. 

 

The ’87 budget provides severe cuts throughout the education 

system. Technical institutes, which was going to be their 

corner-stone — cut by $4.5 million in total. University operating 

budgets — been frozen. Grants to community colleges — cut by 

2.2 million. Education development funds, again another myth 

that they put over the people of Saskatchewan. Oh, we have a 

five-year plan for education. Sure they had — before the election. 

But after the election, it's no longer a five-year plan. And the 

Minister of Education stands up and blames the school boards and 

the trustees. He said they couldn't absorb it. Just imagine; they 

couldn't absorb it. 

 

It was a cut. It was deception. It was mismanagement. It was a 

lack of trust. That's the characteristics of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And I'll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan 

recognize it. 

 

Trades opportunity program was one that they had for this 

diversified economy, this building economy. Trades opportunity 

program — $1 million allocated in ’85-86 for young university 

and community college graduates. It's gone. 

 

Saskatchewan Opportunities ’87 student employment program — 

cut by $4.5 million, down to $4 million. And now the government 

expects to be able to create approximately 4,300 full-time and 

part-time summer jobs, compared with 10,300 created in the 

summer of 1986. 

 

Saskatchewan access youth employment program — cut by over 

$3 million, down to a miserable $200,000. And this program was 

directed to Saskatchewan youth aged 16 to 24. 

 

(1645) 

 

Furthermore, any economic gains that Saskatchewan may be 

experiencing are not being shared by our young people. If you 

take a look at the statistics and the indicators in respect to that, you 

find that the labour force  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1898 

 

data reveal that the number of employed youth, 15 to 24, totalled 

98,000 in May of ’87. This is down 6,000 or 5,8 per cent over 

May of the previous year. 

 

Unemployment rate for our young people in this province is at a 

record level of 13.8 per cent in May of 1987 — 1.2 points over the 

comparable period of a year ago. In other words, worse than a year 

ago. Bad a year ago, but worse this year. 

 

Statistics provided by the Saskatchewan Bureau of Statistics 

reveal that in 1986 Saskatchewan's net migration figure was 

14,085 people. The net migration from Saskatchewan was over 

14,000 people — 14,000 more people left this province than 

entered this province. And you say that . . . and the members 

opposite try to get up and defend that they're building the 

economic diversification of this province. Those are the statistics, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to take a look at a couple of other indicators here in respect 

to the economic situation here in Saskatchewan. And one of the 

sad indicators is the number of bankruptcies that we've had during 

the past year. While the PC government apparently are able to find 

large sums of money for the large multinational corporations and 

political friends, Saskatchewan's consumers and the small 

businesses are abandoned by this government. In 1986 there were 

21 per cent more bankruptcies in Saskatchewan than in 1985. Now 

isn't that a booming, diversified economy? 

 

And then if you go to the migration, as I've mentioned already, we 

find that that trend has been continuing. We find that in 1985 the 

net loss to the province of Saskatchewan was minus 4,924; we 

find that in ’86 there was 7,583 in January to December. And in 

the final analysis, the analysis reveals that in 1986 Saskatchewan's 

net migration figure was, as I said, 14,085. Those are the sad 

statistics. 

 

And we have here a government that gets up . . . or members, and 

moves a resolution, to have the utter audacity when they're driving 

young people out of this province, when they have destroyed 

hundreds of peoples' lives by callously dismissing them without 

even a chance of applying for jobs. They have slashed the efficient 

civil service that this province had in the past and have filled it 

with political hacks. That's the tenor of this government's 

operation. 

 

But what I want to say that they say oh, they have an economic 

policy. One of the things that they hold up as a show-case is 

Saskoil. Oh, they're giving the public an opportunity to participate, 

they say. Well let's take a look at Saskoil in 1984. 

 

Saskoil made $44 million in profit in 1985. And I ask you: who 

owned that money? The Government of Saskatchewan on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan, and it was operating and it was 

developing oil in this province. It was creating jobs in this 

province. It was employing Saskatchewan people. And do you 

know what they said? Well we're going to allow the public to 

participate in Saskoil, as though we didn't own it already. And so 

they decided to sell 40 per cent of the so-called  

appraised value for a little over $100 million. 

 

And do you know what resulted in it? Of the shares that they sold, 

75 per cent of every share was purchased outside of 

Saskatchewan; 75 per cent of all the shares in Saskoil were 

purchased outside of Saskatchewan. We owned it 100 per cent 

before. It was a Crown corporation. All of the profit came to the 

people of Saskatchewan to build schools, to provide dental care 

and health programs and build highways or what other programs. 

But they said, we'll give the people a chance. And they sold 

shares. Supposedly we kept 60 per cent, the province. But they 

gave it not to Saskatchewan people, because Saskatchewan people 

only own 25 per cent of the shares of Saskoil. So who are the 

benefactors? Is it the people of Saskatchewan because of their 

privatization? It's the people outside of Saskatchewan who are the 

benefactors and Saskatchewan people are the losers in this 

transaction. 

 

And to make a sad story even worse, they privatized it, gave it to 

outside investors, and they closed down their operation of 

exploration here in Saskatchewan. And where did they go? They 

went to Alberta to explore for oil? 

 

Now that's the economic development of the Tory government 

opposite. And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province are well aware of the direction that they're going. 

Certainly I say, Mr. Speaker, that the myth is over. The cold, hard 

economic facts are now facing the people of this province. And I 

say to you, Mr. Speaker, if things were going . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member on his feet? 

P 

Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, I'd ask leave of the House, if I 

could, to introduce someone in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In your 

gallery, we have Mr. Lynn Biggart, past president of the 

Saskatchewan Stockgrowers Association whom I'd like to have all 

members acknowledge. 

 

In the past, stockgrowers have provided invaluable advice to the 

members of the government, whether it's with regards to national 

tripartite red meat policies, lease policies, helped us out with our 

drought programs and so on and so forth. 

 

And I'd just like all members of the Assembly to acknowledge the 

presence of Mr. Lynn Biggart. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 17 — Development of Local Manufacturing 

Programs 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes. I am pleased to allow the member to 

introduce his special guests. And I join with him to  

  



 

August 18, 1987 

 

1899 

 

welcome them also. 

 

As I was saying so correctly, that every indication points to the 

fact that the economic policies of the government opposite is a 

dismal failure. They opened their onslaught when they got into 

office with a $300,000 extravaganza — 300,000 bucks they took 

out of the taxpayers' pockets for propaganda. And I'll tell you, 

their economic strategy has disintegrated ever since, if they ever 

had one. 

 

What they're saying is, oh we have a buoyant economy on the one 

hand; and on the other hand, they say times are tough. We got a 

$3.4 billion of debt. Now how can you have a buoyant economy 

with people earning money and everybody working, and a 

massiveness of debt? Well it's simple. 

 

There are two facts that are evident: one, the economy isn't 

buoyant. The economy is on the slide downward like it's never 

been in the history of this province, and you know it. And I'll tell 

you, the only way that you can develop the economy of 

Saskatchewan is the way in which the New Democratic Party 

approached it. You use the tools that you have. And those tools are 

public ownership, there's private ownership, there's joint venture, 

and there's co-operative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — You will build a strong economy if you use those 

tools. But I'll tell you, you can't build it on fluff and an advertising 

agency calling out that we're going to build an economic new 

strategy with big business — open to big business is the cry. 

 

But two things they're saying. They're saying we got a buoyant 

economy, but on the other hand they're saying we don't have. We 

can't pay our bills. We got massive debts we imposed on the 

citizens of this country, of this province, and on the children and 

their children. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there's no doubt that across Canada 

we've had an opportunity — the people of Canada and the people 

of Saskatchewan — to examine what the true Tory government 

policies economically are. And I say to you in summary, I say to 

you in summary, Mr. Speaker, that their economic policy has 

collapsed . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It's gone down the tubes. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Gone down the tubes, as my colleague says. They 

have mismanaged the province to the tune of $3.4 billions. They 

have cut the social net, the safety net that we had in this province 

for the people of Saskatchewan, right to the core. Look what they 

have done. They say they have a buoyant economy, that they're 

building. And look what they've done to the drug program, to our 

seniors who built this province. They have cut the drug program 

that it's not recognizable as to what the people of this province had 

before. And secondly, they've cut the dental program. 

 

But the third thing that they've done is that they have a tax grab. 

Never in this province before have we seen the magnitude of 

taxation increases that we've seen under this administration. Do 

you realize that a person earning  

$30,000, his net income, just on the flat tax alone, pays $450 a 

month? There's $300 million of increased taxation, and they 

haven't finished yet. They're going higher on taxation. 

 

We thought when they brought down the budget that they had all 

the taxation in it. But that's not true, because the Acting House 

Leader got up the other day and he says . . . well suddenly he 

decided he's the minister of Highways, and he decided that maybe 

we need some roads. They hadn't built any for four or five years, 

and they gave away the gas tax which was building the highways. 

He says, oh I've got to tax the people now. 

 

I wonder where your thinking hats were in 1982. You deceived the 

public. Every major promise that you made to the people of this 

province, you broke. And I'll tell you, sitting at 23 per cent of the 

polls is where you deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more to say on this 

subject so I would . . . I think that . . . it's close to 5. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe the member wanted to adjourn the 

debate, so would you like to do it? 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, that's what I was planning on doing. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 


