


















































July 3, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 3, 1987 
 
 

921 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Situation of the Province 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for recognising 
me. My question is to the Premier. 
 
Yesterday in question period, sir, you confirmed that you receive 
regular status reports from the Department of Finance which 
show how the government is doing with respect to revenue and 
expenditure and deficit forecasts made in the annual budget 
address. Those reports would show conclusively whether or not 
you gave accurate information to the people of Saskatchewan 
about the size of the budget deficit during the last fall’s election 
campaign. 
 
My question therefore is to you as follows: will you table in this 
House, either today or within the next day or two of sitting days, 
the status reports which you received in your capacity as premier 
and would you cover the period from, let us say, March 1986 — 
the time of the budget — to December 31 last year. 
 
Hon Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s highly unlikely that 
the Premier or the cabinet, when they receive estimates from 
various departments, whether it’s Finance or Intergovernmental 
Affairs or my own planning secretariat or Revenue, that they 
were going . . . that we’re going table cabinet documents that 
come in to me for providing estimates. 
 
The hon. member says that the conclusive estimates . . . Well an 
estimate is an estimate. And as I said yesterday, we can have 
estimates based on all kinds of assumptions. If you assume you 
don’t change anything, you can have one estimate. If you assume 
that you’re going to increase taxes or decrease expenditures, 
you’ll have another estimate. They’re all based on parameters. 
 
So I receive an awful lot of them, and I sue them with my best 
judgement, as does the cabinet, and we will continue to use the 
best guesses, the best estimates of people in our departments, 
whether it’s Finance or Agriculture or other departments. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m afraid I 
didn’t make myself clear. I wasn’t talking about estimates. I 
wasn’t talking about projections. I wasn’t talking about economic 
forecasts. I was talking about financial status reports — dollars 
and cents status reports which I am sure are provided by your 
Minister of Finance to you. 
 
There’s nothing confidential about them in the sense that they 
simply represent the money that has been received and a running 
total of whether or not the budget targets are likely to be met. I 
am sure you received them. I trust you still are preparing them. 
 

My question to you simply is, and now I’m dealing with the 
status reports from the Department of Finance: will you table 
them? Will you tell the public the basis of the financial comments 
you made during the campaign? You may well say that they 
might well be modified by future tax increases. That’s not what 
I’m asking. I’m asking: will you table the financial status reports 
which you received on a periodic basis from the Department of 
Finance? 
 
Hon Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says that the 
status reports aren’t estimates, they’re targets. Well, what’s a 
target if it isn’t an estimate of expenditures. I’m just using his 
words, Mr. Speaker. He says they’re targets or they’re estimates, 
and I’m saying I’ve received information from several 
departments with respect to targets, if he likes, estimates of what 
revenue will be, estimates of expenditures, estimates of economic 
conditions, forecasts on interest rates. I receive them all. 
 
But it’s not the practice of this Assembly, and I don’t recall it 
where information coming to the Premier on estimates and targets 
and forecasts from his officials are going to be turned over to the 
legislature. Now I can’t recall in previous experiences where if 
you were receiving estimates from people and targets to cabinet 
and yourself that you would turn them over. I don’t know that 
any premier does. We receive the estimates, we look at the 
information, and they’re just that. They’re targets. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m sorry 
again I didn’t make myself clear. I’m not talking about estimates. 
I’m not talking about targets. Sir, please read the Hansard. I 
asked for a status report, not a projection of what was going to 
happen, but where you were on the end of September; where you 
were in collecting the taxes and in spending the money which you 
estimated in March. Your Department of Finance prepares those 
on a regular basis. I trust they go to you. I trust you look at them 
now and then. 
 
I ask: will you table the status reports which you received, because 
they will tell us at least what hard factual information you had in 
your mind when you were speaking in October? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mr. Devine: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the 
Opposition is not accurate when he says the status report is going 
to tell you what the deficit is at the end of the year. That’s not 
correct. It doesn’t say that at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, a status report — and the hon. 
member just says, is this is what it is to date, but he says it doesn’t 
forecast what it’ll be at the end of the year. 
 
All right. What I’m saying at the end of the year looks like we’d 
have half a billion dollar deficit. That’s the end of the year, based 
on estimates of what’s going on, not the status report alone, not 
this report alone, and not that one. You have to make a guess 
because you’re looking into the  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

922 
 

future. 
 
A status report in July . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order, please. Order, please. The member 
is having difficulty answering the question with a little bit too 
much noise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It’s difficult to answer a question when one is 
being constantly interrupted, so I ask hon. members to please give 
the Premier the opportunity to finish his answer. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I am 
attempting to give him the opportunity to answer the question. I 
want then to make it . . . ask the same question, but perhaps in 
another way, since obviously I’m not reaching the Premier. 
 
An estimate of the future consists of an assessment of the facts 
together with how you think they will change from here on into 
the future. What I’m asking you know is: don’t bother telling us 
how you arrived at this projection for March, just tell us where we 
were financially, at the end of September, based upon the 
information which you will have received from your Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Will you table the periodic status reports on tax collections and 
expenditures which you undoubtedly have prepared, and to which 
the Premier undoubtedly has access? Will you file that material 
which does not involve any estimates, any target, any projection 
— just hard financial facts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat that hard 
financial facts for July or for August have to be . . . or September, 
have to be extrapolated into the future to get the deficit for the end 
of the year. And if you forecast it into the future, you have to 
guess and forecast revenue from interest rates, from prices; of oil, 
from the price of wheat, from stabilisation . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Once more the 
member’s unfortunately being interrupted, and I would beg the 
indulgence of members to please allow the individual answering 
the question to answer the question. 
 

Pay Increases for Out-of-Scope Employees at SGI 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today is to 
the minister responsible for SGI. Yesterday, Madam Minister, you 
confirmed outside of this House what you refused to tell us in here 
— that is, that out-of-scope management at SGI got a pay increase 
in the order of 7.6 per cent, April 1 this year, retroactive to January 
1. You confirmed that outside of the House. My question is: will 
the minister come clean today and tell us when was the pay 
increase approved, and who approved it? 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member asked 
yesterday — or alleged yesterday — was  

that out-of-scope employees at SGI had received approval for an 
increase after the March 5 statement by the Minister of Finance 
which called for a two-year freeze on wages. 
 
I confirmed to the member yesterday that there were no increases 
to out-of-scope employees at SGI after the March 5 statement. 
SGI out-of-scope employees — their raises are based on 
performance of the corporation, performance of the employees, 
and are done at the end of the fiscal year. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, that the in-scope employees receive the 
raises October 1, 1986, which will expire the end of September of 
this year, at which time the two-year zero and zero freezing in 
their wages will kick in, as will the zero and zero for out-of-scope 
people. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the minister did 
not hear the question. I asked: when was the increase approved? 
Give us the date. Was it at the March 18 board meeting of SGI? 
Or was it the January 29 meeting of SGI? Give us a date and table 
the document. When was the increase approved? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member that 
the increase was approved by the board prior to March 5. If he 
wants details of that statement or the meeting, he’ll have to wait 
for Crown Corporations Committee meetings. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Madam Minister, clearly yesterday you were 
unprepared to come clean with this House. Today you are showing 
the same contempt for this institution, and I am asking you: when 
was that increase approved? When? Give us a date. Give us the 
date; you surely have the information, or do you not? Are you not 
in charge of SGI? Come clean and give us a date. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite alleges 
contempt in my answers yesterday. I answered his question 
forthright yesterday without contempt. He asked if they had 
received raises after the March 5 statement of the Minister of 
Finance. I told him unequivocally, no, and that answer stands. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, you claim that the 
salary increases were approved prior to March 5, but they were not 
implemented, clearly not implemented until April 1 — April 1, 
three weeks after the freeze took place. A full three weeks after the 
freeze, and as soon as the freeze was announced, your government 
withdrew a formal contract offer to SGI . . . Pardon me, a formal 
contract offer to SaskTel employees. Why was that decision to 
backtrack on a formal offer made, but at the same time you decide 
to proceed with this salary hike for management staff at SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance)? Why the double 
standard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, there is no double 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

923 
 

 standard in SGI. In-scope employees receive their pay increases 
plus their normal increments as agreed to through bargaining. 
Out-of-scope employees do not receive automatic increases as do 
in-scope increases. Out-of-scope people in SGI, performance pay, 
is based on pure merit. 
 
The performance of the corporation . . . I might add, Mr. Speaker, 
the management of SGI got a zero per cent increase in 1984. I 
think they received a 4 per cent increase in their ranges, but no 
cash, in 1985. The increase that was approved by the board was 
based on the performance for 1986. So I would say, Mr. Speaker, 
there is no double standard there at all. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
and the minister can confirm this or rebut it if I’m wrong, that all 
of the . . . or virtually all of the out-of-scope employees got the 
same increase, approximately 7.6 per cent. Are you asserting that 
they all displayed the precisely same amount of pure merit that led 
to their increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is absolutely 
ridiculous for a Leader of the Opposition to demean himself that 
way. When we say merit, we mean merit, and employees who 
have not showed particular good judgement during the year do not 
get merit pay. Merit pay means exactly that — merit pay. And 
though I don’t have the precise figures, Mr. Speaker, I can assure 
the Leader of the Opposition, not all out-of-scope employees at the 
management level received a merit increase. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, and Madam 
Minister. I just wanted to establish what you said earlier with 
respect to information on this matter being available at Crown 
Corporations Committee meeting. 
 
I just want to establish this because I think we’ve established that 
this was all happening in 1987. And I’m happy to pursue this. But 
I don’t want to hear the minister say in Crown Corporations that 
this isn’t in the year under review, which it obviously will not be. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, are you saying that when we come to SGI 
and Crown Corporations, you will answer all questions dealing 
with this issue, even though the matters may be in 1987? Or are 
you saying in the House that we should ask in Crown 
Corporations Committee, and when we get in crown Corporations 
Committee you will say it’s not in the year under review? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, when SGI appears before 
Crown Corporations Committee, the normal rules will apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. Final supplementary to the 
member from Regina North. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I’m delighted to hear the minister saying that the 
7.6 per cent increase for management staff was based on pure 
merit. It’s interesting when I note that SGI had a  

total loss of more than $3 million this past year. My question is 
simply to the minister what would the pay increase have been had 
SGI actually made some money this year? 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the member has 
not read the annual report of SGI for 1986. SGI recorded its first 
profit since 1984 — a profit of $3 point some million. Not a loss 
of 3 million, Mr. Speaker, a profit of 3 million. 
 

Youth Unemployment 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the fourth most powerful politician in 
Saskatchewan, the minister from “Maidenform” from Melville, 
the Minister of Human Resources, Labour and Employment. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the last several days — in the last week, in fact — 
thousands of Saskatchewan high school students have entered the 
job market with anticipation that they’ll be employed this summer 
so that they can continue post-secondary education in the 
province. They’re entering a job market, Mr. Minister, where 
youth unemployment is at 14 per cent — and this is prior to their 
entry onto the market — and where there are officially 16,000 
young people who are officially listed as unemployed. 
 
In light of these facts can you, sir, explain to Saskatchewan’s 
young people why you have drastically cut those programs which 
will lead to youth employment in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well I’m pleased that the member opposite 
realises that thousands of students have entered the job market in 
the last month or two. And we have maintained job programs and 
gone a long way towards creating employment in this province. 
We have put an emphasis on jobs in business and agriculture. 
These are permanent-type jobs rather than temporary summer 
jobs. These are the kind of jobs where the jobs are built and will be 
there next year and the following year. 
 
And we are quite pleased with the results this year with respect to 
the youth unemployment statistics. If you will look back when 
your leader, the Leader of the Opposition, was Premier and felt 
that we were close to full employment, but youth unemployment 
was running about one to one and one-half per cent lower than it is 
now, in the 12 to twelve and one-half per cent range . . . So youth 
unemployment in summer and throughout the year has not 
changed very much in good economic times and difficult 
economic times. The difference runs from about 12 per cent to 
about 13 and one-half per cent. So overall we are doing quite well 
under the circumstances. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m shocked to hear 
what the minister said. What he said, Mr. Speaker, is a falsehood 
and is not true — is not true! 
 
First of all, sir, you have not maintained the youth  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

924 
 

employment moneys normally accruing to it. Do you deny, Mr. 
Minister, do you deny that you have cut the budget for the student 
employment program from 10.5 million last year to 4 million this 
year — a cut of 62 per cent. Do you deny also that the Access 
youth . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. Please get to 
your question. You can quote from figures all morning. Please get 
to your question. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Do you deny, Mr. Minister, that the Access youth 
employment program for Saskatchewan unemployed youth was 
cut from 3 million last year to $200,000 this year — a cut of 94 
per cent? How can you stand here and say that your government 
has maintained youth employment programs and moneys for 
youth employment programs in this province. How can you stand 
here and deliberately mislead this legislature in that way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would like to once more 
remind the hon. member, members, we do not refer to other 
members in this House as having deliberately misled anybody. 
That’s a phrase that we purged from our vocabulary in reference to 
other members, and I would like to once more remind hon. 
members to please refrain from using those kinds of terms. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believed you 
were talking about summer employment, or with respect to the 
Access youth employment program, you’re incorrect. It was not 
cut; it was terminated. And the reason . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reason that 
the budget shows $200,000 or $300,000 is for wind-down money 
for commitments that are outstanding on existing contracts that go 
beyond the year end. And there is a clear reason for why this 
program was terminated in that it was a program to buy jobs for 
youth, and we felt that the home program was a better alternative 
for creating youth employment, and has done a lot to do that. 
 
And from time to time programs have to be adjusted. I recall that 
the members on your side of the House criticised it when we 
started it, and I am pleased that you will now understand that there 
have to be changes from time to time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, once again, once again we see 
“hoof-in-mouth” disease rampant in this legislature. We have a 
program that wasn’t “cut,” it was “terminated.” And if you can tell 
me, sir, the difference between the two, I think that you and Daniel 
Webster and every other lexicographer in this country — in the 
world in fact — will be certainly glad to share in your wisdom. 
 

My question, Mr. Minister, is this: I have a letter, I have a letter 
here which was sent to all members of the Legislative Assembly 
on June 4, three weeks ago, advising us that all funds under the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities ‘87 program had been committed and 
that no further applications would be accepted. 
 
In other words, Saskatchewan’s thousands of high school students 
haven’t even completed their classes yet, and the money that they 
were supposed to get in order to provide jobs was gone. 
 
How can you tell young people . . . How can you even dare to 
stand on your feet and try to defend your record as minister of 
employment before the young people of this province? How have 
you got the gall to do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — The member opposite is confusing two 
separate programs. The Opportunities ‘87 program is a summer 
program for summer jobs. The youth access program was a 
year-round type program which was replaced with the things like 
the home program. And the fact is that with respect to summer 
employment, it took until June 4 before the money was allocated. 
 
With respect to the agricultural sector, we were able to fill 
virtually all of the requests that came in a reasonable period of 
time. With respect to business, we had to allocate some so that 
some of the larger businesses did not get the same number of 
students they had other years and had to dip into their corporate 
pockets for them, and we had a limit of two per business. So it 
took a month or more to allocate this money, and the uptake was 
quite good, and there are many thousands of students employed 
this summer. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder, 
would the minister care to give us a figure as to how many 
thousands of students have been employed by the Saskatchewan 
home program? Would you tell us exactly how many students, 
that is people who are registered in post-secondary institutions in 
this province or in high schools in this province, have been gotten 
jobs, or have got jobs through this program? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well as the member opposite knows, 
summer is not over, and we won’t have the statistics until summer 
is ended, and then we’ll have a determination as to how many 
students were employed and how many weren’t. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 11 — An Act to 
amend The Farm Security Act — be now read a second time. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

925 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. speaker. As a New Democrat it 
is a real honour for me to speak on the subject of The Farm 
Security Act, which is one of the first statutes passed by the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) government of Tommy 
Douglas after taking office in 1944, and was very timely at the 
time. Along with the cancellation of the seed debt and along with 
rural electrification, this Act was immensely popular with the 
people of Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, people came to refer to The Farm Security 
Act as the home quarter protection Act. As you can see from 
reading section 7, subsections 1 and 3, the original Act denies the 
banks the right to foreclose on a homestead. A homestead is 
defined as a quarter section where the residence and buildings are 
located. That was a good provision. 
 
But the problem is that the lenders have over the years learned 
how to get around the Act. They routinely ask farmers buying land 
for an exemption from the Provincial Mediation Board. This really 
defeats the purpose of the Act. 
 
I would have liked to see as part of this Bill an amendment which 
removes these exemptions. But of course, as we all know, the 
Tories are not likely to be doing anything to tramp on the toes of 
the banks who contribute annually approximately $50,000 each to 
the PC war chest. 
 
The other provisions of this Act were certainly worthwhile and 
should remain in place — protection of the farmer who is a tenant 
in the event of a crop failure; allowing the postponement of 
payments and providing the farmer with the wherewithal to take a 
crop off. 
 
The Farm Security Act has, Mr. Speaker, certainly stood the test 
of time. It is a good piece of legislation and has for years 
functioned as a safety net for many family farms. I will be 
supporting the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, we’ve seen in these estimates process so far where . . . 
as one item after another has been brought forward in regards to 
the assessment process which have been going on, we’ve seen, 
let’s just say, an irregular application of the law — an irregular 
application of The Environmental Assessment Act in regards to 
the different projects and developments that have been announced. 
 
I want today to begin by asking the Minister for  

Environment and for Public Safety and question him regarding a 
press release which was issued by Executive Council — Executive 
Council news release 86-089, released on February 12, 1986. And 
the release is entitled “$500 million power plant announced — 
Rafferty and Alameda dams proposed.” And it goes on to say: 
 

Premier Grant Devine today announced that Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation will construct a $500 million electrical 
generating station at Shand, 10 kilometres south-east of 
Estevan, that will be fully operational in 1991. 

 
My question to the minister is: had the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation submitted an environmental impact statement, or had 
the minister responsible for the Environment demanded an 
environmental impact statement prior to this announcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we would not have been 
contacted at that time, but any major development like that is 
always subject to an environmental impact study. And as you are 
aware, that study has been undertaken, though it’s still being 
worked through our department. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m referring here not to Rafferty 
and Alameda — I’m not referring to Rafferty and Alameda. I’m 
referring here to specifically to the Shand power plant. The Shand 
power plant construction was announced by the Premier on 
February 12. He said on that date: 
 

Premier Grant Devine today announced that Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation will construct a $500 million electrical 
generating station at Shand, 10 kilometres south-east of 
Estevan, that will be fully operational in 1991. 

 
In this press release there are no conditions, there are no subject to 
environmental review, there is no subject to the assessment 
process whatsoever. It was a definitive statement made by the 
Premier that the power plant will be built come hell or high water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member is reading from press releases, 
but it doesn’t matter what the press release says, the Department of 
Environment assessment Act demands that that type of 
development have an environmental impact statement filed. That 
statement has been filed, though it is still being worked on within 
our department, and I advised the member of that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I wonder in regard to Shand, which 
sections of the Act were used in determining whether the Shand 
power plant was a development, given that your department or 
that your predecessor, the former minister of the Environment, 
determined that Peter Pocklington was in development, his plant 
in North Battleford, and given the fact that in Waden Bay, Dave 
Longpré and other Tory notables, their development wasn’t 
termed a development. What makes it a development in the case 
of Shand? And how was it different from the “porklington” affair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that sections (iv) and (vi)  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

926 
 

of section 2(d) of the Act would apply. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So sections (iv) and section (vi) of the Act. This is 
2(d)(iv) and 2(d)(vi), is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s what I advised the member. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, in regards to section 2(d)(vi), 
2(d)(vi) says, for the people of the province who haven’t got the 
Act in hand: 
 

“development” means any project, operation or activity or any 
alteration or expansion of any project, operation activity which 
is likely to . . . 

 
And going to (vi): 
 

have a significant impact on the environment or necessitate a 
further development which is likely to have a significant impact 
on the environment. 

 
I think it’s obvious to anybody in their right mind that a power 
plant like Shand will have a significant impact on the 
environment. As well, in regards to section (iv), that there will be a 
general widespread public concern because of a potential 
environmental danger. 
 
How can you apply a criteria to the Shand power plant and not 
apply the same criteria to the Peter Pocklington plant when in fact 
there was substantial . . . We have substantial proof that there was 
damage to the environment and an alteration to the environment 
and, in fact, the use of certain chemicals and the emission of 
certain effluence and substances from the plant caused that 
environmental alteration, and that there has been widespread 
public concern. How can you say at this point in time that the 
Pocklington plant in North Battleford is not a development and the 
Shand plant is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I advised the member yesterday of the 
reasons for the decision with regard to the Gainers plant, and I 
have advised you today of the reasons for the decision that the 
Shand development would need an environmental impact 
statement. I think both cases are very clearly given to you, and I 
have no further response to your question. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I think that the evidence is obvious 
in terms of that there’s problems in the way that yourself and your 
predecessor have, in fact, interpreted this Act. And I think that 
we’ve brought these problems to your attention in a manner that is 
making the points rather well. 
 
In regards to Shand, you’re quoted as saying that you don’t 
believe that public hearings are necessary, given the fact that other 
power plants in the province have been built. Do you hold that 
same view, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, I do. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, I wonder if you would explain to the people 
of this province why it is that you don’t believe that they should 
have an opportunity to comment upon the construction and the 
operation of the Shand power plant. 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — During the review period under any 
environmental impact assessment process, the public have the 
opportunity to be heard, and that will be the case under the Shand 
condition the same as any other development. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You say that the public will have an opportunity to 
put forward their views on the matter. Will you be holding public 
hearings then as part of the environmental hearings on the Shand 
power plant project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, there will not be public hearings at that 
time. The environmental impact statement is there for public 
comment, and the public have that opportunity. It will be placed in 
the usual library locations around the province so that the public 
will have ready access. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder if you would explain this rather strange 
decision of yours in regards to not holding public hearings on 
Shand and not having the public being able to participate fully and 
being able to put forward questions to people involved in the 
project. I wonder if you’d tell the people of Saskatchewan why it 
is that you made that decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s a normal decision in most of these 
cases. The opportunity is there for the public to come forward 
during the public review process. If at that time there is enough 
outcry that there appears to be need, that’s the time that the 
decision is normally made to go to public hearings. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Minister, my 
colleague from Prince Albert -Duck Lake asked a very good 
question, and I’ll ask it for him directly on the floor here. How 
much public outcry do you need to hold public hearings on 
Shand? What criteria will you use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think there is any definitive measure 
that a person can use, but it will be determined whether there’s 
enough outcry and enough concern in the public on this one, at the 
time of the public review period, to make that decision. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Premier, I’m glad to listen to that response. 
I’m glad to hear that response, because one of the things we have 
been saying time after time in these estimates is that decisions in 
the Department of the Environment are made by the minister 
purely for political reasons. 
 
You’ve just admitted that; that when there’s no stink, you’re not 
going to look. When there is enough public stink, then you will 
begrudgingly look. And when there is enough public stink, even 
when there is that public concern, you’ll try to use things like the 
Department of Justice to get your big, rich friends off the hook, the 
same way that your predecessor or yourself did in regards to Peter 
“Porklington.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You’ve just admitted that, sir. You’ve just  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

927 
 

admitted that statement yourself — that we need public outcry in 
this province in order for the Minister of the Environment to come 
to the defence of the environment. Not the merits of the case; not 
the merits of the development. Your own words condemn you, 
that that in fact is the attitude. 
 
That was the accusation I made in my opening statement, and I’m 
glad you’ve confirmed that — what you originally termed a wild 
accusation, because it’s come true, every dot and iota of it. You 
make your decisions strictly for political purposes. 
 
I am raising an outcry. I am requesting that you hold Shand 
hearings, public hearings on the Shand power plant, on behalf of 
the people of the province. And I am one voice. I want to know is, 
how many other voices — what quantitative measure will you 
determine? Is it just purely a question of political heat, or do you 
in fact think that there are some merits for public input in regards 
to the Shand power plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member likes to stand and wave his 
hands and make a lot of commotion and make a lot of statements 
with very little background. I have made no different statement to 
you than I’ve made to the public and I’ve been making 
continuous. 
 
The Act really determines the process. If the hon. member would 
like to read the Act, you will find that what I have outlined to you, 
and the process of the public review, and then after that public 
hearings if there is need; that’s exactly the way the Act was 
written, and that’s the way it is being followed. 
 
It’s not a political move. It’s a straight following of the legislation 
that’s before you, and I would ask the member to read it. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you’re not believable when you say 
that. You’re not believable when you say that, because we have 
seen in the first three or four instances that we begin to discuss in 
this legislature in these estimates, a totally uneven and a totally 
inconsistent method of applying the Act. And there’s reasons for 
that inconsistency. You’ve just admitted yourself what those 
reasons were. It depends upon the level of public concern and how 
much heat is turned on your ministry. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, there is a great deal of public concern 
on Shand and the whole developments that are taking place in 
south-east Saskatchewan. There is a great deal of public concern, 
particularly in regards to Shand, and also particularly in regards to 
Rafferty and Alameda. 
 
Given that you’ve already said here that one of the reasons today 
why you demanded an environmental impact statement be 
prepared was section 4 of the Act itself, which says “. . . because it 
may cause widespread public concern because of potential 
environmental changes” — given that you’ve already admitted 
that that was one of the reasons that you demanded an 
environmental impact statement, will you give widespread public 
concern a forum in which to express 

 itself, and hold public hearings on the Shand power plant? It’s a 
logical outcome of the reasoning that you gave for demanding an 
environmental impact statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Act outlines the methods that you use to 
determine what a development is. And if the member is having 
difficulty, I can read it back to you. I’ve read it before; I can read it 
again. But I would ask you to read all of the six points under 
section 2(d) to determine what a development is. And that’s the 
exact process that’s used in all cases to determine whether or not 
an environmental impact assessment is needed. 
 
Under Shand and Rafferty and Alameda, we have determined that 
yes, they do all require that they go ahead and do the 
environmental impact assessment. And as soon as we say that, you 
say, oh it’s political. You’ve made the decision on a political basis. 
That’s not the case. We’ve made the decision because the Act 
requires that that is the process that be followed. And it’s true that 
some things that government Crown corporations do are very 
close to government. You can’t avoid that. 
 
And I think, if the hon. member will recall, that the Coronach 
development was built when the opposition member . . . the 
opposition leader was the premier of this province. They went 
through exactly the same process, of an environmental impact 
statement and then the public review process. 
 
That’s what we’re going to do under the Shand situation. It’s the 
proper process. We’re adhering to it exactly and giving the public 
a 30-day review period. I think it’s important that the public have 
that opportunity, and we look forward to their comments at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m glad that you mentioned the fact 
that the former government built power plants in the southern part 
of the province. And at Poplar River, I can remember very well — 
very well — that they had public hearings. They had . . . Very 
well. They had public hearings in order to allow the people in that 
area, and people from across the province, to express their 
concern. 
 
Your government has made a major, major commitment of public 
funds at the Shand power plant, somewhere in the vicinity — 
although given the cookbook recipe method of the Minister of 
Finance, nobody really knows for sure how much it’s going to cost 
— but using your own figures, somewhere around $600 million. 
 
Your government intends to put $600 million of taxpayers’ money 
into this particular project. Don’t you think, sir, that the public has 
a right to, in fact, meet face to face with those who are going to 
spend their money, and meet face to face, and pose questions to 
them, and ask them to address the concerns that they may have, 
given the amount of expenditures. Six hundred million dollars is a 
lot of bucks. And I think the people of this province have the right 
to be able to voice their opinion on this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As the hon. member must realise, it’s  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

928 
 

not the Department of Environment that will spend any $600 
million. What we do is review the process through an 
environmental impact assessment, and after that process goes 
through our department, then it goes out for public review, and 
I’ve advised the hon. member of that, and that’s the normal 
process. 
 
If after the public review period there seems to be a need of public 
hearings, that’s the time when the decision is made, is at the end of 
the public review process. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you’re not quite telling the truth on 
this. this is not necessarily the normal process. The normal process 
. . . the process in developing the environmental review is laid out 
in the Act, and that includes sections like section 14 of the Act, 
which I may want to remind you of, and advise you to read, sir, 
entitled, “Inquiries.” Section 14 says: 
 

At any time prior to making his decision, whether to approve a 
development, the minister may appoint persons to conduct an 
inquiry or inquiries with respect to all, or any aspect of, the 
development, and shall set the terms of reference for the 
inquiry. 

 
(2) The persons appointed under subsection (1) have all the 

powers of commissioners under The Public Inquiries Act 
and may engage the services of any professional or other 
advisors, experts, assistants or employees that they consider 
necessary. 

 
In other words, sir, you’ve got the power to conduct the public 
inquiry, with using the powers of The Public Inquiry Act, in order 
to allow — in order to assess the concerns, or address the concerns 
of the people of this province. And that’s just one avenue. And 
that’s considered normal. And I tell you what, right now, that this 
side of the House would consider that normal if we were 
constructing the Shand power plant, because we think the people 
of this province have the right to have input on projects which 
spend $600 million of their money. 
 
And that’s also part of the normal process. Hiding things from the 
people in this province and trying to use the provisions of the Act 
is not normal for an Environment minister and, let me tell you, 
will not be normal after you guys are gone — will not be normal 
at all. We think the people of this province have the right to that 
information and have the right to be heard directly on these kinds 
of projects. I’m asking you again, given that section 14 is also part 
of the normal process, will you call for public hearings and a 
public inquiry into the Shand power plant project in southern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member says that I’m not following the 
process. And I’m going to read very carefully for the hon. 
member, from the Act. And if the member has the Act, turn to 
section 9. 
 

The proponent of a development shall, in accordance with 
regulations: 

 

(a) conduct an environmental impact assessment of the 
development; and 

 
(b) prepare and submit to the minister an environmental impact 

statement relating to the development. 
 
The proponent shall bear all costs incurred in carrying out an 
assessment and in the preparation and submission of a 
statement. 

 
Section 10 
 

When the minister becomes aware that an assessment is about 
to be conducted, he shall immediately give notice of the 
assessment in any manner that may be prescribed in the 
regulations. 

 
Section 11 
 

The minister shall cause a review to be prepared of each 
statement that he receives. 
 
When the review mentioned in subsection (1) is completed, the 
minister shall: 
 
make the statement and review available for public inspection; 
and 
 
give notice in the manner prescribed in the regulations, of the 
locations at which the statement and the review may be 
inspected, and may prescribe any conditions relating to the 
inspection that he considers appropriate. 

 
And then if you go on to section 14, it applies, but it follows after 
those items have taken place. That’s exactly the process that we’re 
going to use. We’re going to go through all of those steps, then if 
there’s need for public hearings, they will be arranged following 
that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I want to advise the minister that it 
was very interesting that he didn’t go on and read past where he 
did. Because it says, starting at section 13: 
 

At any time prior . . . 
 
At any time . . . we don’t have to go through, you don’t have to 
make your decisions following the release of the document in 
making available public libraries. You don’t have to make your 
decision then and only then. You can make your decision prior to 
that. The section 12, pardon me, section 13 says: 
 

At any time prior to making his decision whether to approve a 
development, the minister may: 
 
cause an information meeting to be conducted relating to the 
development; and 
 
direct the proponent to make experts available to attend that 
meeting. 

 
And that’s what section 13 says. I’m asking you: will you invoke 
sections 13 and 14 of the Act and cause public hearings to be held 
in regards to the Shand power project? 
 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

929 
 

Will you, in fact, make a commitment to the people of the 
province that they will have the opportunity to direct . . .to go to 
public meetings and question those experts from SPC on Shand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I advised the member several times that we’re 
following the exact process after the public review period is 
complete. If there is need, then we can order the public hearings, 
but it won’t happen until that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have seen by your own 
statements to have precluded that. In fact, one can’t trust what 
you’re saying in this regards because prior to these estimates 
you’re on record as saying that you didn’t think that public 
hearings were necessary, that you’ve already precluded the fact of 
holding public hearings. So how can you stand here and say that 
public hearings may be held if it is necessary, when you’ve 
already told the people of the province that you’re not interested in 
public hearings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — You’re entitled to your opinion. What I said 
was that, because there have been a number of power 
developments in the same general area, and the people are familiar 
with those plants and with the development of power plants and 
the effect they have, that I didn’t feel that there would likely be the 
same need for public hearings in that area. I’ve told you that we’re 
going to follow exactly the process of the legislation that 
determines how you go about it. 
 
You don’t make the decision now, but rather you make the 
decision after the public review period. And if it appears necessary 
after that public review period that there are a lot of unanswered 
questions that the public want to discuss, then we’ll make the 
decision whether or not the hearings are required. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
know full well that there is a long tradition in this province of 
ministers of the Environment announcing public hearings before 
the environmental impact assessment is completed, and before the 
materials associated with the environmental impact assessment are 
made public. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, that we had, under the former New 
Democratic Party government in this province, a long tradition of 
holding public hearings whenever there was a large scale project 
being undertaken with a significant impact on the environment, 
whether it be the Poplar River plant at Coronach with the 
associated risk of acid rain pollution, and water pollution, that 
resulted in public hearings being held there in the 1970s; whether 
it be the Cluff Lake board of inquiry hearings on the Cluff Lake 
project, which were announced well in advance of the 
environmental impact assessment becoming public; or the Key 
Lake board of inquiry hearings, also held by the NDP government 
in the early 1980s; or the decision that a public inquiry would be 
held with respect to the uranium refinery at Warman, a decision 
that was announced long before an environmental impact 
assessment on that project was ever begun; the decision to hold 
public hearings with respect to the Churchill River development, 
public hearings that 

 eventually led to that development proposal being rejected; and 
once again a decision to hold public hearings before the 
environmental impact assessment was completed. 
 
It has been standard practice in this province, Mr. Minister, that 
where there’s obvious public concern about a project, or where it’s 
clear that the project is of a large scale and will obviously have a 
significant impact to the environment, it’s been a long-standing 
tradition in this province, prior to your government coming to 
office, that public hearings were announced in advance of the 
environmental impact assessment being completed. That was 
common practice. 
 
And I ask you now, Mr. Minister, what’s your justification for 
violating that long tradition? Why won’t you announce a public 
hearing on this project now? It’s obviously a large-scale project. It 
obviously has very significant and a potentially detrimental impact 
on the environment. Over and above that, it’s in the Premier’s 
riding, in what happens to be obviously a politically sensitive area 
for you. I suggest that’s the reason why we’re not seeing public 
hearings. 
 
So why don’t you give us the justification now why you’re in fact 
violating the tradition that’s been laid down in this province over 
many years prior to your government taking office. what’s your 
justification? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me simply tell the hon. member that there 
are many traditions that the NDP followed that I would not want 
to follow. So I don’t have to follow traditions; I follow legislation. 
 
And it just so happens that when that government were in power, 
that this legislation was drafted. They must have thought it was the 
right process or they wouldn’t have drafted it in this form. And 
this legislation is what we will follow. If, after the public review 
period, there appears to be a need of public hearings, that’s the 
time that they will be ordered — not now. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, as one of the two or three people 
who were involved in drafting that legislation, I knew exactly 
what it meant, and it meant what it says. And it says that the 
minister is free to announce a public hearing at any time. You are 
perfectly free, at any time you want, to announce a public hearing 
on Shand. 
 
And my question to you is: is the reason that you’re not 
announcing a public hearing not directly related to the fact that this 
project is in the Premier’s riding; that the Premier is anxious to 
push the project through; the Premier knows that there is already 
mounting opposition to it; and that that’s the reason why you’re 
not holding public hearings, and not for any other reason? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. I’d feel a lot more political pressure if it 
were in Rosetown-Elrose; I wish it were. But no, that’s not the 
case at all. 
 
The hon. member has said that the minister is free to order the 
public hearings at any stage that he wishes, and I  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

930 
 

guess that’s the case, and I have indicated to you what my wishes 
were. You said I was free to make that decision; I’m going to 
make it that way. Thank you very much for telling me I’m free. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I didn’t suggest to you that you were . . . 
certainly you’re free to make a decision on public hearings 
whenever you wish. What I’m suggesting to you is that you have 
been arguing that if you follow your legislation, you don’t make a 
decision on whether or not to hold a public hearing until the 
environmental impact assessment is completed and until all the 
public comments are in. I’m telling you that that’s not what the 
Act says at all. 
 
You, as minister, are entitled to make a decision about holding a 
public hearing on a project at any time that you see fit, prior to the 
environmental impact assessment being completed. 
 
And my question to you again is: why aren’t you prepared to make 
a decision on that now? And isn’t the reason you’re not prepared 
to make a decision on it now because the project is going ahead in 
a highly politically sensitive area of the province, a project that’s 
already ridden with parsonage, a project that’s being constructed 
very likely on land held by members of the PC Party? Isn’t that the 
reason why there is no public hearing on this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I give the member the simple answer — no. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I witness your . . . For four and 
half years, I witnessed your term as speaker. Among the qualities 
which you exhibited was the highest integrity, and I am therefore 
very surprised to see the way you’ve handled this things, because 
this does not exhibit the highest integrity. 
 
It is patently obvious to all concerned that the Premier is in the hip 
pocket of a development interest, and he’s got you on a short 
leash, and that explains the decision. That explains the decision. 
 
Mr. Minister, any piece of legislation depends upon the political 
will of a government to enforce it. And that’s the same with this 
legislation. There’s nothing in any piece of legislation which says 
a government minister shall be hung, drawn and quartered if he 
doesn’t carry out the spirit of the Act. It depends upon the political 
will of the government. And this government is gutless and 
spineless when it comes to environmental legislation, and nowhere 
has that been exhibited in a rawer form than at Shand, where you 
are flooding a valley, some of the finest ranch land in southern 
Saskatchewan. You are flooding a recreation area. You are 
building a plant which has the capacity to cause a good deal of air 
pollution. All kinds of concern has been expressed. 
 
I am not closely connected either with the riding or with 
agriculture. And I bet you I’ve met on a dozen different occasions 
with groups from that area who are concerned about it — the 
farmers, those who use the Mainprize Park, I think is the name of 
the park, and those who are concerned that the creek itself simply 
won’t handle this size of project. All of those people have 
expressed  

concern. And you stand here today, sir, and say, I don’t think 
there’s sufficient public interest. I don’t think you’re that deaf, Mr. 
Minister. I think you just haven’t got the political will to carry out 
this legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I wonder if the hon. member realises what 
Shand is. You know, Shand is a power development. It has 
nothing to do with the environmental impact study that deals with 
Rafferty and Alameda, and I’ve already announced that there will 
be public hearings on Rafferty and Alameda which are the ones 
concerned with Mainprize Park and those things. I’m amazed that 
the member who tells me he even has a practice in Coronach and 
goes down to that part of the province every once in a while, that 
he hasn’t realised there is difference in the two. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Of course there’s a difference, but they are 
connected. They are part of a single developmental project. And 
there ought to be hearings on the entire project and not that portion 
of the project which you think isn’t going to do you any political 
damage. It’s the entire project which has concerned people, and 
the public hearings ought to be on the whole project. 
 
I can just envision your chairman holding hearings, if and when it 
ever comes, on the Rafferty and so on, and the Alameda dam. I 
can just envision someone coming forward and wanting to make a 
submission with respect to an integral part of the development 
which is Shand, and the chairman saying I’m sorry, it’s not our 
mandate. Sir, I will read for you our mandate if you want it. That’s 
what’s going to happen. 
 
People are rationally and logically wanting to talk about the whole 
scheme, and you, sir, have narrowed the discussion to that area 
where you think it’s not detrimental to your political interests. We 
wish, sir, that you had some concern for the environment of this 
province and a little less concern for your environmental interest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Shand proposal came to us as a separate 
proposal, a separate environmental impact study. It’s being 
reviewed. It’s been in the review process since, I believe, late 
March. 
 
Rafferty-Alameda came as a different study, completely separate, 
and it came in June. We’re dealing with them in that fashion. 
That’s the way they are brought forward to us as a department. we 
don’t make the choices of what constitutes one development, what 
constitutes two, those are made at other levels. But that’s the way 
they came to us; they’ll be dealt with in that manner. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it is of no interest to this 
Assembly, or to the public of Saskatchewan, in what order the 
paper crosses your desk. What is of concern to the public of 
Saskatchewan is the projects, what effect they have, and their 
connection — and these projects are intimately connected, have 
been from the very beginning. And it’s irrational not to have 
public hearings on the whole project. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

931 
 

If you think that it makes sense with respect to Rafferty and 
Alameda, and I may say that if those hearings ever come off, I 
think they’ll be the first that your government has instituted since 
you’ve come into office. If that happens — it’s still an if — if that 
happens, I wonder if you’d tell why you think it makes sense to 
discuss one portion of the project and not the entire project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I guess you would have to ask the power 
corporation why they’ve decided to do what they have done, and 
that is to bring the environmental impact studies in as two different 
developments. That’s the decision that was made. 
 
I might tell the hon. member that Rafferty and Alameda are a very 
broad project. It’s not just for power, it covers irrigation and it 
covers recreation; it’s a mullet-purpose project. So I believe that 
they have the right to come in the way they are. Likely the Shand 
environmental impact statement will go out for public review 
ahead of this one because it came in a long time ahead; it’s just 
natural that it should follow that way. So we will be dealing with 
them separately. The public will have plenty of opportunity to 
discuss each one. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’d be delighted to ask the SPC 
these questions, but I don’t think the SPC got elected in any riding 
in Saskatchewan. They’re not part of this Assembly. The process 
is, sir, that you got elected, you’re the minister, and you have the 
responsibility with respect to these reports, not SPC. 
 
SPC’s responsibility is to deliver power. Your responsibility, as 
Minister of the Environment, is to ensure that they do it in 
conformance with acceptable environmental standards. And part 
of that process is that the public have an opportunity to speak on 
the matter. And you, sir, have, you say — although I say it’s a first 
if it actually happens — you say they’re going to have a right to 
speak on Rafferty and Alameda. This is a part of that larger 
project, and I suggest to you, sir, it’s irrational to limit the 
discussion at the hearings to one portion of the project and out of 
all the hearings should be with respect to the whole project. That’s 
what the public are going to expect when they come there, and 
that’s what they should expect. And I suggest, if you’re not 
prepared to make that commitment, then, Mr. Minister, you’re not 
prepared to execute your responsibility to put the environment of 
this province ahead of your narrow political interests, because 
that’s patently what you’re doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member says that I’m elected and 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation isn’t. That’s true. But there is a 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation who 
sits in this House, who is elected and is quite capable of answering 
questions. And that’s what I’m telling you. 
 
As far as the public hearings, I’ve given a commitment to the 
public that there will be public hearings on the Rafferty and 
Alameda projects. I’ve outlined to you today, and I’ve outlined 
before in the news, the process that would be followed with the 
Shand. And after that public review process is complete, that’s the 
time we’ll make the decision whether or not public hearings are 
required. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Is the difference, Mr. Minister, that Alameda 
and Rafferty are not key to the power development project; Shand 
is, and that’s why you don’t want to put Shand up to the light of 
day because you don’t want to jeopardise it? You, Mr. Minister, 
and the Premier, are not satisfied that that project can stand a 
public examination, and that’s why you haven’t announced a 
hearing. And that’s why you have with respect to Rafferty and 
Alameda, because they aren’t essential. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re not prepared to do anything. I suggest, Mr. 
Minister, you’re not prepared to do anything which jeopardises 
this power project, notwithstanding that there are other alternatives 
available at a good deal less cost. This is in the Premier’s riding. 
He somehow or other feels that the pollution of the air in his riding 
is essential to his election and you’re not prepared to do anything, 
Mr. Minister, which will jeopardise this project. And that’s why 
you haven’t announced any hearings, because this is sacrosanct. Is 
that not the case, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Department of the Environment is not 
responsible to make the decision of whether or not a project is 
financially a viable project. That is not within our purview. Our 
purview is really to review it, to safeguard the environment, to 
give the people the opportunity to speak. And we’re doing that. 
And I believe that we’ve done a good job of it up to this point. 
And as you see the process go forward, I’m sure that the people in 
the area will also be satisfied. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, all rational objections to this 
project have been bulldozed aside. I want to spend a moment 
going over the history of this whole project because I think that 
you’re part . . . your department is part of the rational objections 
which have simply been bulldozed aside because the Premier has a 
fixation on this power project. The power was available from 
Coronach at a lesser cost. That was admitted. But that isn’t in the 
Premier’s riding. Indeed, at the time the decision was made, it was 
in an NDP riding. Now it’s in a Liberal riding so it isn’t attractive 
to you, notwithstanding the fact that it’s a few hundred million 
dollars cheaper. 
 
Those considerations of the fiscal integrity of SPC in this province 
was just swept aside because the Premier has a fixation on this 
project for some reason or other. 
 
Mr. Minister, the same thing has happened to your department. 
Your department has not been permitted to carry out its legitimate 
function because of the Premier’s obsession with this power 
project. It is patently obvious that there ought to be public hearings 
on this. There hasn’t been a major development in this province 
which has been as controversial, in environmental terms, for a fair 
length of time. 
 
As I stand here, I have difficulty thinking of another project in 
Saskatchewan which has evoked as much controversy, because of 
environmental issues, as this whole project. It has been nothing but 
a public storm since it was first announced. Some of the concerns 
have  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

932 
 

been financial, but a goodly number of them have been 
environmental. 
 
If there was one project, Mr. Minister, which ought to have been 
held up to the light of day for a thorough examination, it’s this 
one. You’re not prepared to do it because the Premier isn’t 
prepared to let you, because this projects stands on holy ground, 
and nothing, but nothing is going to come between the Premier 
and this lamentable power project. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, that if you were doing your job, if you only 
had one thorough, honest, and complete set of public hearings, it’s 
be on this whole project. You haven’t done it because, as I say, 
with the Premier, this project stands on holy ground, and nothing 
touches it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member was part of a cabinet of a 
former government. And maybe when he was in cabinet, that’s the 
way things were done. But I can tell the hon. member that’s not 
the way things are done at this time. There’s a different 
government in power. 
 
The decisions with regard to the environmental impact assessment 
and the public hearings, and decisions of that nature with relation 
to the Rafferty and Alameda and relation to the Shand, will be 
made by the Minister of Environment, not by the Premier, not 
under coercion by the Premier, or any other way, but strictly 
. . .The job was turned over to my department; it’s my job to make 
those decisions, and I’ll make them when the time comes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Who set . . . Mr. Minister, who sets the terms 
for the environmental impact assessments? Who sets those terms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I wish you would sort of tell me what you 
mean by “who sets terms?” What do you mean by “terms”? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Who sets . . . For the benefit of the minister, 
who’s seeming to have trouble with the English language, let me 
be as simple and precise as I can. Who sets the terms of reference 
for the environmental impact? Who does that? 
 
I’m amazed you have to ask somebody, Mr. Minister. It’s you. It’s 
your responsibility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We develop the guide-lines that must be 
followed to prepare the environmental impact assessment. And 
after we receive the document, if there’s any other information we 
require, we call for that as well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That simple and obvious statement, Mr. 
Minister, was the only admission I wanted. 
 
Your earlier justification for dealing with these things separately 
was that the environmental impact statements had come forth 
separately, and you were dealing with them as you got them. 
 
Mr. Minister, you set them. And if you have different statements 
coming at different times, that’s because that’s the way you 
organised it. It’s all the same proponent; it’s SPC in all cases. You 
set it, Mr. Minister. You have clearly  

divided up this project because you believe it to be in your own 
public interest. I say, Mr. Minister, you could have combined 
these into a single statement. That clearly should have been done. 
If your best justification for not having done it is that the 
statements came forth in a different order, then I say you’re 
damned by your own inability to provide a more rational 
explanation. Because if that’s the best explanation you’ve got, it’s 
obvious that raw political interests are superseding your 
responsibility as an environmental minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member is again trying to throw out 
a few slurs, and maybe that makes you feel good, I don’t know. It 
doesn’t bother me a lot. I can tell you, sir, that we were requested 
to provide guide-lines for an environmental impact assessment for 
Shand, and we did that. And that particular impact study went 
ahead, and it came back to the department and is being worked 
through the department. Separately we were asked to provide the 
same kind of terms of reference for Rafferty and Alameda, and 
that was done. 
 
Now I don’t believe that you would expect the Department of 
Environment to be telling the proponents which projects they must 
tie together and which projects they do separately. That’s their 
decision; that’s not ours. We don’t have that authority; we don’t 
take that authority, but we do demand that the job to be done well 
once we tell them to go ahead and do the study. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the proponent in all three cases 
is the same body. It’s a Crown corporation; it’s SPC. You 
admitted that there’s a member of this Assembly who’s 
responsible for them. And the government, being the only 
shareholder, has some ability to control the efforts and the 
activities of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Mr. Minister, 
you could have asked the Saskatchewan Power Corporation — the 
cabinet could have asked the power corporation to do this in a 
more rational fashion, but you didn’t. 
 
But I really want to deal with your statement that you wouldn’t 
expect us to tell the proponents how to organise this. Indeed I 
would, . Indeed I would expect the department to ensure that the 
environmental impact assessment or assessment, as the case may 
be, comes forth in a manner which provides for a logical analysis 
if the project and provides for the most fruitful and effective public 
input. And I would not expect you to permit SPC to organise this 
in such a fashion that it’s very difficult for the public to provide an 
input. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Minister, if you read that Act which you’re so fond of 
reading. I think you will find it is the responsibility of the 
Department of Environment to ensure that environmental impact 
assessments are done in as effective and efficient a manner as 
possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Maybe the hon. member is not aware that 
there are two different groups involved. Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation is developing the Shand project. The Souris Basin 
Development Authority is the developing body that is involved 
with the Rafferty and Alameda project. It’s not the same company. 
It’s two separate groups entirely. That’s the way that it came 
forward, and that’s the way it will stay. They are different  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

933 
 

people. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
know that these are not two separate projects. I just want to give 
you an example of why they’re not two separate projects. 
 
One of your announced reasons for the Rafferty dam being 
constructed is that the Rafferty dam and the reservoir that will be 
created is going to water-cool the generators at Shand. So the two 
projects are obviously integrally connected. 
 
And my question to you is: do you not acknowledge that 
connection? And therefore in light of that connection, why will 
you not allow the public to comment by way of public hearings on 
the two projects together? Because obviously if Shand’s not going 
to be water-cooled but, for instance, air-cooled instead, then you 
don’t need Rafferty at all. My question to you is: do you 
acknowledge the connection between these two projects, this very 
integral connection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There will be some use made of the water by 
the Shand development. You know, if I followed your logic to its 
ultimate end, then every project in the city of North Battleford that 
connects to the North Battleford public sewage system are 
connected projects, you know, if you want to go that route. But I 
don’t agree with you that we have to deal with these two as one. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Let me ask you this question, Mr. Minister: 
would you build the Rafferty dam at all; would your government 
go ahead with Rafferty if it wasn’t for Shand? What’s your 
justification for pursuing Rafferty in the absence of the Shand 
power project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the minister responsible would be the 
one to ask that question. I don’t think it’s part of the Environment. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — You know, Mr. Minister, that there would be no 
justification for that project. These are two integrally connected 
projects. 
 
I’d like to ask you another question. In the term that your 
government has been in, from 1982 to the present time, have you 
ever held a public hearing, vis-a-vis an environmental assessment, 
on any project that’s come before your government? Has there 
been a single public hearing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, there hasn’t been. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Doesn’t that fact speak for itself. There were at 
least half a dozen public hearings in the years 1976 to 1981. There 
has been no public hearings from 1982 to 1987. What’s your 
justification for not holding a single public hearing on a single 
project that’s come before you? What’s your justification? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would have to say to the hon. member that I 
had very little input into whether or not they were holding public 
hearings, as you are well aware, during that period. I sat in the 
Speaker’s chair and was basically cut off from the decision 
making authority at 

that time. 
 
I have made public on different occasions that there will be public 
hearings on the Rafferty-Alameda projects, and the member has 
heard that. He knows the project will have those hearings. So I 
think he can be quite comfortable that, now that I’m Minister of 
Environment, there will be at least one public hearing. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well at least there’ll be one, Mr. Minister. But 
your record with respect to public hearings, and your 
government’s record, has been abysmal. 
 
You went ahead, for instance, and allowed the development of the 
Collins Bay B zone uranium mine right on the edge of Wollaston 
Lake, within a hundred metres of the lake, Mr. Minister, and your 
government didn’t have a public hearing on that. And we’ve seen 
other developments being undertaken in this province, that should 
have been subject to public hearings, that weren’t. 
 
And now we’re seeing the case of a classic cover-up at Shand, in 
the Premier’s riding, with a major 600 million development that I 
say, Mr. Minister, is even questionable about whether it’s needed. 
In light of the fact that there are all kinds of alternatives that need 
to be examined by the public, alternatives such as: would an 
investment of $600 million in energy conservation not have netted 
you a lot more benefits in terms of energy than a $600 million 
investment in that power plant; or would it not have been cheaper 
to go purchase power from Manitoba than it would have been to 
go ahead with Shand; or would it not have been cheaper to build at 
Coronach than it would have to go ahead at Shand? And would 
those other options that I’ve just outlined not have been more 
environmentally beneficial than going ahead with Shand? Those 
are some of the questions, Mr. Minister, that are posed by this 
development. 
 
And over and above that, there are the obvious impacts that this 
project is going to have in terms of acid rain emissions, in terms of 
water pollution emissions. Three is the obvious question that this 
project could potentially be air-cooled instead of water-cooled, 
and therefore Rafferty would be unnecessary, which is my view, 
Mr. Minister, that Rafferty is a completely unnecessary project. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Minister, this is clearly a political project. 
This project is going ahead because it’s in the Premier’s riding, 
because the Premier wants to push it ahead, irregardless of all the 
potential objections, in time to have it fully constructed and in 
operation before the next election. 
 
(1130) 
 
And, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: what’s your justification 
for separating Rafferty from Shand, and are you not simply 
following on in the tradition that your government’s established in 
the last five years of refusing to hold environmental impact 
assessments on damaging projects by refusing to hold one on the 
Shand power project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

934 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, the minister . . . or the member makes a 
broad-ranging speech, and very little of it really applies to the 
Department of Environment. So I’m going to not follow your 
example; I’m going to stay on the subject issue that we’re dealing 
with today, and that’s strictly the relationship that this department 
has with the two projects. 
 
We don’t make the decision of which projects are combined; 
that’s made by the proponents, the two different proponents. They 
make the decision. We have demanded that each one do the 
environmental impact assessment, and we have given the 
guide-lines that must be followed. 
 
We’re dealing with each one of these environmental impact 
assessments in the department at this time. As soon as they’re 
complete, they will go out for public review. Both of them will 
have a 30-day public review period. Then there will be public 
hearing opportunities on the Rafferty Alameda. And I have told 
the hon. members that if there is a necessity of public hearings on 
the Shand, they may also be called, but that decision will be made 
at the end of the public review period. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ve been listen in with 
interest to my other colleagues’ questioning, Mr. Chairman, of the 
minister, and I find that the minister, in fact, is not telling the truth. 
He is not telling the truth in regards to the linkage between the 
problems . . . Between the projects, pardon me. And he’s not 
telling the truth, and he darn well knows he’s not telling the truth 
in this regard. 
 
I want to refer, Mr. Chairman, to a letter . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d just like to remind the hon. member that 
terms like that are not acceptable in this House, about not telling 
the truth. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, there is nothing, I would submit, in 
any parliamentary rules of order that says that you are not allowed 
to say somebody is not telling the truth. You are not allowed to use 
other words, and I ask you to check your Beauchesne’s on that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I am informed that this is the Chair’s 
discretion, and my interpretation is that these are unparliamentary 
words. And I ask you to rephrase the question, please. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, the Deputy Premier has written a 
letter which says that the Minister of the Environment is not telling 
the truth. And let me illustrate what I mean by that. 
 
In the Leader-Post on March 10 of ‘86, there appeared a letter by 
Eric Berntson, the Deputy Premier and also minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan corporation . . . the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. In this letter to the Leader-Post, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Berntson points out precisely the linkage between Alameda 
Rafferty on the one hand and Shand on the other. 
 
And I want to quote. It says he’s talking about, or replying  

to a letter from a gentleman named Murray Rousay, who happens 
to be the mayor of Coronach. And I’ll get into Mr. Rousay’s 
comments in just a few minutes, Mr. Berntson says: 
 

Mr. Rousay was also critical of the use of the Rafferty and 
Alameda dams to provide water for power generation, 
irrigation, recreation and industrial and municipal water 
supplies, as well as downstream flood control. The $120 million 
required for the two dams will be shared by the United States 
government ($57 million) and by Saskatchewan Power ($14 
million). 

 
Saskatchewan Power — $14 million. 
 
Saskatchewan Power, as the minister admitted, is one of the 
proponents involved in the Shand power plant; in fact, it is the 
proponent involved in the Shand power plant. Saskatchewan 
Power is also one of the proponents involved in the . . . through the 
Souris Basin Development Authority, is also one of the 
proponents involved in the Rafferty and Alameda projects. 
 
For the minister to try to stand here and deny that there is any 
linkage means that the minister is not telling the truth. The Deputy 
Premier of this province says that there is a linkage and that that 
linkage is a cash linkage of $14 million, and that was in . . . . 
(inaudible) . . . prices. And that, sir, is the truth. That, sir, is the 
truth. 
 
And when the minister stands here and says that the minister is 
engaged in a political, total political manipulation of the 
Department of the Environment in regards to the Shand project, 
my colleague from Regina Centre is also telling the truth, because 
that’s precisely what you’re up to, Mr. Minister. You are trying to 
sneak around the issues of Shand, the issues raised as to the 
propriety of first of all of building the plant; secondly, the 
environmental damage that it may or may not have in terms of 
southern Saskatchewan or across the border. And I’ll refer to some 
of the comments of Governor Sinner in regards to acid rain a little 
bit later. 
 
You’re trying to sneak around and hide behind . . . use, once again, 
the Act to try to hide from the people of this province their right to 
question the Department of the Environment; their right to 
question Saskatchewan Power Corporation as proponents of 
Shand and also as proponents of Rafferty; their right to question 
the linkage between the two and, in fact, the necessity of spending 
$600 million for Shand and $120 million for Rafferty-Alameda, 
projects which both happen to appear in the Premier’s own 
constituency. 
 
This is nothing more than a political boondoggle. Let me tell you, 
and let me tell you, the people of Saskatchewan, this is nothing but 
a political boondoggle. They ask Saskatchewan people to restrain 
themselves; they’re asking Saskatchewan people to tighten their 
belts; they’re asking Saskatchewan people to watch where the 
pennies go. They’re pleading poverty. They’re saying, we’ve got 
to cut the dental plan; they’re saying that we’ve got to cut the drug 
plan; they’re saying that we’ve got to cut education facilities in 
this province. On and on and on. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

935 
 

Money to transition houses, they’re cutting; money to the Voice of 
the Handicapped, they’re cutting. One after the other they’re 
cutting money, and what are they doing? They’re going behind the 
backs of the people of this province, spending $600 million at 
Shand and not allowing a public hearing; $120 million at Rafferty 
— $120 million at Rafferty, but try to split the two and saying . . . 
now they’re trying to split the two, the minister is, and saying that 
there is no connection. 
 
What I want to know from you, Mr. Minister, is this: are you now 
saying that Rafferty and Alameda — because that information will 
be part of the environmental impact statement, or should be part of 
the environmental impact statement — that the flow of water from 
Rafferty and Alameda will no longer be going to Shand, and in 
fact that the Shand power plant can be used for . . . cooled by 
purposes other than water. Is that what you’re now telling the 
people of this province, that there is no linkage, that there doesn’t 
need to be a linkage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member goes off onto another long 
diatribe that has very little backbone and very little strength from 
any source. 
 
I have told the member that the Shand project would draw water 
from the Rafferty-Alameda project. I said that quite plainly here, 
and you can read Hansard and you will see it. But I also told you 
that the proponent for the Rafferty-Alameda project is the Souris 
Basin Development Authority, and that’s the only one that we as a 
department deal with on that project. And so they will be dealt 
with separately. 
 
They came to the department separately. We have no choice but to 
deal with them separately. They’re going to be dealt with that way; 
the public will have opportunities, through the public review 
process — as I’ve told you many, many times. The big statement 
that you make that we’re hiding it from the public, there’s no truth 
in that at all. The public will have plenty of access. All the access 
that the public wants will be available to them. So for the member 
to stand and make some of these wild statements, I don’t think do 
him much credit, and they certainly are not factual. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, as to the wildness of the statement, I 
think the people of the province will judge that, and I think they’ll 
get an opportunity if your government screws up the courage and 
calls a by-election in Eastview. We’ll see who makes the wild 
statements or not, in that regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now, as to whether the content of that statement 
was wild — as to the content whether that was a wild statement. 
Let’s look and see what you’re saying. You’re saying that we have 
the Souris Basin Development Authority over here, as one 
proponent — and that’s what you said — and we’ve got Sask 
Power over here as another proponent. Now would the minister be 
so kind as to enlighten the House as to who happens to be the 
chairperson of the Souris valley Development Authority, and who 
happens to be, also, the president of Sask. Power? 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think that that has really any place in 
my estimates, but I believe the member knows the answer to his 
question. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well now as proponents, in fact, once again, I 
think the people of the province are seeing the slippery and sliding 
nature of the kind of answers that you’re giving in regards to this 
program. 
 
Let’s put it . . . as the Minister of the Environment, and I 
mentioned that these were proponents, we had two different 
organisations that were proponents of the developments, and that’s 
using your logic. Okay? On the one hand, we have the Souris 
Basin Development Authority, who as a proponent for the Shand 
. . . for Rafferty and Alameda Dam projects . . Who is the 
president or who is the chairperson of the Souris Basin 
Development Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the member knows who the chairman 
is, and it is a man by the name of George Hill. 
 
I think what you have to also realise, that the Souris Basin 
Development Authority has a number of people on the board, and 
they represent different interest groups. They are funded 
separately, entirely. If Sask. Power puts money into the project, 
the money that they put in will go through to that development 
authority, and it will be paid for in that manner. So I don’t think 
that the fact that one member from Sask. Power is on the board 
has all that much significance; certainly he’s a high-powered 
person, he’s a very capable person, and he’s been involved with 
the negotiations with the Americans and all of those things, and I 
think he’s doing a good job. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, that’s good. We have George Hill as 
the chairman of the Souris Basin Development Authority. And 
over here — that’s one proponent; and over here we have another 
proponent — because you’re trying to split them apart — we have 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
Now I understand, and I think that you understand, that the 
president of Saskatchewan Power Corporation is a person named 
George Hill. Is that not correct? And is it the same George Hill 
which is the former president of the provincial Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member is making a lot of allegations, 
and I think he probably knows some of the answers. whether or 
not he is a former member of the Progressive Conservative Party, 
or whether he is still a member, has very little to do with the 
estimates at hand. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — In other words, that you’re admitting that the same 
person who is the leading light of the proponent for the Shand 
project is also the same person who is the leading light for the . . . 
as the proponent of Rafferty-Alameda is the same person who is 
the former president of the Progressive Conservative Party, who is 
the same person who got his political plum in that position by 
being appointed to his $210,000-a-year job at Saskatchewan 
Power, that’s the same George Hill? And you’re trying to stand 
here and tell this House that this 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

936 
 

 isn’t political? You’re trying to stand here and say that that isn’t 
political? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think that we’re involved in paying 
anybody any amount of salary. If the member has questions as it 
relates to the projects at hand, I’d be pleased to deal with those 
question. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’re asking a few questions, 
and they’re turning out to be somewhat politically embarrassing 
for yourself and for your government, given the fact that it’s a 
political boondoggle and that there’s not a person in this province 
who doesn’t believe it’s a political boondoggle. Even that small 
group of greedy little business people in Estevan who are the Tory 
backbone — the McClellands and the Hills and the Dennis Balls 
and all that little ilk — the people that you’ve appointed to feed at 
the public trough, even though they will admit that it’s a political 
boondoggle. 
 
What we’ve been trying to say, Mr. Minister, to you, is that in 
order to put this political boondoggle that you were promoting on 
behalf of your government, will you hold public hearings in 
regards to Shand, given that you were going to hold public 
hearings for Rafferty and Alameda? And that they are all 
integrally connected, that there is no splitting despite whatever 
kind of splitting you want to make in your own mind, that in 
reality, and from the words of the Deputy Premier, that the 
projects themselves are totally intertwined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ve answered that question to the hon. 
member several times, and the same answer still applies. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — That’s right, you’re not, Mr. Minister. You’ve 
answered that despite the best evidence in the world that you . . . 
that the reason for making that decision doesn’t hold water. You 
said to the people of Saskatchewan that you’re not going to hold 
public hearings into Shand because it’s not connected with 
Rafferty. 
 
(1145) 
 
Let’s ask this way . . . yes you did, sir. In all respect, you shake 
your head now, that’s the reason you gave. You said that . . . to the 
member from Regina Centre you kept saying, well you’ve got to 
split them, that they’re two distinct projects. Won’t you now 
admit, won’t you admit that in fact Rafferty, Alameda, and Shand, 
as envisioned by your government, and as will be stated when the 
environmental impact statements are made public, that in fact 
there is a connection between the two and they’re all part of the 
same development? All part of the same development in that area 
of southern Saskatchewan, and form the point of view of the 
proponents they cannot be separated one from the other. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I won’t make that statement. I have told 
you several times that, yes, Shand will draw some water from that 
Rafferty dam when it’s complete. There will be other users who 
will also draw water from that project. There will be a lot of 
recreation develop along the project, a lot of irrigation 
opportunities. So that is a multi-purpose development that’s going 
ahead. There  

are two separate proponents that came to our department to make 
requests for developments. Sask. Power came for the Shand 
project, to make a request for a development. The Souris Basin 
Development Authority came for the other one. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, your answers are not holding any 
water. Let’s return back to The Environmental Assessment Act. 
Once again, let’s go back to The Environmental Assessment Act. 
We all know that the project itself is not going to hold any water 
because the United States government has refused to provide the 
$41.1 million of appropriation. So if we’re to believe George Hill, 
and his assertion that we need the 41 million, the project will never 
go ahead. 
 
We find out that, in fact, the project may never go ahead, given 
that the United States is even now saying, we don’t think that this 
project may be the best interest for their side of the border. 
 
But returning to the environmental impact, An Act respecting the 
Assessment of the Impact on the Environment of New 
Developments. Section 2(d)(ii) of the Act says: 
 

“development” mans any project, operation or activity or any 
alteration or expansion of any project, operation or activity 
which is likely to: 
 
substantially utilise any provincial resource and in so doing 
pre-empt the use, or potential use, of that resource for any other 
purpose; 

 
We have Shand power plant, which by your own admission and 
which by the admission of the government is going to utilise the 
resource, provincial resource, i.e., the waters of the Souris river. 
We have Rafferty and Alameda which is going to be constructed 
so as that provincial resources, i.e. the waters from the Souris river 
and from Moose Mountain creek are going to be utilised, and that 
that resource is going to be taken from those two constructs and 
used at Shand. And you’ve said that by your own admission and 
by statement after statement of your own government. 
 
Don’t you agree, that in light of what the Act says as to what 
constitutes a development, that the pre-empting of the use of the 
provincial resource, i.e. the waters of Moose Mountain creek and 
of the Souris river by the Shand power plant, makes the whole 
operation one development? Doesn’t the Act guide you in this 
matter, Mr. Minister? And won’t you admit that, in fact, that it’s 
all part of the same development and that your responsibility, as 
the Minister of Environment, is to look at it as one development 
and not to try to split it up into two separate little parts so you can 
hide, you can hide from the people of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have demanded environmental impact 
studies from both groups. And the member knows that; I’ve told 
him many times. But if you follow the extreme logic that you’re 
using now, then if irrigation draws water out of the same reservoir, 
then it would be classified as the same development and would 
have had to come in under the same environmental impact  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

937 
 

assessment. You know, that just doesn’t hold water. It’s not the 
way the Act works. And the way that it is going ahead now is 
proper under the legislation we have. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, that, sir, in plain English is a bunch 
of hogwash. In fact, if one were to draw irrigation from the dam 
— in fact you’ve said that there is going to be irrigation from the 
dam — surely your department is going to look at things like the 
salinity levels and the effect of salinity in the area. 
 
We have Shand building the power plant; we have Rafferty which 
is going to take water from the Souris River and put it to Shand. 
And that’s the only rationale that you have from your own 
admission. We have irrigation, and you’ve said there’s going to be 
irrigation. Surely, sir, that you are going to look upon this whole 
thing as a same development in terms of affecting the environment 
of the area upon which this development impacts. 
 
For you to stand here and say that these things are not connected 
shows you have a total lack of understanding of the eco-systems. 
You’re supposed to be the Environment minister. Eco-system 
implies in fact a relationship, a symbiotic relationship, between 
what you do at A will affect what you do at B, which will have an 
effect at C, which will impact at D. And for you to try to draw 
mental constructs . . . If you try to derive mental constructs that A 
does not affect B, shows you’re either lacking in the sort of, the 
very rudimentary knowledge needed to carry out your job, or 
shows you’re trying to undertake a political operation. 
 
And I’d prefer it in fact, sir, with all due respect, to consider that 
you’re undertaking the latter. Because I think you know very well 
from your own experience as a farmer, that when you do certain 
things to the land, that wheat crop, the yield of wheat crops, will 
be affected, and that A does have an impact on B. I don’t think 
you have to look beyond the end of your nose to figure that one 
out, with all due respect. 
 
won’t you admit and don’t you think that, as the Minister of 
Environment, when you see two things that are going on, two 
activities that are going on, and the people who are undertaking 
those activities say yes, there’s a connection between the two, 
don’t you think that in fact there is a connection between the two? 
And when you can see with your own eyes that A will affect B in 
this instance — that Shand will affect Rafferty, Rafferty will affect 
Shand, the irrigation in the area will be affected by or will be 
developed by it — don’t you think that the whole thing forms part 
of one development. And don’t you think the Act, in fact section 
2(d)(ii) of the Act, gives you that latitude as a Minister? 
 
If you’re interested in protecting the environment, if you’re 
interested in looking at the eco-system of that area, if you’re 
interested in fact of standing up for the environment in that 
south-east part of the province, that if you’re interested in that, 
don’t you think that these things are connected, and that you 
demand from the proponents one developmental plan for that part 
of the basin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The environmental impact statements are in 
the department now, and they deal with both of  

those projects. The public review process will be followed, as I 
advised the hon. member. 
 
Later on, after the public review process is complete on the Shand 
project, we’ll make a decision at that time whether or not to go 
ahead with public hearings, and I’ve advised you of that. I have 
advised the public generally that we will go ahead with public 
hearings on the Rafferty-Alameda, and I’ve advised you of that. 
 
When we come to the point after all of that process is complete, 
then it comes the times that I must make the decision whether or 
not we give the project the go-ahead. And at that time, if there’s 
need to consider the relationship in any way, it can be done at that 
time. 
 
But there are many things that have to take place under the Act; 
they are proceeding in the normal fashion. People will be given 
plenty of opportunities to review and react. And I believe that the 
member is trying to build a problem that really isn’t a problem. 
 
There’s nobody has given approval to go ahead and develop either 
the Shand project or the Rafferty-Alameda at this time. They have 
to go through the review process and at the end of that process is 
when the decision is made. So I’d ask the member to please stick 
to those as guide-lines when he things about it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s obvious to everybody in 
this province except, I guess, yourself, that in fact that these 
projects are interrelated. And for you to stand here and say to the 
Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan that maybe some 
time down the road, maybe some time in the future, we’ll look to 
see if these projects are interrelated, are total hog-wash. I mean, 
you can pick up any newspaper, any newspaper article in this 
province that deals with Shand or Rafferty or Alameda — it 
connect them. 
 
I want to refer you, for example to the Leader-Post, December 10, 
1986: 
 

“Group says dam would destroy park, farmland.” A group 
opposing construction of the Rafferty Dam said Tuesday that 
21,000 acres of agriculture land will become unusable and a 
regional park flooded if the project goes ahead as planned. 

 
And here’s the important part in this regard: 
 

The dam, to be built on the Souris River north-west of Estevan 
as part of the $500-million Shand power project, is to be jointly 
financed by the Saskatchewan Power Corp. and civic, state and 
federal levels of government in the United States. 

 
That’s one newspaper story. We look again. November 19, 1986: 
“Report on dam effects expected in January.” Regina — this is the 
Leader-Post again, or pardon me, the Star-Phoenix. 
 

An environmental impact statement for the proposed Rafferty 
and Alameda dams is expected to be complete by the end of 
January. “I would guess we’re looking at a thickness of seven 
inches  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

938 
 

of paper.” said Gordon Mills, director of public affairs for the 
Souris Basin Development Authority. “It’s no light matter. The 
two proposed dams and reservoirs, the Shand on the Souris 
River and the Alameda on Moose Mountain Creek, are part of a 
$500 million Saskatchewan Power Corporation, coal-fired 
generation project planned for the south-east of Estevan.” 

 
Just two of the many newspaper articles. 
 
The reporters in this province know that, in fact, these projects are 
linked together. You government says time in and time again that 
these projects are linked together. Why won’t you admit to the 
people of the province that in fact these are linked together, and 
that there should be public hearings held on the project as a whole, 
that there should be public hearings so that the people of the 
province have the opportunity . . . 
 
Why won’t you do that? Is it because you’re out there to cover the 
Premier’s behind in this matter? That you’re out there to protect 
the Premier and the Deputy Premier — who happens to be the 
minister in charge of Saskatchewan Power Corporation — from 
the kind of probing and from the kind of questioning as to the 
efficacy of development of Shand, Rafferty and Alameda? 
 
Isn’t that the real reason? That you’re using your department as 
nothing more than a narrow partisan political weapon; that you’re 
not interested in the environment of that part of the province; and 
that you’re interested in one thing and one thing only, and that is 
to act as the political cover man for the Premier and the Deputy 
Premier when it comes to Shand, Rafferty and Alameda. I think 
the facts think for themselves. And I think that the people of the 
province deserve to know the answer to that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member again is making some very 
wild accusations. When I look at the Deputy Premier, I don’t think 
that he really needs me to protect him. He’s quite capable of 
protecting himself. He’s done a pretty fair job of it up to this point 
in history, and I think he’ll continue. The Premier, again, is very 
capable of protecting himself. He doesn’t have to have me doing 
that. 
 
So the job that I have to do is a different job, and that is to see that 
the environment of the province is protected. That’s the job of this 
department. that’s the job that we take very seriously and will 
continue to do that. I believe the hon. member, when all is through 
the mill, will realise how effectively the department has worked to 
protect the environment of the province. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, given the fact that you 
accuse me of prone to making wild statements, whether the mayor 
of Coronach is prone to making the same wild statements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I haven’t talked to the mayor of Coronach, 
and I don’t think that it’s up to me to decide whether his 
statements are wild or not. But I’ve just been listening to yours and 
that’s the statement I make for yours. 
 

(1200) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I refer here to a story in the 
Leader-Post, “Mayor blames politics for location of plant at 
Estevan, not Coronach.” And it says: 
 

Mayor Murray Rousay says politics is the soul reason Sask. 
Power’s new $500 million power plant is going to Estevan 
instead of his town of 1,000 that desperately needs the 
economic stimulus of such a project. 

 
The story goes on to talk about the differing financial 
arrangements regarding the construction of a plant at Coronach 
versus the construction at Shand, or the other option which is 
available to the province, which is to purchase low-cost power 
from Manitoba. 
 
I said before, and I say it now, and I’ll say it again: your credibility 
as a Minister of the Environment is at stake, sir. Your credibility 
before the people of this province is at stake unless you agree to 
hold public hearings into all aspects of that single development, 
that single development being Shand, Rafferty, and Alameda. 
Your own government has said it’s one development,. and it’s 
linked. You yourself in a roundabout manner, have said that 
there’s a linkage between the two, and that one necessitates the 
other. 
 
Will you allow public hearings so that the people of Saskatchewan 
can in fact expose this project for what it is, which is nothing more 
than a political boondoggle? A hundred and twenty million for the 
dams in the Premier’s constituency — $720 million of taxpayers’ 
money gone into the Estevan constituency. 
 
And here we have the Minister of the Environment acting as the 
shield, as the front man, trying to manipulate and distort and use 
every wiggly trick in the world in The Environmental Assessment 
Act so that you won’t allow public hearings on this project. 
 
That sir, is what you’re doing. The mayor of Coronach realises 
that you’re plying politics with this issue and that it’s a political 
issue. Why won’t you admit to the people of the province that it’s 
a political issue and hold public hearings on all the project, the 
whole project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t suppose it ever crossed the hon. 
member’s mind that maybe the mayor of Coronach was playing a 
little politics when he made his statement. You know, why was he 
concerned? He was concerned because he would like to see the 
project in the Coronach area to strengthen his own community. 
 
You say that we’re playing politics, as though politics were a dirty 
word. Well in our book it isn’t. Politics is what governs our 
country, and I think it’s very important that politics be involved in 
many of the decisions. But when it comes to the environmental 
part of it, politics are not directly involved. That’s the time for the 
public to have input, the time for a true evaluation of whether or 
not the environment is going to be injured significantly or whether 
it’s within the purview of the department to give 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

939 
 

 it the go-ahead. 
 
And we’re dealing with it on that basis — to look at the 
environmental impacts, to see that the environment of our 
province is not harmed, and that we leave for the future generation 
a province with a good environment in which to live. 
 
We’re had two major power developments in the southern part of 
the province that are operating. The control of the environment, I 
think, has been good. There are some ash emissions and so on, but 
overall it’s been good. The people of the area basically are quite 
satisfied, and I think you’ll find the same when this project goes 
forward. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, in fact we’re making this issue and 
giving it such attention because the exact opposite, the exact 
opposite is the truth. 
 
The people of this province are opposed. They’re opposed to part 
of the development project, part of this one development project. 
They’re opposed to Rafferty and Alameda in particular. And 
they’re opposed for all of the environmental reasons which you 
have been notified of. 
 
And you talk about openness and allowing public input. Well why 
is it, sir, that when a group representing over 50 per cent of the 
population of the province of Saskatchewan asks to meet with you 
on Rafferty and Alameda, when they ask to meet with you, that 
you have turned them down? And I refer here to the Friends of the 
Valley group, the coalition of people in Saskatchewan who are 
opposed to Rafferty and Alameda. Why have you turned them 
down and refused to meet with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Friends of the valley group have never 
been refused. What they were told is that, until the environmental 
impact statement is complete, we don’t have the facts at our 
disposal to make the kind of decisions that are necessary. So we 
advised them that they should wait until after the public review 
and the public hearing process. If they still wish to meet, then my 
door is open. 
 
I meet with many groups, and I’ll meet with that group at any 
time. But I don’t see a purpose, really, in meeting without having 
any of the facts that are going to come forward through this 
environmental impact assessment process. All of us would be 
flying a bit blind. 
 
You know, if we followed your complete logic, we would never 
have had Lake Diefenbaker and the Gardiner dam. And it flooded 
an awful lot of land back through my own constituency. There 
were quite a number of people that were concerned at the time that 
that project was being developed. 
 
I can till you today that most of the people who had objections at 
the time are saying how thankful they are that that project went 
ahead and that we have Lake Diefenbaker to provide water. And 
perhaps when you take a drink of water here, you’ll appreciate 
Lake Diefenbaker as well, because when you compare the water 
that we have today to what we had prior, it’s quite  

different. 
 
The people likely, in the area of the Rafferty project, as the 
environmental impact statement is made available to them in the 
public review process, and as the ongoing negotiations occur that 
will give them a land value for the land that will be flooded, 
alternative lands that they can use because their present land is 
flooded . . . When you talk about the Mainprize Park, and it is 
going to be flooded, you know, I can tell you Palliser Park at 
Riverhurst was also flooded, but the new Palliser Park surpasses 
anything they had before, and the people there are entirely happy. 
 
So it’s very difficult to make the broad statement that the people in 
Saskatchewan are opposed to the Rafferty project. The people of 
Saskatchewan had an opportunity in an election, after those 
projects were announced, to publicly declare, to the world really, 
that they were not opposed to what the government was 
proposing. And I believe the people in Estevan and area there 
supported the Premier in his bid for re-election. If they were that 
concerned, they could have defeated him. They didn’t choose to 
do that. So to make the statement the whole world is opposed is 
not quite right. Many of the people in the province feel that it’s 
long overdue to make this move. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, the statement I made in regards to 
who’s opposed and who’s not opposed, I said 50 per cent of the 
people of this province are opposed to Rafferty-Alameda. I’ll stick 
by that statement. And if the Minister wants to use the yardstick of 
the election as whether or not that’s a true statement, I would ask 
him to check in fact the percentage of the vote of eligible electors 
in this province; the percentage of the vote received by his party as 
opposed to the percentage of the vote received by the other parties. 
And you will find, Mr. Minister, you will find that a majority of 
people — not a plurality but a majority of eligible electors in this 
province did not vote for you, did not vote for your party. and if 
that’s the yardstick you want to use, then I think I’m quite happy 
to allow that yardstick. 
 
The majority of the people in this province don’t support you, 
don’t support your government, and it’s plain. And if you want to 
use polls, we’ll look at the last poll. Fifty-six per cent of the 
people, eligible voters in the province, would support the party I 
represent. Only 26 per cent would support the party you represent. 
 
And if we want to keep talking about Rafferty and if you want to 
stand there and defend Rafferty, let me tell you, sir, that the 
proportion of people who end up supporting our party will 
increase. Because I have listened very carefully to what you said. I 
listened very carefully to the words you said. And you said: after 
the valley is flooded. You used terms like that. After the valley is 
flooded, after Dr. Mainprize Park is gone, and so on and so forth, 
such will happen. 
 
From your very words, isn’t it true, isn’t it true that you’ve already 
made the decision, and that you made the political decision to go 
ahead with Rafferty, and that you’re standing here already 
defending it while your job as the Minister of Environment is to 
critically examine it, in fact, to take a negative view, you’re 
standing in the House defending Rafferty. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

940 
 

That proves to us, that proves to the people of the province that 
you’ve already made that decision and that you’ve got no right to 
sit there as a Minister of Environment, to stand up and try to 
mouth phrase about protecting the environment because you’ve 
already made the decision to go ahead with Rafferty, and you’re 
going to use The Environmental Assessment Act and you’re going 
to use any other Act that’s under your purview to go ahead and 
defend the political boondoggle which is Rafferty, and which is 
Alameda. You stand condemned by your own words. You stand 
condemned. For what you said, Mr. Minister, was that this was a 
fait accompli, and that in your mind, that Rafferty’s already built. 
 
And that’s the way you’re picturing it. And you’re saying that it’s 
going to have the same benefits and effects as the Gardiner dam. 
So how can you possibly try to stand here and say you’re going to 
go through an impartial environmental process, you’re going to 
allow input from the people of this province, when you’ve already 
made up your own mind, when you’ve already said that Rafferty’s 
going to go ahead. Or let’s refer, Mr. Minister, let’s refer to it, if 
you haven’t made up your mind. 
 
I want to ask you this: has the Premier, as part of the 
environmental impact statement, put on record that in fact that he 
hasn’t yet made a deal with Marubeni corporation of Japan in 
regards to the construction of a plant in Saskatoon for turbines for 
the Shand plant. Or when he said, in fact, that that project was 
under way, was he not telling the truth to the people of this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Again, the hon. member is making some 
fairly wild statements. Many of them I don’t think really even 
deserve a response. I have told you when the decision would be 
made whether or not Rafferty and Alameda will be built, and 
that’s a ways down the line. 
 
We have to go through the environmental impact assessment 
process. We go through public hearings, and when that’s finished, 
then we’ll make the decision. The decision has not been made. 
 
What I was referring to the hon. member was the circumstances 
that surrounded Lake Diefenbaker and the objection that people 
had at the time, but the satisfaction that they now experience 
because the lake is there. And I refer you to the same thought that 
will likely be the case if Rafferty goes ahead, and that is, that when 
the lake is filled, when the people know all of the detail, when they 
have prices for land and alternative options, they will see it 
differently than they do today. But we haven’t given authority for 
any projects. We won’t give that authority till much later, after all 
of the hearings have been held. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — well, Mr. Minister, how is it then that the Premier 
. . . how can you justify statements made by the Premier of this 
province, in regards to Shand and Rafferty and Alameda? In 
particular, how can you justify the statements that a deal has been 
signed with Marubeni corporation of Japan in order to construct 
the turbine corporation of Japan in order to construct the turbine 
generators at Shand if, in fact, a decision has not already been 
made? How can the Premier stand here and make those kinds of 
statements when, if as you say, a decision has not already been 
made? If a decision hasn’t been  

made, then how can the Premier order turbines for a project which 
doesn’t have approval? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that whether or not the ordered 
turbines would not be something that would be under the purview 
of the Department of Environment. That would fall under the 
minister responsible for Sask. Power, and when his estimates 
come before the House, would likely be the proper time to deal 
with that subject. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, you, as part of the Executive 
Council, and I assume also as Minister of the Environment, are 
concerned with the finances of the province. I mean your 
government has been talking about finances and setting up a 
scenario about how bad we’re all doing, and so on and so forth. 
We have the Premier of the province who makes a statement that 
he signed an agreement with Marubeni corporation of Japan for 
the purchase of turbines. Have you told, as the Minister of the 
Environment, have you told the Premier that he’d better not make 
that order because your department may turn thumbs down on 
Shand? Have you advised the Premier that in fact that because he 
has an environmental impact statement, that that project is not a 
certainty? Have you, as Minister, done that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I suppose maybe at one time, when the 
Leader of the Opposition was premier, there may have been need 
for his ministers to run to him and make that kind of statement, 
because he wasn’t very observant. But the Premier we have today 
is very observant. He knows exactly what stage the environment 
impact assessment process is at, because the papers reported 
immediately that it came forward and that it went into the 
department. 
 
So our Premier can make those deductions without me running to 
him and saying, look, Mr. Premier, you must do this. He’s quite 
capable of making those decisions. I don’t believe that the Premier 
went to Sask Power and told them to order turbines. I think Sask 
Power’s board of directors make that kind of decision. And the 
member is kind of drawing a lot of false conclusions here that 
have little relevance to the subject at hand. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Environment Minister, I suspect that 
they have a great deal of relevance, particularly in regards to this 
project. We have the Premier who says that turbines from Japan 
are on order, and that a plant will be constructed in Saskatoon. 
These aren’t . . . these weren’t put there with conditions. These 
statements weren’t made with conditions. These were statements 
of fact. These were statements of fact, according to the Premier, 
that these things were a fait accompli. 
 
We have the Premier of the province saying, we’re going to go 
ahead with Shand, we’re going to go ahead, let’s build the Shand 
power plant. That’s what he said: we’re going to go ahead and 
build the Shand power plant. He didn’t put any conditions on it. 
 
I’m asking you, sir, I’m asking you, sir, that . . . We have  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

941 
 

the position of . . . the situation where the Premier has gone ahead 
and set up the Saskatchewan . . . or the Souris Basin Development 
Authority in order to hide the activities, to hide from the people of 
the province the activities of Alameda and Rafferty. We have 
them setting this and spending money, and spending thousands 
and thousands of dollars to do a PR job to fly —- not take around 
in the valley, but fly — reporters in this province around to try to 
sell reporters in this province on the idea that this is a viable 
project. 
 
We have the Premier in your government, of which you are a 
member, spending literally thousands of dollars and committing 
hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars, to projects which 
don’t have an environmental approval. Have you told the Premier, 
and have you told Executive Council, that in fact they’d better 
keep their mouths shut about these projects, because they haven’t 
been approved and because there’s a possibility that your 
department will turn them down? Or is the reality different? 
 
That, in fact, that it’s a fait accompli; that you, as Environment 
minister, are nothing more than a shield behind to go through a 
number of little hoops; and that in fact these projects are already 
on-line, in the works, which you yourself admitted. You, yourself, 
previously admitted that Saskatchewan Power had these projects 
in the works and have committed funds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Sask. Power has not spend hundreds of 
millions of dollars at this time. 
 
If you’re going to go ahead with any development, you have to 
make certain decisions. And one of the decisions is that you’re 
going to do an environmental impact assessment, and that’s the 
stage that determines whether or not the development’s going 
forward. 
 
To do a statement like the one that Sask. Power has done on the 
Rafferty and Alameda and the Shand, when you do that kind of 
environmental impact assessments, you do spend quite a number 
of thousands of dollars, because that is very detailed work; it takes 
considerable amount of time. You hire consultants that have 
expertise in the area, and you pay them. So, yes, you spend some 
money. 
 
I believe that any business man who’s going to do any 
development spends some money, knowing full well that when he 
spends it that he may not get permission to go ahead and he may 
lose it. But it’s the only way of finding out whether the project can 
go. So that’s the process that we’re at at this point. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, how is it, Mr. Minister, that the Premier can 
make statements that, in fact, a plant will be built in Saskatoon and 
that turbines will be purchased — not maybe — but will be 
purchased from Marubeni corporation, if the decision has not been 
made. If the decision has been made, then the thing’s a fait 
accompli, and all you’re doing with the supposed environmental 
assessment is a sham. If the decision hasn’t been made, then the 
Premier of this province is not telling the truth about the Marubeni 
Corporation’s contract, about buying turbines, about building a 
plant in Saskatoon, and about the dam. 
 

You can’t have it both ways. Either the decision has been made, or 
it hasn’t been made. What I’m asking you, as the minister, because 
you’re aware of these statements as well as everybody else in the 
province, that you, as minister, have you advised the Premier and 
other members of Executive Council not to sign any contracts to 
buy turbines, or to build plants, or to order up contracting firms, or 
to deal with consultants until the environmental impact study is 
done. Have you advised them of that fact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I advised the hon. member before, the 
Premier of this province is well aware of the process of 
environmental impact assessments. He knows the stage that it’s at. 
I don’t have to run to him and give him that kind of advice. He’s 
quite capable of making those deductions on his own, and he does 
that. 
 
The member continually ties the Shand project to the 
Rafferty-Alameda. If the dams were not to go ahead for any 
reason, Shand would still likely be built, and it could be 
air-cooled, as you have said earlier. So it’s not an absolute that the 
two must go together. One could go separately. 
 
We’re going to need generators in this province if we’re going to 
supply power for the people, and if they want to order generators, 
Sask. Power is quite within their authority to order generators. So 
the project in Saskatoon is there; I think the people of Saskatoon 
are happy with it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, your answers just aren’t very 
convincing on this matter. The question I asked you was: as the 
Environment minister, have you taken the same trouble to advise 
the Premier of the province in regards to a $720 million 
development in south-eastern Saskatchewan as you took with Paul 
Meagher and Mr. Boris Mamchur at Redberry Lake, in which you 
advised these proponents not to go ahead until an environmental 
impact study is done. Your own admission . . . by your own 
words, you said you met with these proponents many times and 
advised them many times not to go ahead with any of the 
developments. Have you followed the same procedure in dealing 
with the Premier of this province when he shoots his mouth off 
about spending hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers money at Shand, at Rafferty, and 
Alameda? Have you at least done that, followed that procedure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think you’re looking at two entirely 
different situations here. Paul Meagher and his company did not 
do an environmental impact assessment. Rafferty and Alameda 
have done an assessment. The Shand project has done an 
assessment. So you’re looking at two entirely different situations. 
 
And you know, and I have told you many, many times today, that 
there will be no approval for those developments to go ahead until 
the whole public review process is complete, and in the case of the 
Rafferty and Alameda the public hearings have taken place. So 
they are entirely different. The Premier is aware of the total 
process. I don’t have to run to him and advise him. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, we have $720 million  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

942 
 

of taxpayers money at stake in this project. The Premier has made 
statements that certain things have been done which have 
committed money in terms of . . . and I would suspect that if a 
contract has been signed with a foreign corporation, there are 
certain financial guarantees attached to that contract. The question 
I’m asking you, sir, is: did you, as the Minister of Environment, 
advise the Premier as to the advisability of signing any long-term 
contacts or making any monetary commitments in regards to these 
two projects until the environmental assessment process has been 
gone through and ministerial approval has been approved for the 
project? Did you advise him of that or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I have answered exactly that question several 
times and I answered it very straightforward. I told you that the 
Leader of the Opposition, when he were premier, maybe would 
have needed that kind of advice from the Minister of 
Environment. The Premier that we have today does not need that 
kind of advice. He is quite able to read. He knows the process, he 
knows where we’re at. I see no need of making that kind of visit to 
his office to advise him of what he can and cannot do. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Am I correct in saying that you haven’t advised 
the Premier of not making any long-term financial commitments 
in regards to these projects? Am I correct in saying that? Yes or 
no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Absolutely no. I don’t need to go and give the 
Premier that kind of advice. I’ve told you that many times, and I’ll 
stay with that. He’s quite able to make that deduction on his own. 
And it is the power corporation who would make the decision to 
buy generators. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister,. the question I’d asked you, and now 
you’ve given a double negative — the question I asked you: am I 
correct in saying that the minister, that you have not advised the 
Premier to not sign any long-term commitments until the 
environmental process is completed. you said to that, no. Then I’m 
to assume that in fact you have, that you have advised the Premier 
of that fact. 
 
But the other part of your answer says, no you haven’t. Now 
which is it? Which is it? When I say that you have not advised the 
Premier not to sign long-term contracts because the environmental 
assessment process hasn’t been completed, am I correct in saying 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member appears to be very hard of 
hearing. I’ve told you that I see no need of running down the 
hallway to the Premier’s office and saying, you can’t do this and 
you can’t do that. The Premier is a very capable man. He reads 
and he understands. And he can make his own deductions. He 
knows exactly what process is required before those projects get 
the permission to go ahead. he knows that the environmental 
impact statements have been prepared and that they are filed. For 
me to run to him to make that kind of a statement would be 
absolutely foolish. The Premier doesn’t need it. He can make 
those deductions without any difficulty. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, it seems that the Premier isn’t 
capable of doing that. The Premier of the province has  

said, and has said it repeatedly, that there is going to be the 
construction of a plant in Saskatoon to produce turbines for the 
Shand power plant. The Premier of the province is under the 
impression that it’s a fait accompli; that in fact it’s something 
that’s already been accomplished; that in fact Shand is there. His 
statements, time after time after time, reflect an attitude that that 
plant is as good as been built. 
 
Surely you as Environment minister would take the time to 
caution him, (a) not to make that kind of commitment because 
your department may turn it down. Or you’ve made the political 
decision. And I suspect that this is the real case — that you’ve 
made the political decision to say that Shand is a fait accompli; 
that’s going to go ahead. And yes, Mr. Premier, you can go ahead 
and make all the kind of public pronouncements that you want. 
And that that’s the real reason that you won’t hold public hearings. 
 
(1230) 
 
The real reason you won’t hold public hearings into the Shand 
power plant development is because the Premier knows it’s a fait 
accompli and that you’re scared to allow the people of the 
province to put it under the light, in fact, because the province has 
already made financial commitments in regards to Shand, 
financial commitments which would prove financially 
embarrassing to the Premier and to yourself as Environment 
minister, and that you’re not doing your job; that what you’re 
saying is not true, in fact that it’s just nothing more than a bunch 
of boloney to try to hoodwink the people of the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — These are the worst estimates I’ve ever 
heard in my life. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, the member from Weyburn says it’s 
the worst estimates he’s heard in his life. I thank him very much 
for that compliment. We hear him and the Deputy Premier calling 
for progress in these estimates, and there’s a reason for that. And I 
think it’s because it’s turning into somewhat of a political 
embarrassment to see how the Department of Environment, under 
your and your predecessor’s reign, has turned into nothing more 
than a narrow political tool to be wielded by the Premier any time 
he says jump. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, about some of the proposed 
projects that you say are separate that we say are in fact not 
separate. First of all, certain statements have been made by 
proponents of the Rafferty dam that benefits will accrue to the 
people of this province through its construction. One of those 
statements concerns irrigation and the amount of irrigable land 
that will be put under irrigation with Rafferty. Could you tell us, as 
the Minister of Environment, what the proponents have told you in 
regards to the amount of land which will be irrigated by the 
Rafferty project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The information about the acreage that will 
be able to be irrigated from that project will be in the 
environmental impact statement when public review begins and 
the member can get it from that statement at that time. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

943 
 

Mr. Lyons: — What you’re . . . so, Mr. Premier, what you’re . . . 
or Mr. Minister, what you’re saying to us is that anything in 
regards to Alameda and Rafferty are off limits for the estimates 
because the environmental impact assessment hasn’t been 
submitted. Is that the reason why you put Environment up, the 
environmental estimates up first, so that we in the legislation can’t 
go after you on these estimates? Is that the reason? Is the prince of 
darkness, the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, is he behind this 
kind of political manoeuvre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the member has any serious questions, I’d 
be glad to answer it. But if it’s just going to be a long speech with 
no question at the end of it . It’s very difficult to answer. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I began the question . . . I began my 
statement with the interrogative and that was the word “is”. And in 
normal English usage that interrogative forms the basis of a 
question. What I asked you was: when you began to do 
environmental estimates, was the prince of darkness, the member 
for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, behind this as a political move? Is that 
what you’re trying to hide it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe the decision to go into estimates is 
made by the government and the selection of which one goes first 
is normally done by the House Leader. And the reasons behind it, 
I don’t believe are of any concern. Each department is going to do 
the same process. My department happens to be the first this time 
and I’ll be pleased to answer questions if the member has any. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Let’s go back to a few questions then, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there a possibility, is there a possibility that the 
Shand power plant will not receive ministerial approval from your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The possibility is there on any environmental 
impact assessment, that the project will not be given the go-ahead. 
So yes, there is every possibility that that could happen to Shand 
or it could happen to Rafferty and Alameda. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, in the light of your statement that 
these projects may not receive the approval from your department, 
do you consider it prudent and wise of the Premier to go ahead and 
make long-term financial commitments on behalf of the people of 
this province in ordering, first of all, turbines and the construction 
of a turbine plant up in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that has no relevance really to the 
estimates that are before us. If the member would like to ask that 
question of the Premier, the Premier is here most days for question 
period. He’ll be here for his estimates; you may ask him at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I would submit it has every 
relevance to this process. You are the Minister of the 
Environment; you have the final approval over whether or not 
those projects are going ahead. 
 
In the case of Mr. Mamchur and Mr. Meagher and  

Redberry Lake, you in fact repeatedly intervened and had officials 
from your department repeatedly intervene, warning them — and 
this is from your own words — warning them that an 
environmental impact statement was necessary before they go 
ahead with any project. You have not said that there is the 
possibility that Shand will be turned down, that there is that 
possibility. Have you followed the same procedure in regards to 
the Premier of this province when there is $720 million of 
taxpayers” money at stake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I answered the same question for the member 
before, and maybe he’s got a short memory. The Redberry case 
with Mamchur and Meagher were advised that an environmental 
impact assessment was required. To date they have not filed an 
environmental impact statement. 
 
With the Shand development, they have filed an environmental 
impact statement. With Rafferty and Alameda, they have filed a 
statement. The two have no relation one to the other. 
 
So I think that the member should look at what he’s asking. We 
have two major projects; they’re done major environmental impact 
assessments. And as those assessments go through the review 
process, the people will have a chance to speak to them. 
 
When Meagher and Mamchur do an environmental impact 
assessment, if they ever do, when they do and it comes forward, it 
will also have the opportunity for public review. So, you know, 
they’re two entirely different problems that we face, and you 
cannot relate the two. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I submit that you can relate the 
two. You’re following, as you have repeatedly said time and time 
again in estimates, you’re following the assessments or the 
procedures as laid out by The Environmental assessment Act. 
You’re not. How can you say that when, on the one hand, you 
follow a certain procedure in regards to Redberry Lake and you 
advise them time after time, again, time after time not to go ahead 
with the project because they haven’t got an environment impact 
statement, and at the same time, when you hear statements made 
by the Premier and other members of Executive Council that, in 
fact, these projects are going to go ahead, why haven’t you, as the 
Minister of Environment — and I’ll ask you this again until you 
give me a suitable answer — why haven’t you, as the Minister of 
Environment, done your job and informed them? 
 
I don’t care whether it was by telephone, verbally, or in writing, to 
the Premier or other members of Executive Council. Why haven’t 
you informed them that they had better not make any 
commitments in terms of these things going ahead until the 
environmental assessment process has been completed? Why 
haven’t you done that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I advised you, the Premier is very much 
aware of the requirements to go through the environmental impact 
assessment process. The two projects have come forward with 
very major environmental impact assessment statements. So I 
think that what you’re talking about is entirely two different  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

944 
 

problems. 
 
Mamchur was advised, and Meagher was advised that they must 
do an environmental impact assessment. They didn’t do it. So it is 
an entirely different problem. 
 
The Premier knows that there is a possibility that any project can 
get turned down through the environmental impact assessment 
process. I don’t need to tell him that. He’s aware of it. He’s aware 
of exactly the process that must be followed. For me to repeat that 
to him would be almost foolishness. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, in June of 1984, the “Projects 
Specific Guide-lines for the Preparation of an Environmental 
Impact Statement” prepared by your department was released. I 
want to read to the House the title of this “Projects Specific 
Guide-lines.” It says in the “Projects Specific Guide-lines for the 
Preparation of Environmental Impact Statement”, “Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation Thermal Generating station at Estevan, 
Saskatchewan and Rafferty Dam and Reservoir.” 
 
You have stood in this House, and you have said that the 
environmental impact statements prepared by the proponents had 
to be two different and separate environmental impact statements 
because there were two different and separate developments. 
 
In June of 1984, your department drew up “Projects Specific 
Guide-lines”, and what they did was link them both together in the 
tittle; and also page after page of the guide-lines, as we go through 
them, outlines how these things relate together. Will you now 
admit that in 1984, the department of Environment said those two 
projects are one development, and demanded that “Projects 
Specific Guide-lines” be developed for them as one development? 
And will you now, then, also agree to hold public hearings on all 
three aspects of this same development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — At the time that the initial request came 
forward, it came forward as one request in 1984. Later the 
decision was made that they would come forward as separate 
developments, and the Souris Basin Development Authority was 
stuck. The group then were given the responsibility for the 
Rafferty-Alameda project and the negotiations with the Americans 
and all of those things. 
 
So the initial outline was prepared by the department as one 
project. Later they were prepared as separate guide-lines for the 
two projects. That’s the stage we’re at at this time, and that’s the 
method that was used for the development of the environmental 
impact assessments. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — We know, Mr. Minister, back in 1984, I believe, 
that the Department of the Environment prepared these project’s 
specific guide-lines for that project because they understood, as 
everybody in Saskatchewan understands, that this whole project is 
one interrelated, one interrelated development — one interrelated 
development as defined by The Environmental Assessment Act, 
and that, in fact, was the interpretation placed on it by the 
Department of the Environment. 
 

And I want to read for you, Mr. Minister, not the whole text of this 
project’s specific guide-lines, but the headings, but the headings of 
the text. We have, first of all, the introduction, and it lays out . . . 
and I will read the introduction because it is very, very important 
in terms of the argument that we’re having here today. In 1984 the 
project’s specific guide-lines said: 
 

These guide-lines have been prepared to assist Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation in preparing an environmental impact 
statement for the proposed new 600-megawatt thermal 
generating station at Estevan and Rafferty dam and reservoir on 
the Souris River. The proposed generating station is less than 5 
kilometres north of the Canada-United States border. The 
associated dam and reservoir will be on a stream that flows first 
into the United States and then back into Canada and Manitoba. 
These guide-lines include the most important concerns in 
information which have been identified by Saskatchewan 
Environment, by the environmental assessment review panel, 
and by the governments of Canada and Manitoba, as being 
required by the environmental impact statement. However, 
these guide-lines should be regarded as neither exhaustive nor 
restrictive, as further concerns and daily requirements could 
arise during investigations associated with the environmental 
impact assessment. Saskatchewan Environment will provide 
advice and assistance throughout the EIA (environmental 
impact assessment) process. The trans-boundary implications 
require that Saskatchewan Power Corporation obtain an 
exception form or license pursuant to the International River 
Improvements Act prior to the beginning of power generation. 

 
(1245) 
 
And then we go on to different headings: “Wildlife, Fish and 
Habitat,” “Agricultural Land Use,” “Water Quality and Quantity,” 
“Air Quality,” “Archaeology,” “Socio-economic Concerns,” 
”Development and Operational Details,” “Prediction Evaluation 
and Mitigation”, all put together within one whole package which 
says that those developments are going to impact on the area as a 
whole in the areas outlined. 
 
That was the opinion of Saskatchewan Environment back in 1984. 
What I want to know now from you, Mr. Minister, is: what 
changed the opinion of the officials in your department? Why, in 
fact, all of a sudden, different projects — specific guide-lines are 
drawn up to split the projects in two? What was it that in 1984 is 
different from today? Why, in 1984, did the people in 
Saskatchewan Environment see this as one project and in 1987 
and 1986 see it as two separate projects? 
 
What was it that changed their minds? What was the difference 
that made them change their minds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, I don’t suppose there was any one thing 
that made them change their minds. When the original proposal 
came forward to the department, it was brought forward as one 
proposal. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1987 

945 
 

Later, as the Power Corporation looked at the Shand project, the 
decision was made that there were too many ties if they were to tie 
it to the Rafferty-Alameda, because the negotiation with the 
Americans, and all of the delay process that could happen on that 
project may not make it possible to develop power early enough to 
meet the needs of the province. So they decided to separate, and 
that’s what they’re done. And they set up the Souris Basin 
Development Authority. 
 
And as the hon. member realises, that on December 23, 1986, I 
sent a letter to him and outlined exactly that process. and the 
second paragraph of that letter, and I’ll read it for you, says: 
 

As you are probably aware, these two projects are now being 
assessed separately, by Saskatchewan Power Corporation in the 
case of Shand, and by the Souris Basin Development Authority 
in the case of Rafferty. 

 
So I think the hon. member has been aware of the separation for 
some time. He wrote to me, concerned about it. I responded to the 
letter and gave you the detail. That hasn’t changed. 
 
When the developers come forward to the Department of 
Environment, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation came 
forward, and the proposal for Shand was the one that was on the 
table. Then the Souris Basin Development Authority came 
forward, and the proposal for the Rafferty Alameda was on the 
table. 
 
So they are being treated in that respect, completely separate, 
because they were introduced tot he department to go ahead as 
two separate developments. It’s not our choice to decide which 
one should be tied to which one. That’s the developer’s choice. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — No, Mr. Minister, it’s not your choice if different 
proponents come forward with different proposals. I’ll agree with 
that. 
 
It is, however, your choice whether or not to view it as one 
development. The Act, in fact, specifically allows you to do that 
type of things. You don’t have to be bound by the manipulations 
of the Deputy Premier in terms of trying to break up this project 
into politically manageable proportions, which is what’s 
happened, which is what the Deputy Premier has done in this 
regard. 
 
You do have that choice, but you have failed to exercise your 
authority, as minister, to look at the development as a whole, to 
look at the developments as a proponent, as originally outlined to 
your department in 1984. 
 
What I want to know is, why is it that you will accept, as the 
minister, the definition of what constitutes those things to be 
looked at by proponents? What is it that makes you want to say 
that the proponents are the ones which will define what get looked 
at by your department and how it’s looked at by your department, 
and not yourself? Why don’t you exercise your ministerial 
authority and go ahead and admit something that everybody in the 
province knows, that it is one  

development; that it’s going to have impacts as one development; 
and that you’re going to look at the environmental affects to the 
province as one development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We are reviewing the environmental impact 
statement separately. And each development must stand on its 
own as it relates to that environmental impact statement. We can, 
as we review it, look at the areas where there will be some 
overlap, and that can easily be done, and it can be done all the way 
through the process. 
 
So the member is raising, I believe, concerns that are really not 
valid. The opportunities are there for the department to look at the 
projects. The department staff are not blind; they know that there 
will be some tie at the other end. But if only one project were to 
get the approval to go ahead, that project could go ahead without 
the other. So we must review them separately. That’s what we’re 
doing, and we’re following exactly the authorities that are 
provided under the Act. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Minister, that doesn’t explain to me the 
reason why you made that decision, although it goes part way to 
explain it. Is there the possibility, given what you’ve just said, that 
in fact Shand can go ahead without Rafferty and Alameda? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The possibility has always been there. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So the statements, Mr. Minister, from the point of 
view of the government in this regards, is that Shand does not 
need Rafferty and Alameda, and that Shand goes, so that the 
rationale and the reasoning that you needed Rafferty to cool 
Shand, that you needed Rafferty to cool Shand, doesn’t hold any 
water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that kind of a question should go to 
the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation, not 
to me. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — No, Mr. Minister, as someone who has had the 
opportunity to peruse both environmental impact statements from 
both proponents — and you’ve made the statement in the House 
that the possibility exists that A can go ahead without B, that 
Shand can go ahead with Rafferty — are you now saying that 
Rafferty, that the justification for building of Rafferty by this 
government, does not exist? That as Environmental minister you 
have access to information which says that we don’t need to build 
Rafferty to build Shand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, what I am telling you is that they were 
brought forward to the department as two separate developments. 
What I am telling you is I can give authority for one to go ahead 
and not the other. That authority is there under the Act. If 
necessary, we’ll use it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is interesting because 
judging from the line of questioning and the answers that you’ve 
been saying to us time again is, first of all, is that the government 
hasn’t told the truth when it says it needs to build Rafferty, it needs 
to build Rafferty to cool Shand. That the government has not told 
the truth in that regard. And so that when it makes statements to 
that  
  



 
July 3, 1987 

946 
 

effect, it’s not telling the truth. 
 
But secondly, and I’m getting the clear impression that, because 
the government has split Shand from Rafferty, that is now has the 
intention of going ahead with Shand, not going ahead with 
Rafferty and Alameda. And that the reason that you’re not holding 
public hearings into this whole matter in regards to Shand is 
because the government has made that commitment already and 
has made that political decision. And that you, as the Environment 
Minister, are going along with the government’s decision and not 
making waves for Shand because you know that in reality 
Alameda and Rafferty won’t stand up on their own two legs, and 
that this whole thing is nothing more than sort of smoke and 
mirrors operation to ensure that the Shand plant gets built in the 
Premier’s own constituency. 
 
Once again, if in fact it was necessary to hold public hearings 
when the things were linked in your mind and in the mind of the 
department, won’t you now admit that you can hold and go ahead 
and hold public hearings on Shand? And if you want to separate it, 
but that you hold the public hearings and that you treat it the same 
way that you’re going to treat Rafferty and Alameda. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ve told the hon. member many times today 
that we are going to go with the public review process for Shand. 
There’s a 30 day public review process, and at the end of the 
process that’s the time that I’ll make the decision whether or not 
public hearings will be held. I’ve told you that many times; I 
haven’t changed my mind; it’s going to go that way, exactly that 
way. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — What, Mr. Minister, will make you change your 
mind to go ahead and hold public hearings on Shand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It will only be after the public hearings are 
held and we see whether there is enough concern that there is a 
need. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 


