













































August 20, 1987 Hansard Evening


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 20, 1987 

 

 

1947 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Ombudsman 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in a few moments I want to 

move a motion dealing with the appointment of the Ombudsman, 

but before we do that, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk briefly about the 

individual who has been selected to fill that position, and indeed is 

in the acting position now. 

 

I don't intend to spend any time debating the merits of the 

Ombudsman concept. That's been debated in this House many 

times before at length. I don't intend to spend any time debating 

the process of selection. That's been debated many times before, 

and I suppose that we could spend some time debating that 

process here tonight. I expect members opposite will, and that's 

fine. 

 

But what I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the person that has 

been selected to fill this position. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to section 

3 of The Ombudsman Act, I recommend to this Assembly, that 

Gerald Peter McLellan Q.C. of the city of Regina be appointed to 

the position of Ombudsman. 

 

Pursuant to section 5(2), of The Ombudsman Act which requires 

that: 

 

Where the office of Ombudsman is vacant . . . the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council shall appoint an acting Ombudsman. . . 

 

Since April 3, Mr. Speaker, April 3, 1987, Mr. McLellan has been 

acting as Ombudsman in the province of Saskatchewan until this 

resolution could be dealt with here in the Legislative Chamber and 

presumably that acting position will be concurred in and he will 

have the permanent position for a five-year term. 

 

The former administration, I might point out, Mr. Speaker, took 14 

months before they appointed Mr. Tickell to that position when 

Judge Boychuk vacated the position. 

 

Mr. McLellan was born and raised and educated in the province of 

Saskatchewan. He brings many years of broad experience to the 

job. Mr. McLellan holds two degrees from the University of 

Saskatchewan, a Bachelor of Commerce and a Bachelor of Law. 

 

He has worked previously for both the public and private sectors, 

Mr. Speaker. He also holds a Certificate in Public Administration 

from Regina College. During the '50s Mr. McLellan worked as a 

analyst in the Saskatchewan government's budget bureau. In the 

late '50s and early '60s he practised law with the firm of Noonan, 

Embury, Heald and Molisky here in the city of Regina. Following 

that Mr. McLellan was solicitor in charge of the claims department 

of the Co-operative Insurance Services. 

 

For the past 22 years, Mr. McLellan has practised law with the 

Estevan law firm of McLellan, Cundall and Bridges. He is a 

family man, Mr. Speaker, and a community 

 minded individual. As an example he has been a member of the 

Estevan St. Joseph's Hospital advisory board for the past 10 years. 

 

Since April of this year, Mr. Speaker, as has already been 

mentioned, Mr. McLellan has been the acting Ombudsman. The 

Ombudsman's report for 1986 was tabled in this Assembly a 

couple or three weeks ago and in the highlights of that report Mr. 

McLellan leaves no doubt that to maintain the integrity of the 

Office of the Ombudsman and to leave it high in the public's 

esteem is a reasonable goal, Mr. Speaker, for any Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. McLellan's record of public service and his standing in the 

legal profession of this province, will, I feel, provide the province 

with a very able and diligent Ombudsman over the next five years. 

Mr. McLellan has a highly developed sense of justice, has 

demonstrated compassion and good judgement. These qualities 

will assist him greatly, Mr. Speaker, in his faithful and impartial 

performance and the discharge of his duties and functions as the 

Ombudsman. 

 

I therefore, Mr. Speaker, move, seconded by the Minister of 

Justice: 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending that Gerald Peter 

McLellan of the city of Regina, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, be appointed Ombudsman, pursuant to section 3 

of The Ombudsman Act. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, there are many comments that I will 

be making tonight about the manner in which this appointment 

was made that may leave the impression that I think the proposed 

Ombudsman is a bad person, but that's not the case. That's not 

what I'm saying. 

 

His friends however, his friends in the government, have put him 

in a very awkward position. The proposal to appoint Mr. McLellan 

came as a real shock to me and it came as a shock to many 

members on the opposition side of this House. It came as a shock, 

Mr. Speaker, because there had been absolutely no prior 

consultation with the opposition — not one iota of consultation. 

There had been correspondence, there had been considerable 

correspondence with the government about consultation respecting 

the appointment of the Ombudsman. There had been 

correspondence about setting up an all-party committee, and this 

correspondence was completely and absolutely ignored by the 

government with the exception of one letter taken from the 

member from Souris-Cannington to the former Ombudsman, Mr. 

Tickell, saying his recommendation respecting an all-party 

committee was under review — an all-party committee to select 

and recommend the appointment of an Ombudsman.  

 

This manner of appointing an Ombudsman without consulting the 

opposition flies in the face of the traditions of this government, 

Mr. Speaker. It's totally anti-democratic and flies in the face of the 

tradition of this House. It's unprecedented in Saskatchewan, it is 

arrogant, and some people would argue that it reduces  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1948 

 

accountability to the people of Saskatchewan. It's unfair to the 

public. And when I say it's unfair to the public, I just want to quote 

from a letter that was sent to the Premier of this province from the 

SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour), in which they 

expressed their regret over the manner in which this appointment 

was made. The letter is dated April 21 of this year, and the 

Premier will have that letter in his possession, Mr. Speaker. The 

last two paragraphs say: 

 

Your action in selecting an Ombudsman without all parties' 

support through the Legislative Assembly, without consultation 

with your colleagues in the legislature, and without a public 

search for the best candidate, has done an obvious partisan 

injustice to the people of this province in an office which should 

enjoy their full confidence and support. 

 

It is essential that we honour a time-proven tradition in this 

province, that of fairness and quality in services to the 

Saskatchewan people. The Office of the Ombudsman and the 

individual who fills that position is more than a symbol. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that summarizes many of the thoughts and 

feelings that people in Saskatchewan have with respect to this 

office and with respect to the appointment of an Ombudsman 

without prior consultation with the opposition members of this 

House. Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I can't believe that the 

government is here today asking us to approve this appointment 

without having undergone the necessary informal preliminaries 

that have been done in the past with respect to the appointment of 

an Ombudsman. 

 

In order to further illustrate why this consultation is so important, I 

want to describe and examine in some detail the role of the 

Ombudsman. The Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker, is an advocate for 

individuals. It provides ordinary people with access to a sort of 

appeal from arbitrary administrative decisions. In the last few 

decades, as we all know, there has been a tremendous expansion 

in the functions which government plays in the lives of ordinary 

men and women. Government increasingly plays a more and more 

important role in the lives of ordinary men and women, and many 

decisions that are made by government officials are of an arbitrary 

and administrative nature, a discretionary nature. These decisions 

often have a very profound effect on the life of an individual, and 

as a result of that, many of these decisions are subject to 

complaint. 

 

But when a citizen feels aggrieved, where does he or she go? 

Where does a citizen go when they feel aggrieved by a 

government decision? Some may go their MLA; others may chose 

to go to the Ombudsman. And for that reason an Ombudsman can 

play a very effective role. 

 

Now it was suggested by the member from Melville, I believe, 

during the course of the debate of whether or not there should or 

should not be an Ombudsman — which was a widespread debate 

that took place some time this spring when there was some 

suggestion by government members that they could do away with 

the Office of the Ombudsman — there was a suggestion by some 

of the  

members opposite that an MLA could play the same function and 

do the same things that an Ombudsman could do, and therefore 

there was no need for the Office of the Ombudsman. 

 

That's what we heard from the government members, Mr. 

Speaker. And that's just ludicrous. What that tells me, Mr. 

Speaker, is that those people who made that statement have 

absolutely no understanding whatsoever about the role of an 

Ombudsman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And that's why we're faced with the problem 

today, because they don't understand what an Ombudsman is 

supposed to do and what it's intended that the role of an 

Ombudsman be. That's why we're in this mess today, Mr. Speaker. 

That's why we're in this mess. 

 

Just to give you some examples of what I'm referring to: an 

Ombudsman has very wide investigative powers. He can go into a 

department and he can ask for information, and he can demand 

and insist upon and get documents from government. MLAs can't 

do that, Mr. Speaker. MLAs can't do that — we can't insist on 

documentation being produced. If the government chooses to say, 

no I'm not going to answer a question; no I'm not going to produce 

documentation — which they've done repeatedly in these 

estimates — they can get away with it. But an Ombudsman can 

make sure that that documentation is forthcoming. That's what an 

Ombudsman does. 

 

The other function, the other powers, I must say, that an 

Ombudsman has are the powers to hold quasi-judicial hearings, 

Mr. Speaker. Quasi-judicial hearings, bring up evidence, hear it 

under oath. Do MLAs have that power? Of course they don't, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So those members opposite who say that an MLA can stand in the 

place of an Ombudsman are being dishonest. They're misleading 

the public, Mr. Speaker, or else they're totally ignorant of what the 

role of an Ombudsman is. Either way, it's very upsetting and 

frightening. 

 

The independence of the Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely 

essential in order for this individual to carry out his responsibilities 

— absolutely essential that the Ombudsman be independent of the 

executive arm of government. It's crucial. It's crucial to the 

Ombudsman fulfilling his responsibilities. 

 

(1915) 

 

The Ombudsman is responsible to the entire Assembly, not just to 

the government. The Ombudsman is responsible to opposition 

members, to the member from Regina Elphinstone, to the member 

from Moose Jaw North, to the member from Saskatoon Fairview, 

to the member from Weyburn, to the member from Melville — 

responsible to each and every member in this House, not just to 

the government members, Mr. Speaker, and that has to be kept in 

mind. 

 

And when the Ombudsman does not have the initial  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1949 

 

support of all the members of the Legislative Assembly, I ask you: 

how can that Ombudsman properly and effectively perform his 

responsibilities and his duties? And I say "the initial support" 

deliberately — when the Ombudsman does not have the initial 

support, are the words that I used. And I used those quite 

deliberately because I recognize full well that as time goes on, and 

as days and years pass us by, the Ombudsman will be making 

decisions that will be unpopular with the government, because 

that's what an Ombudsman is there to do, is tale on government 

and protect people from arbitrary administrative decisions. 

 

That's what an Ombudsman is there for, and that's why an 

Ombudsman will inevitably make unpopular decisions with the 

government. And so it's understandable that after a few years or 

months go by, the bloom will wear off. But initially, initially, the 

Ombudsman should have the support of as many members of this 

House as possible, and ideally by every single member of this 

House. And when there is not support from the opposition, the 

public of Saskatchewan, the men and women of this province have 

to ask themselves some very serious questions, Mr. Speaker, some 

very serious questions. 

 

And I want to review, because I think the appointment of an 

Ombudsman in this arrogant fashion — in this unfair manner, 

without any accountability to the opposition, without any prior 

consultation with the opposition — I think that's indicative of a 

general attitude that this government has displayed in the last 

several months of this year, an attitude towards the people of 

Saskatchewan and an attitude towards the watch-dog agencies in 

Saskatchewan that protect individual rights. 

 

I believe that this is indicative. It's a symptom of an attitude that is 

rampant in the government and amongst the government 

members, that watch-dog agencies — agencies which protect the 

human rights and the rights of ordinary men and women — are 

unnecessary and unwanted and to be done away with funding cut, 

left, right and centre. And that's the attitude of this government, 

and that's what they've displayed, Mr. Speaker, in the appointment 

of the Ombudsman in this manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — This afternoon we were talking about cuts to 

native organizations. Native organizations, Mr. Speaker, have 

taken on the government. And what do we see after statements are 

made — hard statements criticizing the government, statements 

that it's every citizen's right to make in this country, in this free and 

democratic country, statements that are our right to make — what 

do we see? They get their funding cut off. 

 

And then let's look at the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission and the 15 per cent cub-back to the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission. That's an agency that's designed to 

protect individual human rights. And, Mr. Speaker, it also has the 

right to go against government if government does something 

that's discriminatory against individuals. So what does this 

government do? It cuts back the Saskatchewan Human  

Rights Commission by some 15 per cent and makes it very, very 

difficult for the commission to perform its duties effectively and 

properly. 

 

And then this government comes along and the former 

Ombudsman, Mr. David Tickell, came out and make public 

certain information to the public of Saskatchewan that the 

government did not like. And then Mr. Tickell went over to the 

John Howard Society to be the director over there, and what do we 

hear a week or two later, after Mr. Tickell's appointment is 

announced? The John Howard Society is cut. Another example, 

Mr. Speaker, of this government trying to muzzle — muzzle the 

watch-dogs of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And let's look at the Voice of the Handicapped. 

The Voice of the Handicapped has spoken out against the 

government, and it criticized the government for its inaction in 

certain areas. And the Voice of the Handicapped gets cut. And so 

it goes on and on. 

 

And now we have the Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker, the 

Ombudsman. We all know in this province that the Ombudsman 

was a thorn in the side of the PC government. We all know it was 

a thorn in the side of the government. And what happens? And 

what happens? An appointment is made to the position of 

Ombudsman. And appointment is made without any consultation 

with the opposition, and that Ombudsman is as much our 

employee as the employee of the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — So I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is the government 

attempting to minimize criticism of its workings and its decisions? 

Is that what the government's intending to do — to minimize 

criticism? And what other message is the government giving to the 

people of Saskatchewan when watch-dog agencies are being 

muzzled, when people who speak out are being cut back? What 

message does that give the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

I'll tell you what message that gives them. That tells the people of 

Saskatchewan, you toe the line, you keep your mouth shut — don't 

say anything or you're next on the list. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Ms. Simard: — But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan aren't going to put up with that. The people of this 

province don't like being shoved around, and they're not going to 

put up with being shoved around any longer. 

 

Now we ask ourselves, what is the normal process? What is the 

normal process? What usually happens when we appoint an 

Ombudsman? What do we usually do? 

 

Well the normal process, Mr. Speaker, is to first of all advertise 

the position; advertise it provincially, and advertise it nationally. 

Very simple. You know, such a straightforward thing to do; such a 

logical thing to do; such a fair thing to do. But what did this 

government do?  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1950 

 

Did it advertise? 

 

As far as I know, Mr. Speaker, not one single advertisement in this 

province. Not one advertisement provincially or nationally in 

order to select a candidate who may be the best of tens or twenties, 

or even more. Not one single advertisement, Mr. Speaker. Now 

how can that be justified, I ask you? How can that be justified? 

 

The next thing to do, Mr. Speaker, is to screen the candidates. You 

screen the candidates, and you come up with perhaps a short list 

that can be discussed by an all-party committee of this House, 

with members from government and opposition on it, and you 

bring these names before the all-party committee; you talk about 

the candidates. The opposition has an opportunity to ask about this 

person's political persuasion, or that individual, what have they 

done in the past, and what sort of qualifications do they have. Will 

they be good for the job? And the opposition gets an opportunity 

to review the curriculum vitae of these individuals, and to discuss 

it and have some input into the appointment. 

 

Well did that happen in this province, Mr. Speaker? No, it didn't. 

There wasn't any consultation at all, not even a phone call. Not 

even a phone call! The appointment was made out of the blue. I 

was downtown somewhere and heard it on the radio. Nobody was 

consulted. And I say that's simply atrocious and unacceptable, and 

it's contrary to the parliamentary tradition of this House. 

 

And these selection committees, Mr. Speaker, these selection 

committees exist in other provinces. In fact here tonight, I have an 

advertisement in my hands, and it's an advertisement from the 

Legislative Assembly of Alberta for an Ombudsman. The 

Legislative Assembly advertisement, the Alberta Legislative 

Assembly, for an Ombudsman. Let me just read to you, Mr. 

Speaker, what's on that advertisement: 

 

Canadians who have earned respect and recognition in their 

chosen fields in the community at large are invited to apply for 

the position of Ombudsman for the province of Alberta. 

 

This is advertised, incidentally, in the Star-Phoenix, so these 

advertisements were advertised across the country. They weren't 

advertised only in Alberta. 

 

The Ombudsman is charged with the responsibility under The 

Ombudsman Act to investigate the complaint of any persons 

who believe they have suffered an injustice through the actions 

or decisions of departments, agencies, or officials of the 

Government of Alberta. 

 

The Ombudsman carries out his/her duties through the 

management of a small group of professional and support staff 

and reports on the results of investigations to the legislature. 

The demands of this position require attributes that go beyond a 

specific discipline or academic achievement. It is desirable that 

the Ombudsman possess wide experience in dealing with 

people from all walks of life, knowledge of Alberta and its  

people, common sense, maturity, tact, patience, perseverance, 

fairness, integrity, tolerance, and sound judgement. 

 

An understanding of the distinction between natural and legal 

justice, a general knowledge and appreciation of the workings 

of the parliamentary system; strong communication skills, a 

practical knowledge of law and familiarity with investigative 

procedures. 

 

That's because the Ombudsman has very wide investigative 

powers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A knowledge of sound administration and management 

practice, and a high energy level and strong dedication (strong 

dedication) to the Ombudsman role. 

 

It goes on to say a few other things, but at the bottom, Mr. 

Speaker, it says that this is advertised by the Ombudsman 

selection committee. 

 

The Ombudsman selection committee. And when I look at the 

names of the selection committee which are at the bottom of this 

advertisement, there's a name of an NDP MLA at the bottom of 

that advertisement and the name of a Liberal MLA. There was 

representation on this selection committee from the opposition 

parties in the Alberta legislature. 

 

And did that happen in Saskatchewan? Did they advertise 

nationally, Mr. Speaker? No. Did they place a telephone call and 

say, we're thinking of perhaps appointing Mr. McLellan to the 

position of Ombudsman? No. Not a phone call. Not a phone call. 

No advertising, no phone call, no consultation; they just upped and 

appointed an individual without any consultation with this 

opposition. And even in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, they have a 

selection committee represented by all parties of the legislature. 

 

I would just like to set out, for this House, the sequence of events 

respecting the appointment, in this dismal manner, of the 

Ombudsman. September 15, 1986 the former Ombudsman, Mr. 

David Tickell, wrote, and he recommended to the government that 

an all-party committee be established. On December 17, 1986 the 

Leader of the Opposition writes and confirms that there should be 

an all-party committee established. On January 19 the Leader of 

the Opposition writes and asks for a reply, Mr. Speaker. He asks 

for a reply. 

 

Then on January 30 a reply is sent from the member from 

Souris-Cannington to Mr. Tickell saying that he's reviewing the 

situation. On March 3 the Leader of the Opposition writes once 

again, asking for a reply. No reply — absolutely no reply to our 

request for consultation and an all-party committee. Nothing. The 

opposition of this province that represent more voters in the 

election than that side of the House didn't even get the courtesy of 

a reply to our request for some input into the appointment of an 

Ombudsman. And I think that's despicable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1930) 

 

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1951 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And while all this is going on, the controversy is 

raging out there in the province, and we have editorial after 

editorial in the Star-Phoenix and the Leader-Post extolling the 

virtues of the Office of the Ombudsman. The people of 

Saskatchewan were speaking out because the members on that 

side of the House were saying, we're going to do away with this 

office because an MLA can do the same thing. Not understanding 

at all what the role of an Ombudsman was, they were making silly 

statements like that out in the public and the public was getting 

very upset and through editorials was lobbying this government to 

change its wrong-headed course and to reconsider the possibility 

of doing away with the Office of the Ombudsman. 

 

And I'll just quote from some of those editorials because I believe 

they're very succinct and to the point. The Leader-Post, February 

7, 1987. The title of the article, Mr. Speaker, is: "The 

Ombudsman's post must be kept filled." 

 

Should the government somehow decide that the Office of the 

Ombudsman is expendable, it would do so at its own peril. 

 

Now that's very interesting, Mr. Speaker. The editorial is saying 

that if the government were to eliminate the Office of the 

Ombudsman, it would do so at its own peril. Now if I was a 

government member I would be saying, gee whiz, maybe we 

shouldn't do away with the Office of the Ombudsman. But what 

else can we do to this office in order to make it less effective? 

 

The Ombudsman plays a vital role in helping those who feel 

they've been wronged by the bureaucracy to find their way 

around the red tape. 

 

That's what this editorial says, Mr. Speaker. The abolition or 

downgrading of the Ombudsman's office would be to the 

detriment of those who turn there for help. The abolition or 

downgrading would be to the detriment of those who turn there for 

help. 

 

Another editorial, Mr. Speaker, from the Star-Phoenix, February 

7, 1987. "The Ombudsman should stay," is the title of the 

editorial: 

 

This advocate for the people against bureaucratic and 

governmental abuses has become an entrenched part of the 

fabric of Saskatchewan society and it should remain so. 

 

Devine, (and I'm quoting from the article, Mr. Speaker) need 

only look elsewhere to see the effect on people when 

governments try to drop or curtail such services. The 

government of B.C. on a ruthless binge of spending cuts a few 

years ago, not only brought thousands of citizens onto the 

streets in protest, but instilled fear and insecurity among 

ordinary residents who felt they were being stripped of rights. 

Just the threat of loss of such human services dealt a devastating 

blow to the morale of thousands of B.C. residents. 

 

Ombudsmen from time to time embarrass  

governments, but such services are none the less necessary if 

just and humane treatment of citizens is to be maintained. 

Embarrassment is a small cost. Indeed, in purely political terms 

the cost of being seen to be silencing this voice of the common 

person would be much higher. But this isn't purely a political 

issue. Governments of all stripes need the kind of checks and 

balances an Ombudsman provides. Saskatchewan is no different 

than any other jurisdiction in that regard. 

 

And those are two editorials in the major cities in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I think the government was reading those editorials, and I 

think they were saying to themselves, it's not going to be 

politically expedient for us to do away with the Office of the 

Ombudsman, so we will backtrack, we will backtrack on the plans 

to abolish the office. But maybe what we should do is appoint 

someone who isn't going to be as eager to take on the government, 

and that's the . . . so eager to take on the government. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that was the thought process that this 

government was going through. So all of a sudden out of the blue 

we hear about the appointment of a former law partner of the past 

PC president in the province of Saskatchewan — a former law 

partner. 

 

And tonight when the member from Souris-Cannington was 

referring to the credentials of the proposed Ombudsman, Mr. 

Speaker, I didn't hear him mention that this person had extensive 

experience in human rights. There was no mention this person had 

extensive experience in the area of human rights. And that, I 

would suggest, is a major requirement for the appointment of an 

Ombudsman — someone who understands and has extensive 

experience in the area of human rights. 

 

I did not hear about the extent of the proposed Ombudsman's 

investigative skills. I did not hear about his ability in conducting 

inquiries and calling up evidence. I did not hear whether he had 

experience in those areas, Mr. Speaker, and those areas are crucial, 

absolutely crucial for an Ombudsman to have experience in. But 

there was no mention of that. 

 

So what does this mean to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker? What does this mean? It means that the government has 

little regard for the office of the Ombudsman and little regard for 

this legislature and its traditions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — It means that they're prepared for their own 

politically expedient purposes to provide the public with less 

protection or to minimize the protection that is now available to 

the public. 

 

It means that this government is prepared to reduce its 

accountability to the public. It's avoiding accountability, Mr. 

Speaker — once again, avoiding accountability. This is another 

incident, I might say, of avoiding accountability. I'd spoken on 

their attempt to avoid accountability when I spoke on the first 

appropriation  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1952 

 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, and the auditor, appointment of private auditors. 

That was another incident where they attempted to avoid 

accountability. 

 

But in any case, Mr. Speaker, they're doing it once again. Yet 

again, this government is attempting to avoid accountability to the 

public, and the result is, there's less fairness in government, Mr. 

Speaker, less fairness for the people of Saskatchewan, for 

individuals who are being trammelled on by the arbitrary 

administrative decisions in the public service, and who want some 

recourse — less fairness for the men and women of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I asked why did they not consult with the opposition. Why 

not consult? Why not set up an all-party committee? Why not 

advertise? Why just barge in like a bull in a china shop and shove 

this on us? I ask you, Mr. Speaker, why did they just barge in and 

shove this on the people of Saskatchewan, because Saskatchewan 

people don't like being shoved around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government, Mr. Speaker, the government does not belong to 

the PC party of Saskatchewan. The government belongs to the 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — They're only a small whirlpool, Mr. Speaker. 

They're only a small whirlpool in a much bigger lake, and they're 

only a fleeting moment in history, so why should they not uphold 

tradition? I asked you what they're afraid of. Are they afraid that 

their incompetence will become more obvious? Is that what 

they're afraid of? I ask you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is absolutely no question that the appointment of an 

Ombudsman in this fashion grossly violates the tradition of this 

House and the rights of Saskatchewan people — the rights of 

Saskatchewan people to have all members of this government 

meaningfully involved in the appointment of an advocate for 

them, a people's advocate, to take on government and keep 

government on the right track. This appointment in this manner 

shows extremely poor judgement, Mr. Speaker — very, very poor 

judgement, and it leaves a cloud of suspicion over the Office of 

the Ombudsman. It leaves a cloud of suspicion, and quite frankly, 

I don't think I'd want the job under those circumstances. 

 

And worse, Mr. Speaker, it leaves the Ombudsman in a very, very 

awkward position. It leaves the Ombudsman without the support 

of the opposition members of this House. And I ask you once 

again: how can he properly and effectively perform his 

responsibilities and have credibility with the people of 

Saskatchewan when the opposition members of this House do not 

approve of his appointment, particularly because of the manner, 

the absolutely arrogant and inconsiderate manner in which this 

government announced his appointment and made his 

appointment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to 

move an amendment to the motion. And if I just  

may read it: 

 

That all the words after the word "that" in the first line be 

deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

this Assembly refer the matter of the appointment of an 

Ombudsman pursuant to section 3 of The Ombudsman Act and 

the method of recruitment and selection to a select committee of 

the legislature. 

 

I would like to move that amendment, and it's seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate on the amendment and the main 

motion will continue concurrently. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a bit of time 

of the House this evening to set some background for the motion 

which we have before us and the amendment. And members 

opposite have asked for a little background as to how this office 

operated in past years and how previous appointments were made, 

and how we came to have an Ombudsman in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to give a little background of a personal nature because 

I've had a lively interest in the idea of an Ombudsman in 

Saskatchewan for many years. I was a minister in the government 

of premier Tommy Douglas and premier Woodrow Lloyd during a 

period from 1960 to 1964 when we first began to consider this 

idea in earnest. We were aware of the Swedish model which was 

adopted in Denmark. We thought that the Danish model perhaps 

offered a little more assistance to us because of the fact that their 

parliamentary system is more like ours than is the Swedish. 

 

(1945) 

 

We took special interest in the New Zealand experiment and 

followed the early experience of their Ombudsman. They call him 

a parliamentary commissioner. His name is, or was — I'm not sure 

whether he's still in office — Sir Guy Powles. He has visited here, 

visited in this Chamber. And we discussed with him the way in 

which the office operated in New Zealand and we felt that that 

would be a particularly appropriate model for Saskatchewan. It's a 

relatively small government, as we have here. 

 

A report was prepared for our government by Mr. Tom Shoyama, 

then secretary of the planning board, in September of 1963. The 

idea was accepted in principle and the Speech from the Throne in 

the spring of 1964 proposed that a special committee of the 

legislature be appointed to inquire into the best means of 

proceeding with the establishing of the Office of Ombudsman, and 

acquiring a person to fill that office. 

 

The government of which I was then a member was voted out of 

office in 1964 — not, I may say, because of that  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1953 

 

proposal, but because of other events surrounding perhaps a 

medicare dispute, perhaps maybe other issues which were of 

greater public importance. The incoming government, headed by 

the hon. Mr. Thatcher, continued with the examination of the 

matter of an Ombudsman, and a detailed report was presented to 

the new attorney general, the hon. Mr. Heald, now Mr. Justice 

Heald, in August of 1964. 

 

And doubtless because of the pressures of a new government 

assuming office, it was not proceeded with. In 1965 I introduced 

into this legislature a resolution calling for the establishment of a 

select committee of the legislature to study the matter. The issue 

was debated at length. The resolution was not accepted but it was 

not dealt with in a hostile way, but I think, feeling that perhaps it 

was premature. 

 

I introduced a similar resolution in 1966, and colleagues of mine 

introduced similar resolutions in 1967 and 1968. The government 

of the day had reservations about the idea. I, on the other hand, 

became more and more convinced that the Office of the 

Ombudsman would fill an important role in the governmental 

structure of Saskatchewan, and I felt that we should proceed with 

that idea.  

 

In our election program of 1971 we included the idea of 

establishing the Office of Ombudsman. We committed ourselves 

specifically to establish the Office of Ombudsman, responsible 

only to the legislature, to investigate grievances against any 

activity of the provincial government. We were elected in 1971 

and set about the job of drafting appropriate legislation and finding 

a suitable person. Because of the experience elsewhere in the 

world between 1964 and 1971, I felt, my colleagues felt, and I 

believe the legislature felt that we no longer needed a legislative 

committee to pass upon the idea of having an Ombudsman, but we 

could proceed with a Bill to establish the office and debate it on 

that basis. And that in fact was done. The legislation was 

introduced on March 8, 1972, and after an extensive debate it was 

passed. My recollection, Mr. Speaker, and I'm speaking now only 

from memory, is that it was passed without a dissenting vote. 

 

We were happy then to set about to organize the office. It took a 

little longer to find the right person for the job than we had 

anticipated. In March of 1973, we were happy to be able to 

announce the appointment of Judge Boychuk, a judge of the 

provincial court, to be Saskatchewan's first Ombudsman. A little 

later on in my remarks, I'm going to come to the manner in which 

Judge Boychuk's name came before the legislature. 

 

During the years between 1964 and 1971, I had maintained a 

lively academic interest in the idea of an Ombudsman. I had 

carried on a correspondence with Professor Don Rowatt, who was 

gathering a good deal of information with respect to this idea in 

Canada, as well as Professor Don Smilie, and also with a Professor 

Stanley D. Anderson of the University of California in Santa 

Barbara. I don't know whether I could find that file, but if anyone 

is interested in a fat file on how the Office of Ombudsman has 

worked in various jurisdictions in the world, I would be happy to 

attempt to share it. 

 

I built up a file of publications from the University of California at 

Santa Barbara, including such diverse items as reports from that 

university at Santa Barbara, reports from the University of 

California at Berkeley, a report of the first year of the Norwegian 

Ombudsman — and they had already embarked upon that in the 

1960s; copies of Bills introduced into the state legislatures of 

Connecticut, Illinois and New York and California, and similar 

material laid before the council of the city of New York, all with 

the idea of establishing an office akin to the Office of 

Ombudsman. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, arguments are frequently mounted, pro and 

con, for the idea of having an Ombudsman. And we heard them in 

the 1960s before the evidence was in. The arguments fell into a 

fairly standard pattern, at least for those countries which had a 

parliamentary tradition like ours. They ran from the fear that there 

would be yet another civil service bureaucracy, to a belief that the 

elected representatives could do the job, to the assertion that there 

was nothing wrong with the system without an Ombudsman. And 

sometimes they ranged all the way over to the other side of the 

spectrum, saying the Ombudsman will be relatively powerless, 

and what we need is someone to investigate complaints, but also 

someone who has the legal power to remedy them — along the 

line of the French Counsel of State. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we heard all those arguments in the '60s and 

the '70s, and we don't hear them any more — we didn't, because 

where the Office of the Ombudsman was established in New 

Zealand and in the Scandinavian countries and here in Canada, the 

way that the Ombudsmen have discharged their responsibilities, 

have silenced their critics. 

 

And I have not heard any of these tired arguments to the effect that 

we don't need an Ombudsman because the MLAs can do the job. I 

hadn't heard them until a few months ago when they were put 

forward, I believe, by the member for Melville, whose arguments 

always have the freshness of the 1960s. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, no one argues that the Office of the 

Ombudsman has solved all the problems, all the problems of 

giving the citizen access to the government. Far from it. Nor was 

this ever their claim. But it has been a major step forward, and we 

can all take a good deal of satisfaction that the office has been 

introduced into this province, and I would say has served the 

citizens of Saskatchewan well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, because it's 

germane to the body of my remarks which I will come to later, 

that much of the success of the Ombudsman depends not on any 

legal powers which he may have, but rather in the manner in 

which power is exercised, the manner in which the person is 

appointed to the office, the manner in which he discharges his 

responsibility, and the manner in which he is supported or not 

supported by the government of the day. Because this man or 

woman, this officer, is not wielding any legal club. His only 

weapon is the weapon of being able to  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1954 

 

publish the facts. And under those circumstances the integrity 

which he brings to the office and the degree of support which he 

receives when he publishes facts, determines whether or not his 

role, or her role, will be effectively discharged. 

 

And so it's no small thing, Mr. Speaker, under those 

circumstances, for a person, an officer, who has no legal powers, 

to have established in the minds of the public that a good job is 

being done to protect the public. And I say that Ombudsmen, from 

one coast of Canada to another, have established that in the public 

mind and it ought not to be eroded or undermined by a 

government which is attempting to do that by denying to the 

recent appointment of Ombudsman the aura of impartiality which 

is necessary in order to discharge those responsibilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now the Ombudsman is not to expect 

perfection from government; he's not to lunge at every peccadillo 

of maladministration nor is he to be or she to be a lap-dog of the 

government — not to be a lap-dog of the government. But he or 

she . . . And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I can digress by saying that 

when I speak of Ombudsman I am including things like a 

legislative commissioner and nothing stems from the name 

Ombudsman. It could equally be a female. The name comes from 

Sweden and from two centuries ago, so it is perhaps not surprising 

that it should carry a male tag, as was perhaps thought to be the 

appropriate stream of things two centuries ago. But we are now 

using that term to mean someone who discharges these 

responsibilities, male or female. 

 

I say that the Ombudsman is not to be a lap-dog of the 

government. They should not expect perfection from public 

servants, but they should call governments to account. And they 

have seen their role as forcing the sometimes unruly machine of 

government to steer a careful path, insisting that it take the path 

decreed by the legislature, and even then ensuring that as few 

individuals as possible are injured — as few individual flowers are 

crushed in the forward motion of progress. 

 

There are special problems which have not been resolved with 

respect to the Office of Ombudsman, certainly. The Ombudsman 

ordinarily finds himself checking up on the public service when 

they are not following the course of action which the legislature 

wanted them to follow. And under those circumstances, Mr. 

Speaker, they don't find themselves in a very narrow corner 

because by and large politicians agree with what they're doing. 

 

An Ombudsman may well be an adversary of the public servant 

but he may be a friend of a politician, because politicians in office 

need someone, as many people as they can, to watch the public 

service — to see that egregious errors infringing on the rights of 

citizens are not made, because it will not be the public servant who 

will answer for it, it will be the politician. And certainly, any 

politician knows that the more trip wires he has out there, the 

better, calling to his attention possible infringements of the rights 

of citizens so that they can be remedied before they become a 

public issue. And all of us, I think,  

who are practitioners of the political arts know that. So in that 

sense the Ombudsman does not find himself in a difficult corner. 

 

But other types of problems are possible, as in a case where a 

government is pursuing, and consciously pursuing, a particular 

policy which affects the citizen in a way which might be thought 

to be unfair. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is not possible for every public policy to be 

fair to everyone. Sometimes a policy fails that test, and yet it 

might be a good policy. Lawyers face this problem all the time. 

Lawyers know that sometimes a good law produces an unfair 

effect for one citizen. And judges struggle with these. They 

sometimes bend the law and do justice to the citizen, and in the 

course of so doing, cloud the law so that the next person doesn't 

know what it means. Sometimes they do the reverse. Sometimes 

they apply the law and do an injustice to the citizen. But the 

citizen who comes following him will know what the law is. 

 

(2000) 

 

Now those are not easy decisions. The lawyers have a shibboleth 

for it: "hard cases make hard law". And the same problems 

confront an Ombudsman. And I am sure that they face those 

problems sometimes, but they have a particular ability to confirm 

the operation of a law or a policy and still find ways to relieve the 

injustice that an individual may suffer. 

 

And I think all of us have come onto those. I recall a lively — to 

put it mildly — dispute when we were in government, having to 

do with the question of whether a handicapped person should have 

a chauffeur's licence to drive a large transport truck. And there was 

no doubt that the Ombudsman was saying, yes indeed, this person 

has shown that he can drive a truck, and he's passed the test, and 

he should not be discriminated against because he's handicapped. 

And the Highway Traffic Board said, our obligation is to see that 

there's safety on the highways, and we do not believe that that 

person is as safe a driver and when you're driving umpteen tons of 

vehicle, etc. And that was a lively dispute. The member for 

Kindersley . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know what particular circumstance is being 

addressed by the members opposite. I well know what 

circumstances I was addressing when I was meeting the Highway 

Traffic Board a fair number of years ago, with a copy of the 

Ombudsman's report in my hands. And they were having none of 

it. They were having none of it. They felt that they were fully 

justified. Both groups felt that they were fully justified. 

 

That's one of the problems of government. Nobody says all 

governmental decisions are easy. But I felt that the Ombudsman 

performed a valuable service. Eventually some sort of an 

arrangement was arrived at, but the problems were highlighted so 

the policy makers knew exactly what the issues were, exactly what 

the pros and cons were, and somebody had to make a decision. 

But nobody got caught because their problem had not been 

addressed. 

 

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1955 

 

Now there's a simplistic view abroad, and it's frequently 

encouraged by the press, that all laws can be drafted and 

administered so that no one will be injured by them, and if you can 

show that a law hurts an individual you've shown it's a bad law. 

Now that is simplistic nonsense but I see it purveyed in the press 

from time to time. Now we know that isn't true. We know that 

there is not enough intelligence in all the world to draft a law 

which will do the job which we need to do and which will under 

no circumstances work an injustice on any single individual. And 

that's why we have things like the Office of Ombudsman, to see 

whether we can isolate those cases and see whether we can 

mitigate injustice which is brought about sometimes by the 

application of a law which by and large produces a just result for 

the vast majority of the citizens. And clearly this requires special 

skills on the part of the Ombudsman, and in the past the two 

Ombudsmen we have had, I believe, sir, have displayed those 

skills. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker I could talk at some length about some of the 

issues which surround the Office of Ombudsman — whether the 

ambit of their jurisdiction, whether or not they should be bringing 

the same rules to bear with respect to commercial enterprises like 

public corporations as they should with respect to the public 

service proper. But I feel that that would be straying beyond the 

boundaries of this particular debate. There is, I think, a . . . And I 

will make this small point, I think there's a pressing need for an 

Ombudsman at the federal level in Canada because every 

provincial Ombudsman . . . And I invite all hon. members to read 

the reports from some other provinces. They will show that 

perhaps a third of the cases which come before provincial 

Ombudsmen are, in fact, cases that are under federal jurisdiction. 

 

The Minister of Justice will know that the courts here have 

established that actions of the RCMP are not subject to the review 

by the provincial Ombudsman because while they're under 

contract to the provincial Crown, they're employees of the federal 

Crown. And it has been decided that the Ombudsman, the 

provincial Ombudsman, does not have that jurisdiction. 

 

We all have cases of corrections and unemployment insurance and 

guaranteed income supplement — allegations of injustice along 

those lines, and it's much more difficult to find the point where the 

citizen can ask for redress — much more difficult. And I think that 

we would be adding to the rights of the citizen and the ability of a 

citizen to get redress if we had a federal Ombudsman. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude this area of my remarks 

with a more general comment, because I think all of us know that 

governments are becoming more complex. Problems grappled 

with by the government are becoming more complex every day, 

and governments are intervening in the lives of citizens more and 

more. And that's not going to change. That is not going to change. 

There are those who believe that somehow we could turn back the 

clock and have that day when governments would not be 

intervening in the lives of citizens. But that day is not going to 

come. 

 

I noted this morning when I was out going around the  

grounds where a new upgrader is being built, that part of the 

commentary was that, we are having to deal with the sulphur in 

this way. It didn't used to be dealt with in this way; we used to just 

pile up the sulphur in blocks. But governments are now frowning 

upon piles of sulphur in blocks. Meaning, someone has said you 

can no longer do that. That's a minor example. But there are a 

great number of them.  

 

The members opposite have suggested PCBs (polychlorinated 

biphenyl), that's true. I am sure there are many more regulations 

with respect to the use of PCBs now then there were 10 years ago. 

Agricultural chemicals, many more. One can hardly think of an 

area of human activity where there are not more regulations. And 

those who that say we should have fewer regulations, say it in 

vacuo, but not specifically. 

 

If there's too much fat in our hamburger, we now have a 

regulation. Once you simply went to another store, but not now. 

Somebody has a regulation. And I have noted that this is a reaction 

of the public. When I was in office, I could not count the number 

of times where people said to me in effect, there ought to be a law; 

there ought to be a law to stop that. Many of them were resisted. 

Many of them were resisted. 

 

I recall, Mr. Speaker, a debate on this down at the Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association in Halifax when I recounted some of 

the proposals which had been put forward by our government and 

rejected, but which . . . Some of them, by the way, have been 

adopted by the government opposite — proposals that we have a 

horse racing commission. And I took the view that the horse racers 

could regulate their own industry. But this government opposite 

decided no, we better have government regulations. 

 

And with respect to rides, amusement park rides. I'm not saying 

they're wrong, I'm just saying proposals came forward to have a 

law; and I took the view, well there is no real need for another set 

of regulations there. Government opposite has decided that there 

is. I'm not saying that it's a wrong decision. I'm just saying that 

time moves on and we then decide something else needs to be 

regulated. 

 

There is a third one I think of with respect to . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member from Regina South is saying that the 

previous government, of which he was not a member, resisted the 

idea of regulation when he was asking for it and now he's finally 

achieved the more regulation he wants. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't want to digress into this. I'm just saying 

that there are, as has been effectively illustrated here tonight, a 

constant call for more regulations, and I suspect that we're going to 

hear one in five years' time, or perhaps less, with respect to the 

regulation of travel agencies in this province, because they're 

regulated in some other provinces — and nice question as to 

whether the time has come here. 

 

My point is clear. My point is that all governments, of whatever 

political stripe or hue, are intervening in the lives of people more 

than was true 10 or 15 years ago.  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1956 

 

And as we intervene, we have to give the citizen some additional 

recourse against the unfair application of governmental 

interventions. And that's what an Ombudsman is all about.  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we can't assume that all 

governments are honest and fair and competent and democratic. 

All we can do is attempt to buttress the institutions which we have 

to protect citizens against instances of dishonesty or unfairness or 

incompetence or undemocratic behaviour. And that's what we are 

attempting to do when we appoint an Ombudsman, and that's what 

we're attempting to do when we reappoint an Ombudsman, and 

that is the subject of the motion before us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I said that I would come to the question of how 

we have had Ombudsmen appointed in the past. And the question 

of whether or not there should be an independent legislative 

committee was given some thought, and there are pros to that and 

there are cons to that. I'm now persuaded that it's probably a good 

idea. 

 

There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that both sides of the House 

should be fully involved in the appointment of the Ombudsman. 

There is no question about that. and there is no question, Mr. 

Speaker, that in the past that was true. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — There is no question that that was true. I 

hope nobody opposite suggests that when Judge Boychuk was 

appointed, the opposition of the day was not fully consulted before 

the appointment or before the name was announced publicly so 

that they had a real opportunity to say yes or no. I hope they're not 

suggesting that, because it isn't true. There was that level of 

consultation before Mr. Boychuk or Judge Boychuk's name was 

floated about. There was consultation, and when it came into this 

House it was passed, and it is my belief it was passed without 

anybody in any way speaking against the appointment of Judge 

Boychuk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that a 

good deal of care was used in the selection of Judge Boychuk. 

Whatever his political affiliations may have been, no one ever 

accused Judge Boychuk of being a supporter of our party — and 

he was known not to be. I'm not going to discuss his politics, but 

he was known not to be a supporter of our party, and it was on that 

basis that we suggested his name because we thought he was a 

fair-minded man. We wanted the first Ombudsman to be 

absolutely free of any possible taint, either real or perceived. 

 

There was that level of consultation, and I invite any member of 

this House to consult with any previous member, any member of 

any previous House, and see whether that wasn't the case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2015)  

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now it could have been done by 

committee. One of the problems with committees is that the names 

come forward and people know who is selected, and then they 

know who isn't selected. And sometimes, as with the appointment 

of judges in the United States, people are unwilling to allow their 

name to be considered if they think that it'll be known publicly that 

they have applied and been rejected. So that's a little down side on 

a committee. 

 

And this is the same argument which the lawyers in Canada put 

forward — when I say the lawyers I mean The Canadian Bar 

Association — puts forwards to oppose the selection of judges by 

any public panel, because they feel that some people would not 

put their name forward if they felt that the name would be known 

before it was approved, and maybe rejected. So that's a little down 

side on a committee. 

 

And we thought that we could get a level of consultation, a level 

of agreement of both sides of the House, without publishing the 

name in advance so that when it came into the House, it bore the 

imprimatur of both the government and the opposition, and that 

was achieved with Boychuk. 

 

And when Tickell came along the same was true; the same was 

true. There was consultation between the attorney general of the 

day and the opposition. And when that appointment was made, 

before that name became public and became bandied about, there 

was agreement between the government and the opposition that 

this was a suitable candidate and that they were prepared to 

support it in the legislature. 

 

Now what we have now is a very, very different approach, an 

approach by a government opposite which says, we do not have to 

consult with anybody. And they certainly did not. And I certainly 

did not know anything about the intended appointment of Mr. 

McLellan before I read it in the press, notwithstanding some 

relatively diligent efforts on my part to get some answers from the 

Premier. Mr. Tickell had put forward a proposal for a legislative 

committee. That made sense to me. It's not the only method but it 

would be a good method. I asked the Premier what he felt about it. 

I got no reply. I kept asking him and I finally received a comment 

from him saying that the Hon. Mr. Berntson was reviewing the 

proposal. That was the end of the consultation. The next I knew 

about it was an announcement in the press, announcement in the 

press that Mr. McLellan's name was going to be put forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, . . . Mr. Speaker, it's not a question of whether 

or not Mr. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — It is not a question of whether or not Mr. 

McLellan is a suitable candidate; it is a question of whether or not 

he is seen to be a suitable candidate. Because it is imperative that 

the Ombudsman carry with him that air of impartiality and public 

support which is necessary in order to make this office work. He 

doesn't have any legal tools. All he has is  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1957 

 

influence, all he has is influence, and the way he can have the 

most influence is if it is clear that he speaks with the authority of 

all members of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I want to say that I think that there is 

no way that Mr. McLellan can speak with the authority of all 

members of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We all know his particular background. 

Well it's . . . One would wonder, frankly, one would wonder. One 

would wonder whether that's the place to look for an Ombudsman, 

in the Premier's constituency, in the law office of the past 

president of the PC Party. I'm not saying that this necessarily 

means the person isn't a proper person; I am saying that it is not 

possible to perceive him as a proper person with that background. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And it's not I who was only saying this. I 

read here in The Globe and Mail, "Ombudsman's choice puts 

Devine deeper in patronage mire." Those are not my words, but 

The Globe and Mail words. Now I am just saying this ought not to 

be. I invite anybody to look back in the press when Boychuk was 

appointed, when Tickell was appointed, and to see whether there 

was any suggestion in the public press that there was any 

patronage involved. There was no such suggestion because there 

was no such patronage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And now we have the Ombudsman, the 

appointment of the Ombudsman being labelled in the press, in the 

responsible press, as putting "Devine deeper in the patronage 

mire." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is improper, but it's more than that; it is a 

very serious undermining of the Office of Ombudsman, to appoint 

someone where there is that possible cloud over his head. 

 

There are dozens and dozens of people in Saskatchewan who 

could have done this job — who could have got the support of all 

sides of the House, and who would not have entered the office 

with this disability, with this ball and chain, because this is what it 

is. The office, as I say, has nothing but influence to use. It must, if 

it's to do its job, have the support of all members of this House. 

 

I regret that because of the manner of the appointment, I do not 

find it possible to support this particular appointment. I believe we 

have to go back and try again, and that's why I believe the motion 

of the member for Lakeview, proposing a legislative committee, is 

the right way to find a person who will have the support of both 

sides of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — If members opposite have some  

other way to arrive at a suggested appointment which will have the 

support of both sides of this House, that would be satisfactory with 

me. I'm not hung up on a legislative committee, as such. But I am 

very much hung up on the idea that the person who is appointed 

Ombudsman should have the confidence of all members of this 

House; that there should be adequate consultation as there was in 

the past, and as there is throughout Canada; and that this is not 

happening in this case. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I regret that. I regret it very much, and 

accordingly, I will be supporting the amendment and opposing the 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to say a few words with 

regards to the appointment of the Ombudsman. 

 

I view this process in the legislature, by reading the motion, that 

what we are having here is very much like a confirmation hearing 

on the appointment of an individual put forward — put forward to 

serve an office in this province. And do we hear, as we would see 

in most confirmation hearings, Mr. Speaker, questions about the 

competency of this man? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And they say, yes. They talk about the 

politics of this man. They say yes to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let's look first of all at the competence in the question 

of this man. Let's look at what he has for a background, Mr. 

Speaker. Number one, he has a degree in Commerce; number two, 

he has a degree in the law; and number three, he has a degree in 

public administration — three very capable degrees, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I'm sure hon. 

members have many viewpoints on this motion, and perhaps 

they'll want to enter the debate later. But this is a serious motion 

and I think we should give the opportunity to the Minister of 

Justice to speak with a minimum of interruption. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, a degree in Commerce, a 

degree in the law, and a degree in public administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. The 

member from Regina Rosemont has just heard me ask for the 

co-operation of the House, and I'm sure he'll want to abide by that. 

So I ask him once more to allow the Minister of Justice to please 

speak with a minimum of interruption. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

from Regina Rosemont says from his seat, "and a Tory 

membership card". That is (a) not true, that is (a) not true; and (b) 

something that would, if it was true, which it is not, clearly be 

beyond his knowledge, Mr. Speaker, and I think a comment 

unbecoming a member of this legislature to this individual. 

 

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1958 

 

Mr. Speaker, besides his education of three degrees, this 

individual's background was as follows. He went to work in the 

government of Tommy Douglas, Department of Finance, in 

budget bureau. And what does a person in the budget bureau do? 

They investigate, more than any other civil servant, how 

government works — each department, one after the other, after 

the other, after the other. But the member from Regina Lakeview 

would have us say, or understand, or believe somehow that this 

individual has no experience or no knowledge of how to 

investigate something. Having served in that capacity and having 

worked with people in the budget bureau, I can say to you that 

probably there is no other person in government, from a civil 

servant in government, that has a greater capacity to investigate 

how government works and where it doesn't work. 

 

But he didn't stop there, Mr. Speaker. He was a solicitor for the 

co-op insurance, involved in claims. Now what would a lawyer do 

for an insurance company? What a lawyer does for an insurance 

company is investigate claims, investigate challenges. 

 

And then besides that, he has practised law. And if you go through 

the list of people he practised law with, the first firm was Noonan, 

Embury, Heald and Molisky. Now I ask the Leader of the 

Opposition, was Darrel Heald a Tory? And if he was a Tory . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, but if you were to follow the logic 

of the members opposite, if he worked in a law firm, everybody in 

that law firm must be a Tory. Now that's ludicrous. I ask the 

Leader of the Opposition. He practised law with Griffin, Beke, 

Blakeney. Were each of the people in his firm NDP? Were each of 

the members of his law firm active members of the NDP? I don't 

believe they would be, and I don't believe the Leader of the 

Opposition would be so inclined to say. 

 

This particular individual — and we're talking here in this motion 

about this individual — served 10 years on the board of St. 

Joseph's hospital in the city of Estevan. The member from 

Lakeview somehow says, what has this person done in society that 

qualified him for anything? 

 

The member over there would have us believe that to fill the job 

— the member from Moose Jaw — to fill this job that you must 

have been a member of the human rights association of 

Saskatchewan. Is that what you're saying? Is that exactly what the 

member from Moose Jaw is saying? And I don't see where that to 

be the case. I don't see why just because you are not a member of 

some association disqualifies you somehow from serving in this 

particular job and this particular function. 

 

So I would say, Mr. Speaker, that looking at the qualifications of 

this man . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They're non-existent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: —The member says they're non-existent, 

non-existent. He has been educated, he has worked in government, 

he has worked in the co-op movement, he has practised law, he 

has served on the board of St. Joseph's hospital for 10 years, and 

he has done nothing according to the member from Regina Centre. 

Nothing. He has done nothing. 

 

(2030) 

 

And the member from Regina Rosemont would have us believe he 

must be . . . he must have a Tory membership. Mr. Speaker . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member says that we would not 

hire anyone — Prince Albert — that we would not hire anyone 

unless he was a Tory. That is unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, and that 

is false. And that is not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Lakeview would have us 

believe that we should advertise outside the province for this job. 

Why would we have to advertise outside the province? Why 

should we go to Ontario to find an Ombudsman for the province 

of Saskatchewan? Why should we have to go to Ontario or 

Manitoba to find an Ombudsman for the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. I 

once more ask the co-operation of all hon. members to please 

allow the Minister of Justice to carry on, and constant interruptions 

do not add to the debate. They, in fact, take away from it and I'm 

sure we're all aware of it. So let's allow him to continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Second, Mr. Speaker, second, Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Regina Lakeview would have us 

believe that we should go to an all-party committee to deal with 

this, Mr. Speaker. And then we heard the Leader of the Opposition 

talk about how this was his invention; how he brought this to the 

province. And if he was so concerned about an all-party 

committee — this is not ancient legislation, this is really quite 

modern legislation — why did he not seek to write that into the 

legislation? Ask that question, Mr. Speaker. And ask the second 

question. 

 

When they were in government they appointed two Ombudsmans. 

They appointed two Ombudsmen when they were in government. 

Did they have an all-party committee on either one of those? Not a 

chance, Mr. Speaker, not a chance . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I'm afraid I must once 

more rise. Hon. members want to get into the debate. That's what 

this debate is all about. They'll all have a chance to get up, but I'm 

not going to allow continual interruptions. I'm just bringing that to 

your attention. And I have asked several times, and I know that 

hon. members will want to co-operate and I ask them once more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don't 

seem to want to listen to the arguments. They can only listen to 

their own arguments, not to somebody else's. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Lakeview talks about and 

reads from some editorials from both the Leader-Post and the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, and what did those editorials talk about? 

That somehow this government was going to get rid of the Office 

of the Ombudsman. Has this government, I ask, eliminated the 

Office of the Ombudsman? No it has not. Mr. Speaker, no it has 

not, and not only that, but the funding levels we provide to the 

Office of the Ombudsman is higher than  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1959 

 

those provided in the only NDP province in this country, and that 

is Manitoba. We pay more; we support more the Office of the 

Ombudsman under this government than does the NDP 

government of the province of Manitoba. 

 

She reads . . .Because I really believe, I really believe that she 

wanted this government — somehow in her view of what a Tory 

is — to get rid of this, so that she could stand on her soap-box day 

after day after day talking about injustices, talking about someone 

who had taken away some fundamentals of human rights. Because 

they on that side believe only they, only they know what human 

rights are — the Tory Party doesn't, the Liberal Party doesn't — 

only an NDP in their sanctimonious way understand and know 

something about human rights and about fairness to individuals 

and fairness to people. Mr. Speaker, they do not. 

 

But let's go to this idea . . . and thought that somehow this guy is 

not qualified because he happened to practise law with somebody 

that is a member of our party. Is that the basis by which we will 

select this particular individual? Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let me 

go further. Let me go further and talk about the Office of the 

Ombudsman and compare it to the office of a provincial court 

judge, or the office of a superior court judge, or Queen's Bench 

judge, or even the office of a judge of the Court of Appeal. 

 

Now I ask you and I ask all members, is it a higher standard and 

should we have a higher standard in selecting the Office of the 

Ombudsman than what we have for the selection of judges of this 

land? Is it not valid, Mr. Speaker; is it not a proper comparison to 

say that if a guy sits in a court of law and determines perhaps 

whether a person goes to jail for his life or for 10 years, that 

somehow that is not a standard where unbiased and principled 

people can sit? Mr. Speaker, I believe it is. I believe it is a higher 

standard even in the Office of the Ombudsman. 

 

And what do we see here in the appointment across this country, 

of judges? We see the accusation — yes this person is an NDP, or 

yes this person is a Liberal, or yes this person is a Tory. But the 

people that go to the bench, Mr. Speaker . . . and I suggest all the 

people that go to the bench, when they leave practice and are 

appointed to the bench, they leave politics behind them. The 

member opposite says, give me a break. That's like saying the 

judges of this country practise politics on the bench. And I think 

that is a dastardly thing to say about our court system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know people that have gone to the bench from 

various political parties. And when those people go to the bench 

they put that part of their life behind them. They put that part of 

their life behind them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Nutana would have us believe that is 

not in fact true. Mr. Speaker, I would hope that she will stand up in 

this House and state her position on that particular fact. I would 

hope that she would have the courage to stand in her place and 

speak that way and not just from her seat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Ombudsman is no different than the appointment of a superior 

court judge or a provincial court judge. The  

person is appointed; the person is appointed; he then fills that 

office for a term certain. And when that term certain is done, he 

goes. The government has no power to say, we don't like what you 

are doing and therefore you are gone. The only way you replace an 

Ombudsman when it's not the end of his term, is by impeachment 

process in this House. 

 

That person has the independence, Mr. Speaker, he has the 

independence the same as a judge in any court in this land. I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly and the members 

opposite who crow so loudly about their concerns for human 

rights have convicted this particular appointee because they did 

not like the law firm he practised in. 

 

Now let's talk about human rights, Mr. Speaker, and let's talk 

about fairness, and let's talk about principles. And the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, know nothing of it, but they believe only 

they and nobody else has a right to talk and speak about principles. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they do not. 

 

What we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a competent, fair-minded 

individual, a man who has served his community, a man who has 

served well in his community, a man capable of doing this job. 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this Assembly, for the preservation of this 

office, must vote against that amendment, Mr. Speaker, and must 

unanimously support the motion of the member from 

Souris-Cannington, and I encourage all people to do so. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I stand in opposition to the motion 

and in support of the amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the two basic points, the two basic aspects of the 

argumentation that has been used was one in regards to the 

process; the process argument has been placed, but also there has 

been the individualistic argument. What we are raising, Mr. 

Speaker, is the issue of process. 

 

The member from across can mention at great lengths about the 

principles of justice and the principles of fairness in regards to 

how this process of appointing the Ombudsman came to be. I 

would state at the outset that the process in and of itself was not far 

removed from the perception that The Globe and Mail had on the 

whole thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an implication was made by The Globe and Mail that 

it smacked of patronage because of the way the process was 

conducted, and because there was no way of having the system of 

going through the system that was part of the Saskatchewan 

tradition, part that has been established through the appointment of 

the two previous Ombudsmen. That process, Mr. Speaker, was 

completely disregarded. 

 

The process, Mr. Speaker, is the same type of process that we 

argued about in December when Bill 5 was created. It's the same 

type of argument, Mr. Speaker, that we put forth since that time in 

regards to how this PC government carries on the operations of 

governing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of justice and fairness in this  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1960 

 

province, the position of Ombudsman is sometimes looked upon 

by people as a final position in which to deal with the issues that 

sometimes cannot be handled by the regular legal system. It is a 

final place where they can look at our legislative system. It's a 

final place where they can say, this is where I am going to finally 

be treated with justice and fairness. 

 

(2045) 

 

When I look at the process that was brought forth by the 

government, it made again a complete mockery of the word 

consultation. I hear the word consultation all the time from across. 

They say they consult Indian and Metis people. They say they 

consult workers. They say they consult small business. they say 

they consult this and that group. But the practice that we have seen 

in the past five years, and even more recently to a greater extent in 

their second term, Mr. Speaker, is that this process of consultation 

is becoming to be one where the people are losing a lot of 

confidence in this government. Unless a government or a group 

provides true consultation, confidence is lost. 

 

There is no accountability; there is no feeling that there is a basis 

for the impartiality of a particular position. And like I mentioned, 

Mr. Speaker, this position requires the highest demand of 

accountability and impartiality. That is why, when we raise the 

issue from this side of the House on the aspect of consultation, it is 

extremely important for people, the public, to know that the 

government will be fair. 

 

I read, Mr. Speaker, page 3 of the Ombudsman's report for January 

1, '86 to December of '86, and this is what the Ombudsman had to 

say in regards to the position. He says: 

 

The reaction of the government to the Ombudsman's findings 

sometimes suggests he and they are diametrically opposed in 

their functions. But in reality, both have the same end — fair 

treatment for the people of the province. The existence of an 

Ombudsman's office denotes governments' understanding that 

the bureaucratic machine can break down; that public servants 

are only human and their service to the people is their raison 

d'etre. 

 

I must add, Mr. Speaker, that the breakdown in regards to the 

specific role of our bureaucratic system, which is a central concern 

of the Ombudsman, is not the only thing that is at issue here. What 

is at issue here is the breakdown, the breakdown of proper fairness 

and proper consultation. That is the main issue. 

 

It's very important to recognize that this process of selecting this 

individual to this position is not a fluke; it's not something that has 

come by chance. It is something that we have already seen in the 

past five years, and more particularly, in this second term where 

the even legislated process where only they can make the 

decisions without the involvement of people on this side of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker. this process, which involves people on all  

sides of the House, which has been established by the previous 

government, has been broken. This government continues to break 

down the traditions of this province. 

 

The argumentation that was presented by the Minister of Justice 

was one that looked upon the issue only from a very 

individualistic perspective, and of course that individualistic 

perspective is part and parcel of the policy and practice of this 

government. 

 

As The Globe and Mail asserts, individual patronage has been a 

mark of this government and continues from what even The Globe 

and Mail perceives. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, if the person was as skilled as the previous 

speaker has said he is, then why did he not go through the 

channels of consultation and co-operation in the same way that has 

been done in the previous two appointments? The previous 

government allowed that consultation. They allowed that choice to 

take place, because it was understood that this was the final act of 

justice in certain cases in this province. And when you get to the 

final act of justice for many individuals in this province, it has to 

be perceived by the people that it has gone through a fair and just 

process. 

 

Instead, the minister started also bringing out inaccurate 

statements about whether or not . . . which government operated 

on a more thorough basis in regards to supporting the 

Ombudsman's office. 

 

I would just like to quote a couple of statistics to the previous 

speaker on that regard. It must be remembered that in 1981 there 

was 16 staff to this important office. But what was it in 1987-88? 

It's 13. It's been cut back. When you look at the work-load, in 

1982, it was over 2,800; in 1986, it was over 3,200. In between 

that four-year period, there was an increase of 400. 

 

In other words, people were having greater and greater problems 

because the system was not able, the regular system was not able 

to respond in a just fashion. Or somebody could interpret it this 

way, Mr. Speaker — that in fact there was greater pressure by the 

new government during this period of time to create greater 

turmoil on individuals, or otherwise it could have been attributed 

also that there was less legal justice during that period in time. 

 

But there could be many interpretations in regards to the fact that 

there has been an increase in the number of cases the Ombudsman 

has to look at and deal with, and at the same time recognize that 

this government who talks a lot about justice, who talks a lot about 

fairness, has cut back the staff, has cut back the basis of the 

functioning of this office. 

 

I would state back again about this very importance of fairness, 

and I would like to reiterate another statement that was made by 

the Ombudsman on page 1 of his report. He says: 

 

While governments compromise human beings, mistakes will 

be made. And citizens will feel, sometimes with justification, 

that they have been treated unfairly or arbitrarily or rudely, or 

have  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1961 

 

been ignored or are victims of discrimination. For these citizens, 

the Ombudsman represents not only a possible remedy, but 

sometimes just the assurance that they have not been treated 

unfairly. 

 

And this is the message David Tickell has brought to the people of 

this province during his tenure — that the Ombudsman is an 

impartial reviewer, an impartial reviewer, Mr. Speaker, who tells it 

as he sees it, whether in favour of the complainant or of the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the essence of this perception of fairness that a 

lot of people talk about; that in fact people say, how could it be 

fair if the process of putting an Ombudsman in place appears to be 

a process of patronage. How could we have public confidence in a 

government who continually operates and disregards tradition? 

How can this happen at this day and age, a lot of people ask. 

People recognize that this government in the past five years have 

put a lot of pressure on them. 

 

In this last budget, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the people who are 

pressured by the system, particularly Indian and Metis people, but 

also people from the North where sometimes the strains of justice 

are heavily felt, many times these people have to look to the 

Ombudsman as a final basis for looking for justice in this 

province. 

 

But what they're seeing, Mr. Speaker, is the practice that in fact 

this government doesn't care, it doesn't care at all whether or not 

people perceive this as simple patronage. They will try and talk 

about principles, of consultation, of people involvement. But 

people have recognized, Mr. Speaker, that this government makes 

a mockery of consultation and a mockery of involvement. 

 

(2100) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in order for the people of this province to gain 

back the confidence that they have lost through this process, in 

order that we may perceive this as a basis of just protection and 

fairness, Mr. Speaker, I support, therefore, the amendment to the 

motion that was made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 

participate in the debate here this evening on a motion that was 

brought in by the Hon. Deputy Premier where he's presenting a 

recommendation to this legislature that one Gerald Peter McLellan 

of the city of Regina in the province of Saskatchewan be 

appointed as Ombudsman pursuant to section 31 of The 

Ombudsman Act. 

 

And I think it's important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the three 

previous speakers for the New Democratic Party . . . the first 

speaker was the member from Regina Lakeview; the second 

speaker was the member from Regina Elphinstone, our leader; and 

the third speaker on this side of the House was the member from 

Cumberland. And I would want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that 

none of these three individuals drew into question the integrity or 

the qualifications of one Peter McLellan who's been put forward 

by the government side as the Ombudsman for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

And I found it very, very strange that the only speaker outside of 

the mover of the motion, the only speaker outside of that 

individual, was the Hon. Member of Justice, the member from 

Kindersley. And his total intervention in this debate was in 

defence of the individual they're putting forward as the 

Ombudsman in the province of Saskatchewan. Well, I wonder 

what would make the Minister of Justice so defensive about this 

individual when no one on this side of the House had drawn that 

person's integrity into question — no one at all. 

 

They questioned the process by which the appointment has been 

brought before us here this evening. There has been no 

consultation whatsoever. It's a complete break in tradition. Now 

I'm not saying that other members might not say something about 

the individual, because I don't know what other members are 

going to say during this debate. I know very well that members on 

this side of the House have strong feelings for parliamentary 

tradition and for the traditions of this legislature. But I know that 

the government on the opposite side of the House have very little 

regard, Mr. Speaker, for the traditions and the unwritten rules — 

the conventions of this Assembly. 

 

I can think back to many examples. I go back to the throne speech 

on June 17, Mr. Speaker, in which the government announced that 

they would be putting into place a rules committee to study the 

rules of this Assembly and the rules under which the Legislative 

Assembly operate. And no sooner had they stated that in the 

throne speech debate, Mr. Speaker, than the member from 

Yorkton, I believe it was, came in and put forward a rules change 

in the Assembly. I think it was the very next day, or at least within 

the next couple of days. And it just flies in the face of what the 

government says they're going to do and then again what they 

actually do. 

 

I can think of Bill 5 that was brought in before Christmas. Prior to 

Christmas, there was a Bill 5, called the government 

reorganization Bill, which in hindsight maybe we should've fought 

a little harder because they're now abusing the powers — the 

government is abusing the powers that they acquired and granted 

to themselves under Bill 5, while saying in their speeches and their 

interventions during the debate on Bill 5 that it was a 

housekeeping Bill, that it didn't really mean anything. 

 

We argued that. We said it had substantial changes to the way in 

which the government would operate in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It would confine many of the decisions that are 

made, to the little group of people who sit around the cabinet table 

with no regard whatsoever for the Legislative Assembly and all 

the individual members of this Assembly who sit here in 

representation of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I also can think of the question of integrity for the government 

whereby about a month ago, the leader of our party, the member 

from Regina Elphinstone, was going to put forward a motion in 

this House commemorating the 25th anniversary of medicare in 

the province of Saskatchewan, a program that has grown 

acceptance right across the country even though 25 years ago it 

was fought by very vicious attacks from many people, some of the 

same bend of the members sitting on  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1962 

 

the government side of the House today. 

 

Now as a courtesy to the government, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 

the Opposition gave a copy of that motion to the government so 

that they would be prepared that afternoon and would know in fact 

that the Leader of the Opposition was going to put forward this 

motion and they could participate with some degree of intelligence 

in the debate. Well, Mr. Speaker, the thing that surprised me was 

the member from Redberry, immediately after question period, 

hopped to his feet, read the exact motion word for word in this 

Legislative Assembly, and took credit for it. No integrity, no 

ethics, blatant disregard for the legislative process that's been 

practised over the years in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the other thing I would say, Mr. Speaker, about the disregard 

for the process of the Legislative Assembly is the fact that there is 

very little, if sometimes any, notice on the business coming before 

this legislature. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The question before the 

Assembly is the Ombudsman motion, and I would ask the member 

to keep his remarks to the motion or the amendment that is before 

the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with all due respect for you 

— as hard as that may be — I think that the remarks are relevant. 

The fact is that we are arguing that the process in bringing before 

this Legislative Assembly for the appointment of the Ombudsman 

has been blatantly violated, just as they have blatantly violated 

many, many rules of tradition in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — And that's a point; it is to the topic of the motion 

being debated here this evening, Mr. Speaker, I would submit to 

you. 

 

The other thing that bothers me, before your intervention, Mr. 

Speaker, was the fact that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — No . . . Well, Deputy Speaker, I believe when he 

is in the Chair he assumes the role of Speaker. So I would extend 

to you, sir, the courtesy of calling you Speaker, if that's all right 

with you. 

 

But there's very little notice that comes out on anything. 

Departments come into estimates, they pull them off, they change 

them, they move them. You never know what's coming before the 

Legislative Assembly from day to day. I have a great deal of 

respect for members on this side of the House who adapt very 

quickly because we know the rules and the process and the topics 

that we are responsible for as critics on this side of the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Going to the, sort of the chronology of the events in Saskatchewan 

where the Ombudsman office has come about . . . It started back in 

about 1947, Mr. Speaker, under the government of the day, which 

was the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, under the 

leadership and premiership of Tommy Douglas. 

 

And in 1947, the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights was put into place 

— the first Bill of Rights in all of Canada — to protect the rights 

of individuals against having their rights abused and their 

privileges abused by government or other individuals or 

businesses or corporations. That government of the day felt that 

peoples' rights had to be observed and had to be protected, not 

only in the province of Saskatchewan, but other provinces later 

saw the wisdom of that. Many adopted Bills of rights. In fact the 

Right Hon. John Diefenbaker adopted a Canadian Bill of Rights 

back in the 1950s following on the lead of Tommy Douglas and 

the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) government 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1956 there was a further step, Mr. Speaker. There were two 

Acts that were brought into place. First off, there was The Fair 

Accommodation Practices Act, and secondly, The Fair 

Employment Practices Act, again to protect Saskatchewan people. 

 

In 1964 the New Democrats in their throne speech proposed the 

creation of the Saskatchewan Ombudsman. Unfortunately, the 

Liberals of the day intervened. There was a Saskatchewan election 

called and under the leadership of the late Ross Thatcher, Liberals 

came to power, and in fact the commitment in the throne speech 

by the New Democrats was not carried out by the Liberals. They 

did not feel compelled to carry that out, and I can say rightly that 

they weren't compelled to carry out the commitment of another 

government. 

 

During the period, though, Mr. Speaker, from 1964 until 1971, the 

Liberals were the government during those seven long, lean years, 

and they didn't do anything in terms of protecting people's rights in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And the NDP made repeated 

efforts to put into place the office of the Ombudsman, and the 

government did not see the wisdom at that time under the Liberal 

government to, in fact, do that. 

 

During the period of 1971 . . . That's when New Democrats came 

into power in the province of Saskatchewan, formed the 

government under the leadership of the current member from 

Regina Elphinstone. And between the period of 1971 and 1975 — 

that's the first mandate, the first term of office that New Democrats 

held in the province of Saskatchewan — there were three 

important offices set up in the province of Saskatchewan. There 

was the Ombudsman's office; there was the Legal Aid 

Commission; and there was the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission, all with the intent of protecting the rights of people 

in the province of Saskatchewan, whether those rights were 

violated by other individuals, by governments, by corporations, by 

businesses, whoever. We wanted to assure that Saskatchewan 

people had the best rights and the best protected rights of any 

place in Canada. 

 

In 1973, Mr. Speaker, the first Ombudsman was appointed under 

the section 3 of The Ombudsman Act, in which they're asking 

approval tonight to appoint the choice of the government at least 

to the appointment of Ombudsman. But Judge Ernie Boychuk was 

then appointed as the Ombudsman in the province of  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1963 

 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I'll say a bit later on — I don't want to take too much time of 

the House — about some quotes from Hansard during the time 

that the motion came up to appoint Judge Boychuk, and in fact, 

had support from all sides of the House; and as the Leader of the 

Opposition pointed out that there were no contrary votes to the 

appointment of the Ombudsman at that time. 

 

Judge Boychuk unfortunately resigned before his term was up, and 

in 1977 David Tickell was appointed. And again I want to refer to 

that a little later because I have some quotes from 1977 Hansard 

that reflect the opinion of not only the Progressive Conservative 

Party but the attitudes of the Liberal Party at that time that were 

also represented in this provincial legislature. 

 

Now it seems that the process has gotten bogged down in terms of 

the rights of individuals in the province of Saskatchewan. In 1985, 

in a report by Dave Tickell, he warns that his term is expiring and 

there's a need to start discussions for a replacement. Under the 

Act, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure you would be aware that the 

Ombudsman is appointed for a five-year term with the option at 

the end of that time to be reappointed for another five-year term. 

Now Tickell had come in '77 — this is '85, and he's saying, lookit, 

you have to start the process to replace me under the legislation 

that currently stands in the province of Saskatchewan; I cannot 

stand for appointment at the expiration of the term that I'm 

currently serving. 

 

Again in September, Mr. Speaker, of 1986, Tickell writes to the 

government and the Leader of the Opposition warning that his 

term expires within a six-month period. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

government did take some action, but not the action that has been 

traditionally held within this legislature, within the province of 

Saskatchewan for the appointment of the Ombudsman. And then 

all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, in April of 1987, there is an 

appointment of McLellan as the Acting Ombudsman that's 

announced within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2115) 

 

Now during that time that the Progressive Conservatives have 

been in government in the province of Saskatchewan, I think that 

they've made a deliberate attempt to muzzle the public watch-dogs 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

If you look at the area of the provincial Ombudsman, the topic of 

conversation here this evening, between the period of 1981-82 and 

1987-88 the provincial Ombudsman was reduced from 16.1 

person-years of employment to 13.4. And at the same time the 

case-load is going up, but employees and support services are 

going down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You look at the Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor plays a 

very important role in terms of auditing the books in a 

non-partisan, impartial way for the province of Saskatchewan, for 

the people of Saskatchewan, regardless of who, in fact, is the 

government at that time. In 1981-82 the Provincial  

Auditor had a staff complement of 72. In 1986-87 that had 

dropped by 9 person-years to 63. 

 

Look at the Human Rights Commission. The Human Rights 

Commission in 1981-82 had in excess of 21 people working for 

that department. In 1987-88 they only have a little over 15 people 

working in that Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, so I 

think that there is a very serious attempt to erode and muzzle the 

public watch-dogs that were set up to protect people's interests in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

If you look at the work-load that I already had mentioned, Mr. 

Speaker, of the Ombudsman and the staff of the Ombudsman 

between 1982 and 1986 the work-load of the Ombudsman's office 

increased by some 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker. At the same time, the 

staff went down by 8 per cent. That's not fulfilling the needs of the 

people in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'd like to talk a little bit about the general approach, Mr. Speaker. 

We on this side of the House and, I maintain, people in the 

province of Saskatchewan, believe that the CCF and the NDP in 

the province of Saskatchewan have had an excellent record with 

respect to setting up and respecting watch-dog and public service 

agencies, so that peoples' rights again, Mr. Speaker, are in fact 

protected. 

 

And we believe that the people of Saskatchewan agree with us that 

that record is good. We also agree, Mr. Speaker, on the other hand, 

that people in the province of Saskatchewan, because of some of 

the things I've outlined here this evening, believe that the Tory 

record, the Progressive Conservative government's record, is very 

poor in that same area. 

 

As I've pointed, the Conservatives have cut back consistently on 

the Ombudsman and those offices set up to carry out very 

important roles in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It was previous practice, Mr. Speaker, to advertise for an 

Ombudsman. And the member from Kindersley said, why would 

you advertise outside the country or outside the province, I think 

his words were, to find an Ombudsman for the province. Well, I 

don't know why we should either, to come right down to it, Mr. 

Speaker. But we certainly should do some searching within the 

province of Saskatchewan because we have many capable and 

non-partisan people in the province of Saskatchewan that can 

adequately fill that role. And I think it's been portrayed by Judge 

Boychuk and by Dave Tickell in the very good roles that they've 

performed in the Office of the Ombudsman. 

 

The second thing that's previous practice, has always been to 

consult with the opposition. When there's an appointment of 

someone who's supposed to be impartial, non-political, 

non-partisan, to establish that role — and so that person can work 

independently from the legislature, independently from the 

government and the opposition — it's very important that the 

individual has the agreement of the government and the members 

of the opposition in the provincial legislature. I think that's 

absolutely imperative. 

 

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1964 

 

In the motion that is put forward here today, Mr. Speaker, there 

has been no consultation whatsoever. It's been a great surprise, not 

only to opposition but people in the province of Saskatchewan, 

that this name all of a sudden comes forward for appointment in a 

very important position to serve people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I think that the Progressive Conservative's 

have grossly, grossly violated the tradition of Saskatchewan's 

legislature by the method of which they have gone about this 

appointment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what it does say in the Act, and I would quote 

from the Act, it's section 3(1): 

 

There shall be appointed, as an officer of the Legislature, a 

commissioner for investigation to be called an Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an officer of this legislature is non-partisan, just like 

the people who sit at the clerks' Table, just like the pages who 

serve us in this Assembly, like the Sergeant-at-Arms. These are 

non-partisan people. They're employees of the legislature, and I'm 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that as Speaker of this Assembly, and having 

jurisdiction over the Chamber, you're very, very well aware of 

that. 

 

The other qualifications, really, Mr. Speaker, are not that the 

person has to have a law degree, and they have to have a Bachelor 

of Commerce degree, and they have to have a Public 

Administration degree. The person, and I quote from Section 3(2): 

 

The person appointed as Ombudsman shall be a Canadian 

citizen and . . . shall be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council on the recommendation of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

On the recommendation of the Legislative Assembly, not the 

recommendation of the government; even though they may beat us 

by majority vote in this legislature, it still puts that person in a very 

awkward position if they don't have the support of the Legislative 

Assembly as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take you back in time a little bit to 

. . . and I refer to Hansard from March 12, 1983, and I think it's 

important the members opposite listen, especially the member 

from Weyburn; he may learn something from this. Okay, so I'm 

quoting from Hansard from March 12, 1973, Mr. Speaker:  

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney, (Premier), moved, seconded by Hon. R. 

Romanow, (Attorney General): 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending to His Honour Ernest Carl 

Boychuk, of the city of Saskatoon, in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, be appointed Ombudsman under section 3 of 

The Ombudsman Act, 1972, being Chapter 87 of the Statutes of 

Saskatchewan, 1972. 

 

Well the premier at that time, the current Leader of the 

Opposition, went on to articulately put forward the qualifications 

of Judge Boychuk and to state the  

importance of the office of Ombudsman. And I won't go into 

quoting anything from his remarks, but also on the same date in 

Hansard, following the premier's remarks, there was the leader of 

the opposition stood in his place in this legislature, Mr. D. G. 

Steuart — he was the leader of the Liberal party in the province of 

Saskatchewan at the time, leader of the opposition in the House. 

And there must have been consultation went on at that time 

because I quote, Mr. Speaker: — 

 

Mr. Speaker, first I would like to make it very clear that as far 

as the individual is concerned, Judge Boychuk who has been 

chosen for this position, the Premier told me about this some 

time ago and asked if we had any objection to the individual 

and I said No, he is a fine man and enjoys an excellent 

reputation. I certainly wish him well in this undertaking that he 

has agreed to do on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan . . . I 

want to say very clearly that we will co-operate with Mr. 

Boychuk in every way that we can to allow him to make a 

success of this particular position. 

 

That's the leader of the opposition, March 12, 1973, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A far cry from tonight, Doug, a far cry 

from tonight. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — As the member from Regina Rosemont points 

out, it's a far cry from this evening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would quote what the other party said during that debate of 

March 12, 1973, where the motion was put in to appoint the 

Ombudsman, but incidentally, Mr. Speaker, there were no 

Progressive Conservatives sitting in the legislature at this point in 

time, so I'm unable to quote anything that the Conservatives 

actually said during that particular debate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to move on to the next appointment of 

an Ombudsman in the province of Saskatchewan. I'm looking at 

Hansard on March 11, 1977, and there was a motion put forward, 

it's on page 653 of Hansard regarding the Office of Ombudsman 

by the Hon. A.E. Blakeney, premier, moved, seconded by the hon. 

attorney general, Mr. Romanow. And I quote: 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending to His Honour that David 

Arthur Tickell, of the city of Regina, in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, be appointed Ombudsman under section 3 of 

The Ombudsman Act, 1972, being Chapter 87 of the Statutes of 

Saskatchewan 1972. 

 

The premier at that time goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last time I spoke on (this) Office of 

Ombudsman in this Legislature at any great length was on 

March 12 1973, when I moved that Judge Ernest Boychuk be 

appointed Ombudsman. Since that time the office of 

Ombudsman has developed considerably. Judge Boychuk 

began with a Regina office and a staff of five and in 1975 when 

he resigned as Ombudsman to become Chief Judge  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1965 

 

of the Magistrates' Court . . . 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me there also must have been some 

consultation prior to March 11, 1977 as well. At that time on page 

656 of Hansard, Mr. S.J. Cameron the member from Regina 

South at that time representing the Liberal party in his intervention 

said this: 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may address . . . this matter. As members 

know this is an appointment which is made by Members of the 

Legislature as distinct from the Government, and we were, as 

the Premier indicated consulted in advance of this appointment. 

We indicated to the Premier that we would be supporting the 

move to have Mr. Tickell appointed as the Ombudsman. 

 

I want to particularly to join with him on behalf of the Liberal 

Opposition in the House to pay tribute to the work that Ernie 

Boychuk did in the period in which he held the office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the difference between 1973 . . . That's right. The 

difference between March 12, 1973 and March 11, 1977 is that all 

of a sudden there were Progressive Conservatives represented in 

the Legislative Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Questionable as to whether that was a great day for people in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I again want to quote from Hansard, page 656 of March 11, 

1977. And I quote from Mr. J.G. Lane, member from Qu'Appelle. 

And I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to address the House on behalf of the 

Progressive Conservative party in extending best wishes to the 

new Ombudsman. 

 

A little further down, Mr. Speaker, I quote still from the Mr. J.G. 

Lane, the current Minister of Justice by the way, Mr. Speaker. And 

I quote: 

 

Surely if we have an individual with the capability of Mr. 

Tickell it is time to increase the levels of government which 

would be subject to investigation by the Ombudsman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Certainly different, Mr. Speaker, from what the 

member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden is saying today through his 

government, the Progressive Conservative government in the 

province of Saskatchewan, from what he said on March 11, 1977. 

 

He goes on, Mr. Speaker, on page 657 of the same Hansard, I 

quote: 

 

On behalf of the Conservative Party, I would like to extend a 

thank you to Judge Boychuk for the admirable way in which he 

carried out his duties as Ombudsman and wish Mr. Tickell best 

wishes in his new position. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what are they saying? They say one thing in 

opposition; they say something completely different when they're 

in government. 

 

But the point that I've tried to make here this evening, Mr. 

Speaker, is the total disregard for the process. Whether Mr. 

McLellan is the proper individual or whether someone else is the 

proper individual is not the real question, Mr. Speaker. The real 

question is the process and the blatant disregard that I have tried to 

point out many times in my intervention here this evening — the 

blatant disregard that is held for the process of an office that has to 

be impartial from any political affiliation, or at least appear to be 

impartial. 

 

And I don't know, Mr. Speaker, of anyone who would want to take 

this appointment with the burden that the Progressive 

Conservative government would place on them by having such 

disregard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I don't want to get into the 

personalities of the individual. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I do. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I would just say . . . Other members said that 

they may want to; I don't want to do that, and I can't say whether 

other members will or will not. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have a very good tradition in 

Saskatchewan. And I don't say that from a partisan point of view, 

but there are some basic conventions and principles and ethics and 

traditions by which this Legislative Assembly and by which the 

province must operate. And without that, we will not operate in 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people; people's rights will be 

abused in the province of Saskatchewan unless we can preserve 

those rights through this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to the motion and I support 

the motion that was moved by the . . . or the amendment to the 

motion as moved by the member from Regina Lakeview and 

second by the member from Saskatoon Fairview. And the motion 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker:  

 

That all the words after the word "that" in the first line be 

deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

this Assembly refer the matter of the appointment of an 

Ombudsman pursuant to section 3 of The Ombudsman Act and 

the method of recruitment and selection to a selection 

committee of the legislature. 

 

I think that that's very important. I think that this could have all 

been averted by some consultation to put forward some names to 

show the people of Saskatchewan that we, at least, are willing to 

work with the government, even though the government does not 

seem to be willing to work with anyone in the province of 

Saskatchewan, other than their very close friends for political  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1966 

 

appointments. We're willing to work with them. Let's show some 

co-operation so that the people of Saskatchewan can see some 

faith in this institution again through the appointment of people 

through a due process to have the best person possible and take the 

burden of accusations off the individual that has to fulfil that role. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

recognizing me and giving me time to participate in this debate 

here this evening. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 

participate in this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's my conviction that in any public situation where 

justice and fairness is demanded, it's always true, the truism holds 

that justice must not only be done, but must be seen to be done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that's true in the courts, in the 

courts of the law; it's true in labour courts; it's true in the courts of 

the church; and it's particularly true when we go about the 

appointment of an Ombudsman. Justice must not only be done, it 

must be seen to be done. Of all the appointments made by a 

provincial government, and we know there are many of them, this 

appointment must be seen to be done fairly and justly. The 

procedure that this government has followed cannot be perceived 

to be just or fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Ombudsman — the Ombudsman 

who is appointed by this legislature — is a person who ought to be 

someone to whom the people of Saskatchewan, any person in this 

province could turn to with ease, a person you can turn to with 

confidence. If someone gets caught in the web of government 

bureaucracy in this province, they ought to be able to turn to the 

Ombudsman and be able to trust that individual. And to fulfil that 

responsibility, the Ombudsman must be clearly perceived to be 

entirely independent — entirely independent of the government of 

the day, and clearly supported by every member of this House. 

That kind of confidence was earned; that kind of trust was placed 

in the Ombudsman, when the appointment was made after 

advertisement of the position, and when choice was made with the 

consultation of all parties in this House. In that way justice was 

done, and it was seen to be done, and Saskatchewan people could 

then trust their Ombudsman. 

 

In the manner in which this government has chosen to appoint an 

Ombudsman, that confidence is destroyed, and trust in the office 

will, understandably, be gone. We have an appointment of an 

Ombudsman made. Where was it made, Mr. Speaker? Where was 

it made? To quote a colleague of mine, it was made behind closed 

cabinet doors. It was made without advertisement. It was made 

without consultation. It was made behind closed cabinet doors. 

 

And so I say, is it any wonder that the people of  

Saskatchewan see this as a patronage appointment. Should it 

surprise us that the people of Saskatchewan see this as a patronage 

appointment? Should it surprise us that The Globe and Mail 

headlines the article describing the appointment of the 

Ombudsman in Saskatchewan with the headline referred to earlier, 

"Ombudsman choice puts Devine deeper in patronage mire." 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Globe and Mail article describing the 

appointment of the Ombudsman in Saskatchewan compares this 

appointment to other appointments that this government has made. 

Let me just quote a little of the article. 

 

This article talks about former provincial energy minister, Paul 

Schoenhals, named chairman of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan at a salary of $78,000. This article talks about 

former environment minister, Tim Embury, receiving a portion of 

a $500,000 contract. This article talks about former social services 

minister, Gordon Dirks, receiving a $30,000 contract. This Globe 

and Mail article talks about former justice minister, Sidney 

Dutchak. He is acting president of Sask. Housing. This article 

talks about Mr. George Hill being appointed president of 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. This article talks about Mr. 

Keith Parker, former Conservative MLA, Moose Jaw North, 

defeated in the October election, now an executive assistant to the 

head of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board — salary reported to be 

more than $50,000. This articles describing the appointment of the 

Saskatchewan Ombudsman talks about Paul Rousseau, 

Conservative cabinet minister appointed . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. The 

article might, in fact, talk about all those things, but that doesn't 

necessarily mean that it applies to the motion being discussed. A 

steady string of patronage appointments is not, in my opinion, on 

this motion, and we could keep this up all night of course so that 

. . . 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I indeed agree that we could keep 

the discussion about patronage appointments very long. My point, 

Mr. Speaker, is this: The Globe and Mail, in their reporting of the 

appointment of an Ombudsman in Saskatchewan, describes it as a 

patronage appointment. And I say, is there any wonder when this 

crucial decision is made behind closed cabinet doors. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, in my mind is indeed a tragedy, for this kind of 

appointment destroys the integrity of the Ombudsman's office — 

it destroys the integrity of the office. 

 

How can an Ombudsman who is appointed in this fashion then be 

seen by the people of Saskatchewan to be just? How can this 

Ombudsman be seen to be impartial and to be someone who is, 

indeed, at arm's length from government, no matter what his 

abilities, no matter what his qualifications, no matter how good he 

may be? How, when he is appointed in this fashion, can he be seen 

by the people of our province to be impartial, to be fair, and to be 

just? As we've heard tonight, never in the history of the office has 

an appointment been made in this fashion. It never happened this 

way before, not until this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that this government does  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1967 

 

not like the Office of the Ombudsman. At every level this 

government fears independent scrutiny, it fears any voice of 

independent criticism. At every turn it tries to silence opposition. 

It's this government that initially suggested doing away with the 

Office of the Ombudsman altogether. When it realized that was 

not going to be politically palatable in Saskatchewan, they chose 

the second course, and that is to appoint a friend. And if that's not 

the case, Mr. Speaker, if that be not the case, then I believe 

members opposite will support the amendment that we have 

brought this night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a goodly number of constituents. A goodly 

number over the course of the past number of years have received 

help from the Ombudsman's office in a way that I, as their MLA, 

or any other MLA, could not give them. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

has been true not just for the past five years but true also when we 

were in government. Every government makes its mistakes, some 

governments more than others. 

 

In every government people get caught and trapped in the 

bureaucracy. In every government people find themselves 

standing alone. And, Mr. Speaker, it's my conviction that every 

government needs a voice of conscience. Every government needs 

a voice of advocacy that is somehow removed from partisan 

politics. Every government needs a voice that only seeks to do that 

which is right and that which is just. And mature governments 

across this country and around the world have recognized that fact. 

But if the holder of that office, if that voice is to play that valuable 

role, then it's my position that his or her appointment must be 

simply above question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — It must be simply, entirely non-partisan, 

non-political. And the manner in which this government has 

chosen to make this appointment does not, in my mind, meet that 

essential requirement. Indeed, in the way this appointment has 

been carried out, I submit that the very integrity of the office is 

lost, and I think that's a tragedy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment that has been proposed by the 

member from Regina Lakeview, I believe, can change that. If it 

passes in this House, if it passes in this House, I believe it can 

restore some of the integrity to the Office of the Ombudsman. I 

believe it can restore some trust in the person who will eventually 

fill that role. If it is passed by this House, we then will not only do 

what is right, it will restore the perception that right is being done. 

 

(2145) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe it's going to take some courage for 

some members opposite to vote for this amendment. But if I lift 

my eyes at least above the front row, I know there are members on 

that side of the House who understand this issue. They understand 

what's at stake here. And I believe some of them do wish to see a 

non-partisan appointment of an Ombudsman for this province. I 

do believe that some of them have that conviction, and so I'm 

hoping that they will act on the courage of their conviction and 

support this amendment. 

 

With the passage of this amendment, Mr. Speaker, I believe justice 

can be done, and it will be seen to be done. And so indeed, I will 

be supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish 

at the outset of my remarks to indicate that I intend to support the 

motion put forth from the member from Regina Lakeview — or 

the amendment, I'm sorry. And the reason I intend to support that 

amendment is because of the way that this government has 

introduced their motion and introduced our new Ombudsman to 

this legislature. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The potential Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Or the potential Ombudsman. 

 

The history of the selection of the two Ombudsmen that we've had 

in Saskatchewan was clearly outlined by the member from The 

Battlefords. And he clearly indicated that the Ombudsmans, the 

men that we had, were chosen with care, not by just members of 

the government side, they were chosen by members of the 

opposition in both occasions. 

 

It's a far cry and such a great difference from what this 

government has done, Mr. Speaker. But it's no surprise. I don't 

believe it's any surprise to any of the members on the opposition 

side; I don't think it's a surprise to the government back-benchers; 

and nor do I feel it's a surprise to the people of this province. 

 

When Mr. Boychuk and Mr. Tickell were chosen — as has been 

indicated in this House this evening — there was consultation, 

there was care, and there was some feeling for what the role of the 

Ombudsman was. And it was understood by the premier of the 

day and his cabinet that in order for that position to function, and 

for that Ombudsman to be able to serve the people of this province 

in a fair and impartial manner, he had to have support from all 

members of this legislature. And that's what happened two out of 

three times. 

 

But when don't we get it, Mr. Speaker? Under a Tory 

administration. I indicated before, Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. 

Speaker, that we're not surprised on this side of the House. And in 

my remarks tonight, I'd like to indicate why we aren't surprised at 

the way he was chosen. We aren't surprised at the lack of 

consultation — not one bit. And I don't want to quote the litany of 

patronage appointments that the member from Moose Jaw has just 

done, because we all know full well that that list could go on and 

on and on and on. And we're hoping and we're praying to God that 

this isn't what we have, just another political appointment in this 

choice for the Ombudsman. Because the people of this province 

don't deserve it, they deserve better. And Mr. Speaker, why we're 

up speaking against the motion and for the amendment is because 

we fear that's not the case. 

 

I indicated that I want to point out some examples of why we're a 

little concerned at the lack of consultation that the members from 

that side have done. I want to speak a little  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1968 

 

bit about the amalgamation of the community colleges and the 

changes to the educational system without consultation. 

 

I want to talk about Bill 5 and what happened in regards to Bill 5. 

Again, another indication that there was no consultation. 

 

I want to talk about what happened to health care in this province 

without consultation with the people of this province, and in fact, 

Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker, a direct reversal of what they said 

they were going to do prior to the election. 

 

I want to talk about privatization and what we perceive to be this 

government's direction in terms of what they're going to do with 

Crown corporations without consultation. 

 

I want to talk about the closure of the hospital beds in this 

province that have happened under this administration — a record 

number of hospital beds closed for a record length of time, and 

again without consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has been demonstrating its inability 

to be fair with the people of this province, and I suggest to you that 

the choice of this gentleman as Ombudsman, Mr. McLellan, 

without consultation, is just another example of that. The Office of 

the Ombudsman is meant to deal with the people of this province 

in a fashion of fairness and impartiality, and it's not just the 

symbol. 

 

The problem that I see here is that this government is afraid of 

scrutiny, and it's very clear. I want to say tonight, we haven't had 

Crown corporation estimates in this House in this session, and I 

ask the members across: why haven't we? Because they don't want 

the books of the Crown corporations scrutinized by the opposition 

so that the people of this province can have a clear look at why the 

majority of them are losing money. And I suggest to you that they 

want the same situation with the Ombudsman's office, and they're 

afraid of scrutiny of this government by the people of the 

province. 

 

That office was there to protect people of this province, to protect 

them from the bureaucracies, to protect them from the regulations. 

And why, why wouldn't they consult with the Opposition 

members? I think we're a fair and we're an open group of people 

who were sent here by the majority of the people of this province 

to represent their views and their wishes. But you've got a minority 

representation over there, only represented by more numbers, not 

by more people; you've got a little group over there who isn't 

going to open this government up and let the people have a look at 

what's really going on inside. 

 

It was mentioned, I think by the Finance minister tonight, that 

perhaps we're picking on their choice on Mr. McLellan . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . the Justice minister, I guess it was. 

We're not debating that. The debate from this side is the system 

that they used to select that gentleman, and the problem is the 

position they're putting him in. 

 

The man should be able to go into that job . . . Mr.  

McLellan should be able to into that job knowing that he has the 

support of all members of this House — the same kind of support 

as Mr. Tickell and Mr. Boychuk did. And I say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, it's a little suspect that a man would take on that position 

— and this is a problem — that a man would take that position on 

knowing that the tradition of this House, the tradition of the Office 

of the Ombudsman has changed. and it's a precedent. 

 

Not that this government or anything else they would do would 

surprise anybody, but the qualifications of a man like Mr. 

McLellan would indicate to me that he must have had some 

reservations before he took that position. And if he didn't, I 

suggest to you that he should have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to give you another few examples of why 

people question the method that this government chose to pick Mr. 

McLellan. We've stood here for 50-some days in this session, and 

I'm not sure how many in the first session before Christmas, but 

consistently in question period members on this side of the House, 

including the independent member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 

have asked these people to be accountable for the things that their 

department has done, and the things that they have done. It's a 

scrap and it's a battle and it's a consistent and constant fight in 

order to get an answer from them. We get little speeches — here, 

there, and the other place — but the answers, for the most part, 

aren't forthcoming, or else you get one answer in here and one 

answer out there. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, this government 

is rapidly losing credibility — what little bit they came in with. 

And it's not a very good situation. 

 

I've watched in estimates, Mr. Speaker, when this government has 

had some $680 million of government money at risk — not 

government money, but certainly commitments on behalf of the 

people of this province. Are they willing to table the conditions 

under which they put this money at risk? No. We sit with almost 

$1 billion put forth by that government on behalf of the people of 

the province and they don't want to talk about it. 

 

So I say again, wouldn't that suggest to members on this side of 

the House, and to the people of the province, that there might in 

fact be a reason that they didn't consult with us before they chose 

their Ombudsman? 

 

I find it hard to believe that any thinking person in this province 

would want to believe the reasons that the members on the other 

side of this House have put forward tonight. It's clear they say one 

thing when they're in opposition and another thing when they're in 

government. It's clear they say one thing before an election and 

another thing after. All of those things are crystal clear to the 

people of this province. No wonder we ask why they didn't consult 

with us. 

 

The kind of non-accountability in this province is unprecedented. 

But there's more, and there's more reason that there's mistrust on 

this side, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk about their decision to change 

The Electoral Boundaries Act in this province. And it relates very, 

very closely to the kind of a decision they've made in terms of 

their choice for the Ombudsman. 

 

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1969 

 

Why do you want to change a system where you've got equal 

representation throughout this province, an impartial board to 

choose the boundaries at a set time which would enable the system 

for one person, one vote? How do you improve on something 

that's working, Mr. Speaker? And why do you want to change 

those things? I tell you why. I tell you why. Because they're afraid 

to go to the people on one member, one vote. 

 

And that's the same type of situation we've got with the 

Ombudsman. They're afraid to come to the opposition so that we 

can say: government, we believe you've chosen the right man — 

the same as they did when they were in opposition, the same as the 

Liberals did, and even the Liberal that sits over there did. He said: 

we think you've chosen the right man. 

 

The New Democrats were consistent in the way they chose the 

Ombudsman. There was consultation; there was unanimous 

support. And we had, on two occasions, terms of Ombudsman that 

were fair and that worked. 

 

Now I believe we've got good reason to feel this government has 

betrayed the people in not allowing the opposition some time and 

some input into the decision. We on this side of the House say 

they've been unfair, not only in this situation, but on many others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few more comments that I would like to 

make, but it being two minutes to 10, I would beg leave to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 p.m. 

 

 


