













































September 22, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 22, 1987 

 

 

2741 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order I hereby lay on the Table the 

following petition. I have examined the petition under rule 

11(7) and now present it for reading and receiving. 

 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, 

praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

urge the Government of Saskatchewan not to change the 

school-based dental plan. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Waiting for Cancer-Related Surgery 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, 

and it deals with the state of health care in this province. Is it 

the Premier’s view that a wait of six weeks or more for 

cancer-related surgery at Saskatchewan hospitals is acceptable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it is the view of our 

government that waiting lists, as I have said on several 

occasions in the past, in some specialties in Saskatoon are at a 

level that is not acceptable, and we are attempting to solve that 

problem as it relates to several specialties, namely, 

ophthalmology, orthopaedics, and to some extent, ear, nose and 

throat. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have been listening to this 

minister for some weeks now, and the answers have not been 

acceptable. The Premier of this province is responsible for . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

I must assume that the hon. member rose on a supplementary. 

She knows that preambles should be very short, and she also 

knows that she should not make statements which re debate. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — It’s a new question, Mr. Speaker. And I refer 

once again to the Premier of this province, and it has to do with 

a 53-year-old woman in Saskatoon, by the name of Joyce 

Kosokowsky, who was diagnosed as having a growth on her 

kidney. Her doctor has said that she has a 95 per cent chance 

that the growth is cancerous, and he has put Mrs. Kosokowsky 

on the hospital waiting list at St. Paul’s Hospital to have her left 

kidney surgically removed. The booking slip for Mrs. 

Kosokowsky was given to the hospital on August 31, and she 

has now been told, Mr. Premier, that she has a six-week wait to 

mid-October. Mr. Premier, that’s six weeks, and I ask you, Mr. 

Premier: is that kind of a delay acceptable when this woman 

appears to have cancer? And the question is to the Premier. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the case that the member 

raises of the lady in Saskatoon who is booked, in fact, for St. 

Paul’s Hospital, the member is right to this extent, in the sense 

that she says that there’s a possibility of cancer to the person’s 

kidney. She is right to the extent that she was booked on August 

31. She is not correct to say that mid-October is the time. The 

time that the lady is booked for, I believe it’s October 5, for her 

surgery. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, she says the middle of October; October 5 

the surgery is booked at St. Paul’s Hospital, the best 

information that I have. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the Premier of 

Saskatchewan who is responsible for the overall health care 

policies of his government. In view of the fact that there are 

11,000 people on the hospital waiting list in Saskatoon, and in 

view of the fact that 308 hospital beds were closed this summer 

for a two-month period, and in view of the fact that St. Paul’s 

Hospital had to close 69 hospital beds for a two-month period 

— the longest period of time ever in the history of St. Paul’s 

Hospital — and in view of the fact that two hospital operating 

rooms were closed at St. Paul’s Hospital, do you not 

understand, Mr. Premier, that it’s your inadequate health care 

policies that have led to these kinds of circumstances where 

cancer patients are waiting exceptionally lengthy period of time 

for hospital care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of facts. First of 

all, there are people waiting in Saskatoon, there are some people 

waiting in Saskatoon, people who need urgent surgery in 

Saskatoon. As I have said before, and as would be the case if 

that doctor in Saskatoon believed that was urgent he could have 

that person — the person being referred to here today — in the 

hospital within hours, days. That’s the case. That’s the case, Mr. 

Speaker, if the urologist believed it was urgent. I’m not 

diminishing the fact that it’s of great concern to the person, or 

to the person’s family and others. I don’t diminish that in any 

way, shape, or form. We know the concern and the 

consternation that will surround a case of this kind of diagnosis. 

There’s no question about that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, some of the facts — the member raises all of 

these other things and, frankly, exaggerates the issue to some 

extent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon, for example, the number of 

surgeries performed in Saskatoon has risen by 41 per cent a 

year — on a yearly basis — more surgeries performed on an 

annual basis every year. Mr. Speaker, those are impressive 

numbers in terms of the number of surgeries. The fact is . . . 

there is more and more pressure, but the fact is that 41 per cent 

more surgeries in a given year than there were back in the days 

when they were in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been addressing this issue. It’s a 

long-standing issue in Saskatoon. We are addressing the waiting 

list problem in Saskatoon. We’re addressing that problem; we 

will continue to do so, but the answer is  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2742 

 

simply not pouring more money at a system that is already 

under a very, very — under a very great deal of pressure. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — We have had nothing but talk, talk, talk out 

of this minister, and I will once again put my question to the 

Premier. We don’t care if it’s five weeks or six weeks, Mr. 

Premier; whether it’s October 5th or October 15th, this woman 

has cancer — so her doctor believes. And my question to you 

is: is five weeks acceptable when you have the potential of 

cancer and require surgery? Is that your policy, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The policy, Mr. Speaker, is as I have 

stated it on many occasions before — as I have stated on many 

occasions before. When the cases of cancer surgery, where it is 

deemed by the specialist — and it must be deemed by the 

specialist — to be of an urgent nature, can have admittance to 

the hospital in a very quick order. There’s no question about 

that. That’s the case at all three hospital in Saskatoon, as it is 

here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I talked about the pressures on the system — 

and just so that everybody knows the kinds of pressure that 

have been there — let’s just talk about the examples of the 

growth rates. Let’s just talk about the growth rates in terms of 

the number of procedures in the various areas that have 

happened — growth rates between 1979-80 and ‘85-86. Now 

we’re talking about a four- or five- or six-year period here. Hip 

replacements, 105 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker; cataracts, 67 

per cent increase, in terms of the number of procedures 

performed; not those that have been requested; not those that 

have been booked; those that have been in fact performed in 

these hospitals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of pressures that are on the 

system. And once again, I reiterate, for cancer patients that are 

deemed urgent by the urologist, the specialists in the field, can 

be admitted to the hospital much more quickly if deemed 

necessary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, I hope you will concede this is not something 

involving opthamology, not something involving 

orthopaediatics, but is cancer surgery and has to do with 

urology or cancer surgery. You have conceded that there is at 

least a five-week wait. 

 

Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that that doctor has said that the 

operation was not urgent, or are you going to repeat that if he 

says it’s urgent he can get his patient in, in a matter of hours? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is as I 

have said, that it does do with cancer, and I will reiterate once 

again, those kinds and the consternation that surrounds this kind 

of diagnosis. There is no question. We recognize that, as do the 

members. 

 

The person in question today has surgery booked for October 5. 

What I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that if that  

surgeon, and if it fits along the lines of the urgent surgery and 

other urgent surgery that’s in line at St. Paul’s Hospital, that 

surgeon could have that person in more quickly, if it was more 

urgent than some others that are in line ahead of him. 

 

Environmental Impact Statement re Rafferty-Alameda 

Project 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. IN the 

absence of the Minister of the Environment, I refer my question 

to the Premier, and it concerns the $136 million political 

boondoggle which is being built in the Premier’s own 

constituency, known as the Rafferty-Alameda dam project. 

 

Mr. Premier and Mr. Speaker, I have here a review document 

put forward by the Saskatchewan Department of the 

Environment in regards to its assessment of the environmental 

impact statement submitted around the Rafferty-Alameda 

project. And I want to point out to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, 

that this document says that the deficiencies in the 

environmental impact statement — forgetting the fact that they 

don’t even know where Alameda dam is going to be built — 

say this: that there’s insufficient attention to preparing an 

integrated water management plan which will take reservoir 

operating plans, ecosystem management and human water 

supply demands and flood control requirements into 

consideration, further tied to an overall mitigated plan, with the 

exception of flood control for Minot, North Dakota. 

 

Given the deficiencies that your own Department of the 

Environment puts forward, Mr. Premier, will you put a halt now 

to the Rafferty-Alameda project until these deficiencies are 

overcome? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will briefly respond 

by saying that Environment Canada has looked at that particular 

letter some time ago and the concerns raised there, and they 

have been addressed to the satisfaction of Environment Canada 

as well as the Department of Environment here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So he’s reading from an old letter, and he can probably bring up 

old letters that are 50 years old about concerns about a water 

projects. I will say, Mr. Speaker, there have been addressed, the 

very issues that he raises have been addressed. 

 

In fact the management plan for water, you will find one of the 

best in North America. And I’m sure the children and the 

grandchildren from the members opposite will be very happy 

and proud of the fact that there is a major water project in this 

province years and years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, 

supplementary question. The document, Mr. Premier, I’m 

referring to is not from Environment Canada; it’s from the 

Saskatchewan Department of Environment. It was issued at the 

end of August of 1987. And if you’re trying to  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2743 

 

say, sir, that the end of 1987 . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. The hon. member 

is having a preamble that is too long, and his remarks are 

bordering on debate for a supplement. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question is a new 

question. It will be to the Premier, and it concerns a letter that 

we have here from the stock growers association concerning the 

Rafferty-Alameda project. The Saskatchewan Stock Growers 

Association, Mr. Premier, would like to request, and I quote: 

 

. . . an extension of 60 days in the public review hearings 

on the Rafferty dam to allow affected producers sufficient 

time to thoroughly review the 1,800-page environment 

impact study that was distributed August 10, 1987. 

 

Mr. Premier, in the light that stock growers, many of whom 

operate in the affected area, are requesting a 60-day extension, 

will you or will you ask your Minister of the Environment to 

please ask the board of inquiry, the public board of inquiry, to 

reopen hearings in November so that affected stock producers 

can, in fact, participate in the public hearings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have public hearings 

going on, and if the hon. member has not attended them, I’m 

sure that somebody has informed him that hearings have been 

going on all over south-east Saskatchewan, and people in 

business, in livestock, people concerned with the environment, 

schools, chambers of commerce, health officials, and everybody 

else, Mr. Speaker, have been able to attend the hearings. And 

the general observations is that wide support by the agriculture 

sector, wide support by cattlemen, wide support by people who 

want to see tourism and economic development, and water 

projects, and the power projects. So I would say that that’s why 

we had the hearings, and that’s why the process is there. 

 

And Environment Canada has addressed the issues that have 

been raised earlier, and the Saskatchewan Department of the 

Environment have addressed those issues, and the water 

management plan is an excellent plan, Mr. Speaker. You will 

find, Mr. Speaker, that history will show what you know and 

don’t know about the stock growers would fill a large room, my 

boy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will just point out to the hon. member, there’s a 

few people in the NDP opposition, Mr. Speaker, who happen 

not to like to build. I’d say if you go back and look at your roots 

of Tommy Douglas and others who were builders, Mr. Speaker, 

you’d build Diefenbaker Lake and Gardiner dam and projects 

like these because of the kinds of things people in this province 

want to see done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — New question, Mr. Speaker. It’s evident what 

the Premier doesn’t know about Rafferty-Alameda would fill a 

large empty dam filled with mud-flats. 

Mr. Premier, are you aware, in regards to the public hearings, 

that these are the shortest public hearings ever, ever held in the 

province of Saskatchewan in regards to an environmental 

impact statement — the shortest in the history of the province. 

And do you deny that the only reason why you and your 

henchmen are trying to push the project through is so that you 

can get that $136 million, that political boondoggle, in your 

own constituency, behind the backs of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the public obviously has 

difficulty figuring out where the NDP is coming from on these 

kinds of projects because under the CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) of Tommy Douglas, there was 

encouragement to build those kinds of management, water and 

power projects. 

 

We find today the new leader is saying that he’s going to 

review everything under the Blakeney administration because 

he’s not sure that nay of it is quite accurate. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Wants to forget it all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — They want to forget about it. And now, 

Mr. Speaker, they’re standing up here saying: well, I’m not so 

sure that they want to have a water project or in fact whether 

they’re against public or . . . privatization, or public 

participation. The whole policies of the NDP are under review, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s very typical — it’s very typical. 

 

You look at the CCF was going to help farmers; the CCF was 

going to build. The NDP didn’t want to do it; you want to 

nationalize companies and potash industries. The new leader’s 

going to change his mind because finally they’ve even noticed 

— and I think the member from Rosemont would like to hear 

this — that the Soviet Union and China are going to 

privatization and public participation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Proposed Sale of SGI 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was to be 

to the phantom minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) but in her continuing problematic 

absence I will direct the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’ll allow the 

hon. member to . . . Order, please. Order! Order. The hon. 

member is trying to ask a question but, for whatever reasons, 

both sides of the House are preventing him from doing that. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome back, Madam 

phantom Minister. My question is, of course, to you, and it 

deals with the Premier’s and your government’s plan to sell of 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2744 

 

In a Canadian Press interview just yesterday, Madam Minister, 

you said that the decision on the sale of SGI will be made by 

the provincial cabinet before the end of the year, and you added, 

I quote: 

 

It’s no secret that the board of directors of SGI has been 

looking at all options. 

 

Madam Minister, the SGI board of directors has been looking at 

all the options in secret, with no input from SGI’s workers, 

SGI’s agents, or SGI’s customers. Will you and the Premier 

now give the people of Saskatchewan a clear commitment that 

before you decide to sell off this important public utility, you 

will submit your proposals to public hearings around the 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

his question. What I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was I would 

hope that the board of SGI would have a package finalized that 

could go to cabinet. 

 

With regards to public meetings around the province, I think the 

Deputy Premier answered that very succinctly the other day 

when he indicated to the member that we would have as many 

public hearings as the opposition did when they had 

nationalized the potash. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the aspiring leader 

of the NDP, or to-be-leader of the NDP, recently on a talk show 

in Regina indicated his support for public participaction — 

participation. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Madam Minister, what are you afraid of? Bring it 

to the House then. Let’s have a debate . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

 

If the member has a question, he can put it now. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I have a question, Mr. Speaker, thank you. 

Madam Minister, if the sell-off of this important public utility is 

such a good move, why are you afraid to let the public see the 

details before you sell their insurance company> What exactly 

are you afraid of? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can assure the member from Regina 

North that I and this government are not afraid to look at any 

option available to government to diversify the economy, to 

strengthen the economy, to protect people. And we will look at 

all options — options, Mr. Speaker, without fear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary. Can the minister tell 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Would the member please indicate if he’s asking 

a new question or a supplementary? 

Mr. Trew: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I clearly stated 

supplementary, but I’m sure in the noise of the House you 

missed that — clearly. 

 

Can the minister tell Saskatchewan’s taxpayers, who now own 

100 per cent of SGI, how giving up control of SGI to 

non-Saskatchewan residents is in their best interests? How will 

that protect Saskatchewan jobs, and how will it keep 

Saskatchewan insurance rates down? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 

member previously, we are discussing the options available to 

SGI to expand the company to make this company stronger. His 

specific question, Mr. Speaker, is purely hypothetical because 

no decision has been made by this government. 

 

Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

you have talked of public participation, and we’ve seen your 

definition of public participation with Saskoil. Do you deny that 

75 per cent of the Saskoil shares sold in 1986 are already owned 

by non-Saskatchewan residents? And do you deny that within 

weeks of the sale of Saskoil shares 25 per cent of Saskoil 

employees were fired? And do you further deny that today this 

oil company, Saskoil, is expanding in Alberta rather than in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

In other words, Madam Minister, your version of public 

participation will see ownership of SGI move outside of 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan jobs lost, Saskatchewan insurance 

rates sky-rocket, and all expansion take place outside the 

province. Is that what you’re telling us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it always surprises me, 

particularly in this session, to sit on this side of the House and 

watch those members over there — the negativism, the “anti” 

everything. They’re critics of everything. They distort 

everything. 

 

SGI is a strong provincial insurance company. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, even though SGI only insures within the boundaries of 

our province, SGI’s listed in the top 25 insurance companies in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. And if we can’t, as a government, look at 

ways of expanding that to see that there’s more employment, 

that the company is strengthened here with the head office here, 

I might add, Mr. Speaker — you know, they’re just like 

ostriches with their head in the sand. They are scared to look t 

anything new. They want to go back to the days of 40 years 

ago, like hang on to those days, you know. 

 

This government, as I said, Mr. Speaker, is looking at public 

participation, and we have made no bones about that, and we 

will continue to look at public participation. And it’s not a scary 

thing, Mr. Speaker. It diversifies the economy, it strengthens the 

economy, it creates jobs, and it protects people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Budget Cuts to Urban Municipalities 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2745 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Urban Affairs, and it deals with yet another 

example of his profound propensity for hyperbolic excess. And 

I’d use simpler language, Mr. Speaker, but some words are not 

permitted here. 

 

The most recent issue, the must recent issue of his department’s 

newsletter, called Municipal Scene, suggests that the board of 

directors of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 

supported the government’s budget cuts to cities, towns, and 

villages, including the elimination of the $16 million provincial 

capital fund. 

 

As your newsletter puts it: 

 

In consultation with the executive board of SUMA, a 

number of decisions were made regarding municipal 

programs. 

 

Is it really the minister’s position that the SUMA executive 

approves of the budget cuts your government has introduced for 

urban municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the foggiest idea 

what he said at the outset. I don’t know if that was a 

compliment or a . . . I grew up on the east side of this city and 

lived here for a long, long time and obviously if the member 

from Regina Victoria has that kind of dialogue with his 

constituents, I doubt that they understand what he is talking 

about. 

 

But in any event, Mr. Speaker, I should tell the member that he 

seems to disagree with an awful lot of publications that this 

government puts out, and really, I suppose, that that’s his 

prerogative if he chooses to do so. I know that as we examine, 

for instance, that survey that he so graciously undertook, that he 

claims to be some kind of a legal document, we have had now 

the opportunity to deal with that in quite an extensive look. And 

I can tell you that as we get into estimates, I hope that he refers 

to that survey because clear — and I’ll deal with regard to his 

survey — none of that survey really makes too much sense. 

 

So if he has a problem — getting back to his direct question — 

if he has a problem with a paper that the Department of Urban 

Affairs publishes, I suppose all I can say, that that’s not news. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister provides an excellent example of what I was talking 

about. To short it up, B.S., I think, are the appropriate initials. 

 

My question is: following your budget cut announcements last 

April, the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) board of directors issued a public statement. For 

example, this is part of what SUMA had to say about the 

elimination of the $16 million capital fund: 

 

The board urges the government to reconsider its position 

with respect to capital funding. The board  

believes it is unreasonable for the government to reduce 

spending in this area to the degree proposed. The 

economic impact of this position is potentially disastrous 

and totally unacceptable, in the board’s view. The board 

considers it irresponsible for the government to completely 

eliminate the fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I realize that complaints are few and far 

between these days for government members, but . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please! The hon. member stood on his feet for I don’t 

know how many seconds after I had risen. He was engaging in a 

long preamble to his question, and I’d just like to say that today 

in question period we saw situations where, I’m sure hon. 

members will agree, preambles in some cases — not all cases 

— were too long. Answers to some questions, but not all cases, 

were too long, and sometimes not quite on the topic. And I hope 

that we’ll come back tomorrow in a little different frame of 

mind. 

 

I didn’t hear your question; I don’t know if the minister did, but 

if you have a question, please put it without any further 

preamble. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — My question is this, Mr. Minister. 

Compliments are few and far between these days for the 

government. I wonder, do you take those kinds of statements as 

expressions of support for your government’s actions in so far 

as urban municipalities are concerned? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — You’re right, Mr. Speaker. It’s difficult to 

hear with the noise that comes from the opposition benches 

most of the time during question period. I can tell you that 

perhaps the biggest question that I received from SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) is: why did 

the prior administration ever take away capital funding in the 

good times? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’m sure hon. 

members know that question period is over, and I’m sure that 

they also know that when the Speaker has risen the noise should 

not continue in the House. I therefore ask members on both 

sides of the House to please refrain from the same. 

 

The member for Regina Rosemont, I would ask him to please 

co-operate with my request. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Before order of the day, Mr. Speaker, I rise 

to table a document protesting to the Premier regarding the 

RCMP cut-backs that affect residents of Anglin Lake. I have 

110 signatures here that have been sent to me. I have been 

asked to present this to the House. It’s a result of them having 

increased . . . 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2746 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave of 

the Assembly, and from what I understand has been a prior 

agreement through the normal channels of all parties, I would 

move that we go directly to government orders, specifically 

adjourned debates. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Constitution Amendment, 1987 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Devine. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is with 

some mixed emotion that I enter into debate in the dealing of 

what has been referred to as the Meech Lake accord, or the 

approval of the Meech Lake accord by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think all of us in our political lives, Mr. Speaker, welcome an 

opportunity to impact in some small way upon the statement of 

the values of our nation, the rights of our nation, and most 

importantly, the people within, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I stand today to address a few brief comments, Mr. 

Speaker, and at the conclusion of my comments I will be 

moving an amendment from this side of the House, an 

amendment which will, in effect, allow for changes to be made 

to the Senate of Canada using the same amending formula that 

currently exists. But before getting to that, Mr. Speaker, there 

are some observations that I would like to make. 

 

It is a proud time for many Canadians about to accept one of the 

implications of the accord that is before this Assembly and 

before the House of Commons, that is being considered, 

although in no province of the nation as hurriedly as it is here in 

Saskatchewan. It is a proud statement of fact that one of the 

things that the accord makes possible is that it will bring into 

our nation, as a full participant, the province of Quebec. And I 

think after the conclusion of the considerations of the 

constitution that wrapped up in 1982, it was a sad mark for 

many Canadians that our brothers and sisters in the province of 

Quebec were not signators to that agreement. 

 

And it is clearly a noble objective. It is clearly a desirable 

characteristic of the Canadian constitution that we welcome our 

fellow Canadians in the province of Quebec to join with us in a 

description of our rights, our expectations, our protections that 

we can accept as unarguable as citizens of this beautiful 

country. 

 

And it is for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that I say I stand with 

some mixed emotions, because I share the joy that many 

Canadians and, I believe, all legislators of this country  

have in welcoming Quebec as part of the Canadian 

constitutional agreement. 

 

But I believe also that I share many of the reservations that 

many of the legislators, and more importantly many Canadians, 

feel about the specifics of the accord that we’re asked to 

approve in this Assembly — with some shortcomings — an 

accord or an agreement that was reached, I think many would 

agree, under questionable kinds of circumstances. I think many 

of us shook our heads and wondered: what was the rush? 

 

When we learned some two or three months ago that the Prime 

Minister of Canada brought together the premiers of the 10 

provinces of this nation and sat together in a room until the dark 

hours of the night and the wee hours of the morning to hammer 

out an agreement, an agreement to amend the constitution of 

Canada, and the accord in many ways reflects the credibility of 

the process that was used to arrive at the conclusion and to 

arrive at the words that are before this Assembly today. 

 

We all know that the Prime Minister of Canada is an eastern 

labour lawyer who had a good reputation, a sound reputation, 

Mr. Speaker, at being one to facilitate labour agreements; and 

that’s a reputation he’s earned through his performance. 

 

But there are many of us who doubt that that same process 

that’s used to arrive at a labour agreement where management 

and labour who are at an impasse come together and commit 

themselves to living together in a room until they have resolved 

their differences in a way that they both find acceptable and live 

with for the duration of the contract — maybe a year, maybe 

two, clearly very rarely ever more than three — many of us 

doubt that that is really the kind of process that we want the first 

ministers of our nation to use to lay down the specific words to 

outline and to define the protections and the rights that 

Canadian citizens can expect by virtue of their citizenship. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what the rush is. It was with 

disappointment that I noted in this House last week an 

amendment that was moved by the Leader of the Opposition, 

calling for public hearings, that that amendment was defeated, 

supported unanimously on this side of the House and rejected 

unanimously on the government side of the House, and 

therefore defeated. Because it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that if 

there is anyone who is most important in considering the 

Canadian constitution, it should be the people. 

 

A constitution should attempt, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, to 

define as much as words can do that, in a legalistic kind of 

framework, to define the heart and the soul, and in some ways 

the ambitions of Canadian people. And I am one who believes, 

Mr. Speaker, that that’s a process that is most valuable, is most 

credible, is most accurate, when it’s done with time. 

 

The Canadian tradition has been one many around the world, 

Mr. Speaker, will criticize Canadians for being a humble 

people. And I guess in a sense we have to accept that criticism. 

I don’t know that it’s a criticism. I think it’s a personal 

characteristic of Canadian people that we are  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2747 

 

not bound to be inflammatory in our language often, nor in our 

expectations. In a sense I think it reflects the fact that we 

Canadians are a sensitive people who consider it important to 

give just accord to the opinions of our neighbours and to the 

opinions of those who disagree with us, as well. 

 

And so in a sense we Canadians are a hesitant people because 

we believe in the importance of compromise. We believe in the 

principles of co-operation. And that, in a sense, has become a 

characteristic of our nation, of our institutions, and of our 

people. 

 

And as we look at the accord that’s before us in this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, there are some things that I find problematic, that 

I want to bring to the attention of the Assembly, that haven’t 

been referred to by other hon. members of this House. And it is 

my hope that as we come in this Assembly with the 

opportunity, that, quite possible for every one of us here, is a 

once in a lifetime opportunity; to be able to speak in the 

Assembly as an elected representative of the people to the 

constitution, even though we’re not federal members of 

parliament, to the constitution which governs not just 

Saskatchewan people but all the people of Canada. 

 

And there are two factors, Mr. Speaker, that I want to focus on 

in my remarks today. One has to do with the promise for the 

security of social programs for Saskatchewan and Canadian 

people, and the other has to do with the role and the ability of 

Canadian people to change that role of the Canadian Senate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we Canadians stand proud of the fact that we have 

a medicare system in this country that, perhaps arguably, but I 

submit, Mr. Speaker, is the best in the world. I’m proud to say, 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that you and I can share as a matter of our 

Saskatchewan heritage, is that in many ways medicare is the 

gift of Saskatchewan people to Canada. We celebrated the 25th 

anniversary of the introduction of medicare in the first province 

in this nation back on July 1. And across the nation today 

Canadians, when speaking frequently with our American 

friends, our American brothers and sisters, will point to our 

medicare program with pride and will say: that’s one of the 

things that we are proud to say is truly Canadian. And it is. 

 

There is a security for our health care in Canada that exists here 

that is absent in many nations of the world, in fact, is absent in 

the nation immediately south of us. It is a program, Mr. 

Speaker, that was introduced — although clearly health care 

services under our Canadian constitution are delivered by the 

provinces, it is a program, a medicare program in Canada — but 

because of the national will has been implemented in every 

province across this nation, providing approximately equal kind 

of health care protection and coverage for all of our citizens. 

 

We have as well, Mr. Speaker, a Canada assistance plan 

agreement that was signed in this country in 1966. It was an 

agreement which provided for all of the provinces — which by 

the Canadian constitution they’re responsible for social services 

— to provide protection, a basic kind of protection to the 

citizens of each province; an agreement  

that was drafted and agreed to by the federal government and all 

the provinces, which ensured that there would always be federal 

revenues available. In fact, Mr. Speaker, half of the money 

spent on social services in the province of Saskatchewan, as in 

every other province in this nation, is provided from the federal 

treasury. As a result of this agreement . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me, why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, we have a couple 

of special guests in the Speaker’s gallery, and I’m sorry to 

interrupt your speech, but I think if I was allowed to introduce 

them . . . You would allow that, please. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery I’d like to 

introduce a couple of distinguished visitors to us that are well 

know to all of us in this House probably, but Cliff Wright, the 

mayor of Saskatoon, — the largest city in the province, I might 

add — and Henry Dayday, the alderman from Saskatoon is with 

him. And I would ask everybody to welcome them to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would join as well in 

welcoming His Worship from Saskatoon, and the alderman, and 

I hope that you will enjoy your time that you are here to take in 

the proceedings of the legislature. I recognize of course that you 

are both gentlemen who appreciate the importance of the 

democratic traditions, and perhaps, in some special kind of way, 

the importance of the debate that’s before the legislature today. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Constitution Amendment, 1987 (continued) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, if I may go back to the comments I 

was making about the Canada assistance plan agreement which 

provides for all provinces in this country 50 per cent of the 

funding to put in place social services for their people; to 

provide opportunities for protection, security, arguably in some 

jurisdictions, I guess, the retention of dignity; and in some 

ways, to use those funds as well to improve the quality of life of 

their people. 

 

The Canada assistance plan agreement of 1966, Mr. Speaker, 

came about because there was a will — a national will with the 

federal government, in co-operation with the provinces, to 

provide a level of security that’s approximately equal across the 

nation, even though clearly social services are provincial 

jurisdiction under the Canadian constitution. 

 

And I think that as well, Mr. Speaker, is a characteristic that 

Canadians would refer to as something about which we feel 

proud; that Canadians more so than, I believe, our  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2748 

 

neighbour to the south and many other nations throughout the 

world, appreciate that we have the ability and we welcome the 

opportunity to pool our resources and provide some social 

securities for our friends and our neighbours, for our brothers 

and sisters. 

 

Those two characteristics, Mr. Speaker, of a national agreement 

to provide provincially . . . services under provincial 

jurisdictions, I fear, with the agreement that we have before this 

House, may be . . . they may be the kinds of possibilities that 

will never happen again. 

 

Because one of the things that I note as I look at the accord 

before us, Mr. Speaker, is that it requires unanimous agreement 

— unanimous agreement of all provinces before changes can be 

made to national programs for services of provincial 

jurisdiction. And I want to refer specifically, Mr. Speaker, to 

the seventh item of the accord before this Assembly, and with 

your permission to just simply read verbatim the paragraph that 

I’m referring to, Mr. Speaker. It says: 

 

The said Act is further amended by adding thereto, 

immediately after section 106 thereof, the following 

section: 

 

Now that’s the kind of lawyer talk that frankly gets me lost at 

times, Mr. Speaker, but this is the important part: 

 

The Government of Canada shall provide reasonable 

compensation to the government of the province that 

chooses not to participate in a national shared-cost 

program that is established by the Government of Canada 

after the coming into force of this section in an area of 

exclusive provincial jurisdiction, if the province carries on 

a program or initiative that is compatible with the national 

objectives. 

 

And what does that say in layman’s language, Mr. Speaker? 

Well, what it says to me is this: it says that when the people of 

this nation want to provide some national level of service that 

comes under provincial jurisdiction, that if there is a province 

that agrees with the federal government’s objectives — and I’m 

not sure in terms of the courts and the legal system what that 

means — what that means when a province has, and I quote, 

“programs or initiatives that are compatible with the national 

objectives.” 

 

Those are legal terms that I understand don’t have a precedent 

and therefore are difficult to interpret and to read with assurance 

for all Canadian people. What it says is that if there is a national 

intention to provide some kinds of services to all Canadian 

people, normally delivered by provinces, not normally, 

delivered by provinces, but there are some provinces that don’t 

want to participate in the way that the federal government or the 

nation perceives to be appropriate, that if — and we start to get 

into loosely defined terms here, Mr. Speaker — if their 

objectives are compatible — as I say, those are not clearly 

defined — that there will be some kind of reasonable 

compensation. And again that also is not clearly defined, Mr. 

Speaker, by precedent, that I’m aware. 

 

And what that says to me, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re  

putting in jeopardy — if we agree to this accord, at the same 

time that we welcome Quebec as a full participant in the 

constitution of Canada — that we may at the same time be 

putting in jeopardy the ability of our nation to provide those 

kinds of social securities, those social programs to Canadian 

people, programs delivered by provinces. 

 

And let me raise just two that I think are . . . that they’re on the 

beach, Mr. Speaker, of the national agenda. And that may very 

well mark the kinds of things that we as Canadians would like 

to make changes in the delivery of programs under provincial 

jurisdiction through federal funding. And the two items to 

which I refer, Mr. Speaker, are day care and some form of an 

adequate basic income. 

 

Many of us in this House and across the nation are expecting 

that the federal government some time in the not too distant 

future, within months I would expect, Mr. Speaker, will be . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, social programs change in our nation as a result in 

changes in values of Canadian people, changes in economic 

structures of Canadian people. 

 

And both of these initiatives that I think were on the . . . just the 

early parts of the horizon and looking at seriously in a national 

sort of way — a day care program which provides some 

consistency across the nation, provides opportunities for 

Canadian parents in every province to participate in their 

communities as they choose, and at the same time give some 

assurances for quality of the raising of children in our nation, 

some kind of a national day care program. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, an adequate basic income. We, in this 

House and other Houses across the nation, are given to debate 

the value, the complexity, the responsiveness of providing 

income security to our people. And we do it in a myriad of 

kinds of ways right now. 

 

Many people, I think appropriately so, Mr. Speaker, are saying: 

perhaps there’s a better way. Perhaps there’s a way to provide 

an adequate basic income for citizens to provide income 

protection in ways that are less administratively complex, that 

involve less red tape, that involve putting more resources into 

the benefits for people, and less resources into the operations of 

the institutions and the bureaucracies. 

 

There are people who, I think, in our nation would be perceived 

as visionary, Mr. Speaker, who would see that there is in the 

foreseeable future an opportunity for Canadian people to realize 

some form of adequate basic income assurances. 

 

And yes, it would involve virtually, by definition, significant 

changes in our tax legislation, Mr. Speaker, and reallocation of 

funds. But clearly that it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, as I sit in 

this Assembly, concerned about Saskatchewan people, that that 

is not likely to be the kind of solution to providing income 

security for Saskatchewan people that we can do in isolation; 

that our only hopes of doing that effectively would be to join 

hands with other provinces, and with the federal government of 

Canada, and collectively, all Canadians  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2749 

 

working together, to bring a new kind of structure to provide 

basic income security for people across the nation. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, I wonder when I look at this 

particular section of the accord, whether by approving it in the 

rush to welcome Quebec as a full participant in our Canadian 

constitution, whether we might at the same time be putting up 

barriers and road-blocks to prevent us, legislators in this House 

and others across the nation and for years to come, are we 

putting up road-blocks that will prevent us from implementing 

these kinds of programs — programs sensitive to the needs of 

Canadian people? 

 

And so I raise that as a caution, Mr. Speaker, and as part of the 

explanation as to why I say that, when I stand, it is with some 

mixed emotion because I have some concerns that I don’t see 

clearly guaranteed in the accord that’s before us. 

 

And if I may move finally, Mr. Speaker, to some concerns 

about the Senate, and the amendment that I wish to propose — I 

won’t read the amendment now, I’ll read it at the end of my 

remarks, Mr. Speaker. It’s, I guess, less than clear without the 

explanation. 

 

But the intention is this, Mr. Speaker. The accord that is before 

us requires that the Senate, in order to be changed in any way, 

would have to meet with the approval of the federal government 

and all 10 province. In effect, Mr. Speaker, any one of those 11 

would have a veto in changing the Senate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there will be a variety of opinions about the 

Senate across the nation. But I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, that 

there are many who hold the opinion at all that the Senate is just 

hunky-dory the way it is. There seems to be universal opinion, 

Mr. Speaker, about the fact that the Senate is due for some kind 

of change. And there will be debate. There will be those who 

say that the Senate has to change, Mr. Speaker, has to change 

the way it operates. It has to change the way that senators are 

appointed to that House. 

 

And there will be those, Mr. Speaker, and I believe many who 

will be of the opinion that as a matter of fact, as a matter of fact 

the Senate is a needless institution in the Canadian political 

agenda. There will be those, Mr. Speaker, who will be of the 

opinion that the Senate really is nothing more than a House of 

patronage for patronage appointments, populated virtually 

entirely by Conservatives and Liberals as a place to go for a 

reward — maybe it’s a little bit of heaven on earth — a reward 

for having carried out the political deeds that met with the 

approval of the federal government of the day, Mr. Speaker. 

And there will be many Canadian people who will say that it is 

a luxury we cannot afford; it is a political institution that has no 

role in the Canadian democracy. 

 

But I know this, Mr. Speaker, that if this accord is passed in its 

present form, we are virtually, we are virtually locking in the 

continued existence of the Senate indefinitely. And not only 

that, Mr. Speaker, we are virtually locking in the continued 

existence of the Senate in its present form. 

And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that they would be few, the 

Canadians who would say that the Senate we have in its present 

form is the kind of institution that has an important role to play 

for Canadian people and should continue just the way it is. Very 

few Canadians, very few Canadians. A number of senators 

perhaps would think that it’s a good idea, but very few 

Canadians would see it in that light, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so it is for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that I wish to propose 

an amendment to the debate before this House today. And I will 

read the amendment, Mr. Speaker. It is seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. And the amendment is this, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

That section 9 of the schedule be amended: 

 

(a) by striking out paragraph 41(b) of the Act, as being 

enacted by section 9 of the schedule, and renumbering 

paragraphs 41(c) to 41(j) of the Act as paragraphs 41(b) 

to 41(i) respectively; and 

 

(b) by adding the following section after section 41; “42. 

An amendment to the constitution of Canada in relation 

to the power of the Senate and the method selecting 

senators may be made only in accordance with 

subsection 38(1).” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I move that, seconded by the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

As you can see it largely is numbers and words and sounds very 

legalistic. But the implication is this, Mr. Speaker, that it will 

allow, with this amendment, it would allow for the continuation 

of the Senate to be change — using the present formula for the 

Canadian constitution — changed with the approval of 

two-thirds of the seven provinces representing at least 50 per 

cent of the population. 

 

So two-thirds of the provinces representing 50 per cent of the 

population would be sufficient to approve changes to the 

structure, and perhaps even the existence of the Senate, as 

opposed to the proposal before us which, if adopted, means that 

the Senate could not be changed without the unanimous 

approval of all the parliaments and legislatures of this beautiful 

country of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1500) 

 

And so it’s, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that I hope you will 

understand, and that the people will understand, why I say that I 

stand in this Assembly with mixed feelings — on the one hand 

looking forward to welcoming Quebec into full participation in 

the Canadian constitution, but on the other hand with some 

concerns and reservations. And I hope that all members will 

consider endorsing the amendment to help to remedy one of 

those shortcomings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the . . . I  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2750 

 

wonder if Mr. Speaker would rule as to the eligibility of the 

seconder of this particular amendment. The hon. members has 

spoken to the main motion, and in fact at the end of his remarks 

moved what became known as the Mitchell amendment, and 

that amendment has since been voted off. And I would question 

whether or not that particular member is eligible to second this 

amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Thank you. I’ll give it my consideration for a 

few moments. 

 

The point of order raised by the Deputy Premier is a point of 

order which is well taken. Beauchesne’s . . . we’ll say 

Beauchesne’s citation 304(9) states: 

 

The mover and seconder of the amendment having spoken 

to the main question cannot speak again to it. 

 

Now the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview may, later, 

speak to the amendment. However he may not second the 

amendment. Therefore you need a new seconder. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, while you were deliberating, 

there was a mad scramble on this side of the House because 

everybody wanted to second it. But the member from Prince 

Albert won out, Mr. Speaker. And so the member from Prince 

Albert will be happy to second that amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 

assure you that I will limit my remarks to the particular 

amendment, and I certainly do o not feeling that I’m giving the 

kiss of death to it merely by supporting it. 

 

The question of the Senate is a controversial subject in our 

country. It’s been controversial in the last month at the level of 

the federal government. It has been controversial for many, 

many years. A number of questions have been asked about the 

Senate and re-asked over the years, and significant bodies of 

opinion have formed with respect to these questions. 

 

For example, there is a strong sentiment that the powers of the 

Senate ought to be changed. I cite as an example of a person 

who holds such sentiments, the Prime Minister of this country, 

who has been heard in the media in relatively recent days 

talking about the question in relation to the drug patent 

legislation. 

 

There is a strong sentiment in this country that the Senate 

should be abolished. The majority of people in my party have 

held that view for many, many years, and a significant body of 

opinion outside my party is to the same effect, that the Senate is 

anachronistic, that it does not serve any purpose in modern-day 

Canada, and that it ought to go. There is another body of 

opinion which would not go to that length, but who argue that 

the Senate should be elected rather than appointed. There is 

another body which advances a somewhat similar theory, and 

that is the Senate should be at least more representative of 

Canada than is now the case. 

As my colleague from Moose Jaw North pointed out, Mr. 

Speaker, there is not a significant body of opinion in this 

country which says that the Senate should remain exactly as it 

is. I don’t know of any large lobby group that’s pushing that 

idea. Rather, it seems to me that the people who are thinking 

about the problem of the Senate and its existence in the future, 

tend to fall into one of the camps that I’ve described earlier. 

 

And yet at this moment in our history, the schedule to the 

Meech Lake accord would put those questions into a 

strait-jacket. By strait-jacket I mean it makes it much more 

difficult to make changes to the institution of the Senate than is 

now the case. And I don’t have to elaborate on the argument 

beyond saying that obviously it’s a great deal more difficult to 

get unanimity on a question than it is to get seven of the 

provinces representing 50 per cent of the population. And I 

submit that on a question like this we ought to retain as much 

flexibility as we can, and that this is not the time to be making it 

more difficult to amend the arrangements involving the Senate. 

 

Now the Meech Lake accord speaks to three matters. It speaks 

to the powers of the Senate; it speaks to the method of electing 

senators, and those two matters are addressed in clause (b) of 

section 41; and also speaks to the number of members from 

each province that will be represented in the Senate and the 

residence qualifications of those senators. So in effect we’re 

talking about all of the important matters surrounding the 

institution of the Senate and the Meech Lake accord is 

transferring those into a category where it requires unanimity to 

make any changes. 

 

Now I must say that this is surprising. It is surprising to find 

this in the Meech Lake accord because I am not aware of who it 

is that’s pushing this idea other than perhaps the senators 

themselves. I do not see that it’s a priority of this government 

that the Senate be institutionalized in its present form. I do not 

understand it to be the policy of this government that it should 

require unanimity to change the constitutional provisions 

respecting the Senate. Now I don’t think it’s . . . neither do I 

think it’s the policy of the province of Alberta who has been 

pushing for a Triple E Senate. And a Triple E Senate, Mr. 

Speaker, would require very significant amendments to the 

constitution. 

 

Now it’s hard for me to imagine that Alberta is pushing the idea 

of unanimity with respect to the very questions that it wants to 

see amended, and where amendments would be more easily 

passed if they were agreed to by seven out of the 10 provinces 

representing 50 per cent of the population. 

 

So I want to pose a question to the government members to 

indicate to us which jurisdiction it is that is pushing this idea, 

and why is it in the Meech Lake accord, and why that part of 

the accord should be carved in stone; as I said in an earlier part 

of the debate, why this should be fiercely protected and not 

subject to amendment and not subject to a flexible approach 

which would result in it being changed? 

 

I can’t imagine that it’s the federal government pushing that 

line, having regard to what the Prime Minister’s been saying 

about that very Senate. I mean, is it seriously  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2751 

 

contended that he, of all people, would want the Senate 

institutionalized in its present form and protected by the 

requirement for unanimity? I think not. 

 

And so, if I look across the country, and not seeing any 

enthusiastic determined proponents of the idea, then I put it to 

the government today in this Assembly that this is part of the 

Meech Lake accord which probably is not something that has to 

be fought for, but which is something that could be amended 

without wrecking the consensus that was arrived at through the 

night when the accord was reached. So I would urge the 

members of the Assembly to support the amendment. 

 

Another feature of the amendment that I want to mention 

specifically is the question of how vacancies are to be filled. 

Now that is covered by a new section 25 of the Constitution Act 

and, as members will know, that requires that the names of 

persons who may be summoned to the Senate will be put up. 

The names will be put up by the provinces. 

 

Now I’m certain that that proposal enjoys the support of 

members opposite. I mean, in a government which is so 

entranced by the notion of patronage, such big practitioners of 

the idea of patronage, here’s another play-pen for them to play 

in. They actually get to name the people who will be the 

senators from the province of Saskatchewan. Now that also is 

protected by . . . That really nefarious prospect is protected by 

the unanimity requirement as well. And we in Canada will be 

saddled with that requirement as long as one single jurisdiction 

in Canada wants that to be the way things are done in this 

province. 

 

Now I think that’s shortsighted; I think it’s cynical, foolish. 

And I don’t think that in our heart of hearts we really want that 

part of the institutions of our country to work in that way. 

 

The constitution of Canada has already been difficult to amend. 

The precise amending formula was only agreed to in 1980 and 

1981. It has not had the benefit of much experience, Mr. 

Speaker. As a matter of fact, with the exception of the accord, it 

hasn’t had the benefit of any experience, but I suggest that it’s a 

sufficient safeguard for the purposes of our constitution. 

 

It is sufficient to require that any amendment be supported by 

the federal government by seven out of 10 provinces and that 

those provinces represent more than 50 per cent of the 

population. That’s a sufficient safeguard, certainly, for the 

arrangements surrounding the institution of the Senate. And it is 

a piece of nonsense to suggest that there’s something about that 

institution which requires that unanimity be present for any 

changes. 

 

(1515) 

 

And to repeat myself, I would beseech members of the 

Assembly to vote for the amendment, send a signal to their 

counterparts in Ottawa that this part of the accord should 

certainly be subject to a flexible approach and to amendment 

even at this stage. I think it clear, if members accept my 

analysis, that a change in this area would not  

result in a scuttling of the accord. 

 

I can well appreciate that there are matters in the accord which 

are essential so far as the province of Quebec is concerned, but I 

respectfully submit that the preservation of the Senate in its 

present form is not one of them. And that flexibility could be 

shown in this area. 

 

I’ll be supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1517) 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 22 

 

Blakeney Prebble 

Brockelbank Koskie 

Romanow Tchorzewski 

Thompson Rolfes 

Mitchell Simard 

Solomon Kowalsky 

Atkinson Anguish 

Goulet Hagel 

Lyons Calvert 

Trew Smart 

Van Mulligen Koenker 

 

Nays — 29 

 

Devine Muller 

Duncan McLeod 

Andrew Berntson 

Lane Taylor 

Smith Maxwell 

Schmidt Hodgins 

Gerich Hepworth 

Hardy Klein 

Meiklejohn Martin 

Toth Johnson 

McLaren Hopfner 

Swenson Martens 

Baker Gleim 

Gardner Kopelchuk 

Britton   

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 

able to participate in this debate to support the motion 

introduced by our Premier which would indicate the province of 

Saskatchewan supports changes to Canada’s constitution. 

 

Some people would suggest that any discussion of Canada’s 

constitution is boring and not very relevant. Those people are 

definitely wrong. The constitution is a very important document 

that spells out what Canada is all about. The constitution of 

Canada is a truly remarkable document that holds our country 

together. 

 

The proposed amendment to the constitution will bring the 

province of Quebec into the constitution, and at the  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2752 

 

same time, the amendment to Canada’s constitution will 

enhance the power of our provincial governments. Each 

province in Canada will receive a veto on the future 

constitutional amendments, and that will make each province an 

equal partner in the confederation. This proposed amendment to 

the constitution is constructive and worthy of the support of this 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the resolution before the legislature came 

as a result of the Meech Lake agreement. In June of this year 

the premiers of 10 provinces met with Prime Minister Mulroney 

at Meech Lake to work out an amendment to Canada’s 

constitution that would bring Quebec into that document. 

 

More important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a meeting to 

firmly united the Canadian nation. Premier Bill Vander Zalm of 

British Columbia said after the Meech Lake agreement: 

 

Today, as Canadian around this table, there are no losers. 

Instead, Canada is a winner. 

 

Premier Robert Bourassa of Quebec said: 

 

Quebec is proud today. 

 

And our Premier of Saskatchewan went on record as saying: 

 

The Meech Lake agreement is an indication of the 

maturity of our nation that our nation has attained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, all Canadians recognize the 

importance of the constitutional accord that was agreed to at 

Meech Lake. Just what was accomplished at the Meech Lake 

conference? What does this proposed amendment to the 

constitution mean for western Canada? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as one who has long advocated reform of 

Canada’s Senate, I am pleased that as a result of the Meech 

Lake meeting, the Senate reform is on the national agenda. This 

is the first time in the history of Canada that the question of 

reforming the Senate has commanded the attention of every 

government in Canada. Senate reform will become a reality in 

the not too distant future because people like Alberta’s Premier 

Don Getty and our Premier of Saskatchewan had the courage 

and the leadership to get it on the national agenda. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, equally important is the fact that for the 

first time in history every province in Canada will have a veto 

at the constitutional table. That came about because of the 

leadership and the commitment of our Premier. The Premier of 

Saskatchewan will hold a place in history, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

for the role he played in making all the provinces equal. 

 

Many people in western Canada will never forget the treatment 

they received from Pierre Trudeau. It was Trudeau who 

inflicted the national energy policy on the West. It was Pierre 

Trudeau who told western farmers to sell their own grain. It was 

Trudeau who treated the West like we were not part of Canada. 

So when Pierre Trudeau  

attacks the Meech Lake agreement which makes western 

Canada an equal part of Canada, I say, three cheers for Meech 

Lake agreement. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan and western Canada have 

become a strong and equal partners in Canada because of the 

leadership of our Premier at Meech Lake. Indeed, our Premier 

said that the West gained power as a result of signing of the 

constitutional accord. This type of positive reform will go a 

long way in making western Canadians feel more at home in 

confederation. Meech Lake was indeed a victory for western 

Canada. 

 

(1530) 

 

The constitutional accord marks a new era in the history of 

Canada. Quebec is now a willing partner in Canada. Gone are 

the days of threats of separatism. Western Canada can take its 

place in Canada as equal partners to every other part of Canada. 

 

The amendments to the constitution of Canada spells out a new 

direction for this nation. The premiers and the Prime Minister 

met continuously for almost 20 hours in a marathon meeting on 

the constitution. Six hours after that marathon meeting, the first 

ministers gathered in an open session to endorse the accord in 

front of national television. Clearly a chapter in Canadian 

history was written at the Meech Lake meeting. 

 

Today the Saskatchewan legislature is being asked to approve 

the constitutional amendment agreed to in Ottawa. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I believe this legislature should pass the resolution to 

amend the constitution of Canada. It will send a message to the 

rest of Canada that we in Saskatchewan want Quebec in 

Canada, that we want all the provinces to be equal, and that we 

want Canada to work. 

 

Our Premier of Saskatchewan played a decisive leadership role 

at the first ministers’ conference on the constitution. Allow me 

a few moments to congratulate and commend our Premier for 

his leadership in developing the new constitutional amendment, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, like all other members of this Assembly, I 

am proud of our Premier’s leadership in this important national 

decision. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you may ask, why is this amendment to 

the constitution good for Saskatchewan? Allow me to state a 

few of the good reasons why the amendment is good for our 

province. 

 

For the first time in Saskatchewan we’ll have a say in naming 

senators to represent this province in the Senate of Canada. As 

well, we will have a say in the appointment of Supreme Court 

justices from this province. Saskatchewan, like all other 

provinces, will have a veto over amendments to the Canadian 

constitution. These gains are significant for our province. 

 

I do not profess to be a constitution expert, but I do recognize 

the value and significance of the Meech Lake amendment to 

Canada’s constitution. The people of Saskatchewan can now 

consider themselves as full and equal partners in confederation. 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2753 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are about to become the second 

province in all of Canada to accept and endorse the agreement 

to amend the constitution of Canada. This is an important day 

for Saskatchewan, and indeed for our role in Canada. We must 

show our good faith in this country by passing the motion 

introduced in the legislature by our Premier. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Premier gave his word at the Meech 

Lake that Saskatchewan believes in making Canada work. 

Today we must honour Saskatchewan’s commitment by passing 

the motion before the legislature. The Premier has said that this 

amendment to the constitution renews people’s confidence in 

Canada. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I agree with the Premier. 

 

The effect of this amendment to the constitution of Canada is to 

move us forward as one nation united. This amendment is good 

for Canada and good for the West. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we can be 

proud of this nation building amendments to the constitution. 

We are fortunate to live in a country that is so deeply 

committed to the principles of democracy as is proven by our 

constitution. 

 

Canada is a better nation because of the Meech Lake agreement, 

and I ask all members of this legislature to support the 

Premier’s motion. I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I rise to 

participate in this debate I would tell you that, like others in this 

House, I have mixed feelings about the motion before us. It 

represents on the one hand a desirable goal for Canadians in so 

far as it will ensure that the people of Quebec will be full 

partners in our confederation in the context of our constitution. I 

believe this represents a great step forward for Canada. 

 

Having said that it must be recognized that the means to achieve 

this substantial progress is in some ways questionable. The 

means I refer to of course is the motion before us, or the Meech 

Lake accord. Some of my colleagues have spoken and others 

will speak on the questions that the accord raises. I do not 

propose to deal today with all of these questions but wish to 

speak more particularly to one aspect of the accord, specifically 

the question of the establishment of new provinces. I would 

advise you, Mr. Speaker, that at the conclusion of my remarks 

that I will be moving an amendment in this respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the current amending formula only four 

subject matters require unanimous provincial consent. They are, 

one, the office of the Queen, the Governor General, and the 

Lieutenant Governor; secondly, provincial representation in the 

House of Commons, not less than senatorial entitlement; three, 

subject to section 43, the use of French and English; and four, 

the composition of the Supreme Court. 

 

Six other matters are delineated as requiring the consent of 

two-thirds of the provinces with 50 per cent of the population. 

These are, one, proportionate provincial  

representation in the House of Commons; secondly, the powers 

of the Senate and the method of selecting senators; three, the 

number of senators per province; four, the Supreme Court; five, 

the extension of existing provinces into territories; and six, the 

establishment of new provinces. Under the Meech Lake accord 

all of these matters will in the future require unanimous 

provincial consent. 

 

Unanimous provincial consent, Mr. Speaker, is based on the 

compact theory of confederation. This theory holds that 

inasmuch as the original provinces entered into a compact, or 

treaty to create Canada in 1867, it follows that any and all 

changes to confederation must require consultation with and 

support of all of the provinces. According to R. MacGregor 

Dawson, a political scientist and author of a standard reference 

text for political science, author of The Government of Canada, 

this theory is constructed on sheer invention with neither legal 

nor historical foundations, and with few precedents to support 

it. 

 

Prior to 1907 there is no instance of the provinces even being 

consulted about constitutional amendments, even though two of 

the amendments affected provincial rights of representation. 

 

Since the Statute of Westminster passed in 1931, constitutional 

convention has required provincial consent to amendments 

affecting provincial powers. In 1981 the Supreme Court upheld 

this convention with the qualification that this convention did 

not extend to unanimous provincial approval. This conclusion 

on convention was in agreement with submissions of the 

Government of Saskatchewan at the time. 

 

The establishment of such an inflexible, and in practical terms, 

unworkable procedure for amending these matters, does no 

service to the Canadian nation; rather, it establishes unfair, 

inequitable, and unnecessary barriers to future constitutional 

changes. This is particularly evident with reference to the 

creation of new provinces. On this point in particular, history is 

clear. The creation of new provinces has never required 

unanimous provincial consent. 

 

As in the rest of the Commonwealth, the standard in Canada has 

been for aspiring provinces to negotiate its entry into the nation 

directly with the federal government. This was in fact the case 

with all but the original four provinces. 

 

After Manitoba was established in 1870, doubts had arisen 

concerning the power of parliament to create a new province. 

As a result, imperial legislation was passed the following year 

ensuring that right. 

 

It was this legislation of 1871 which provided the parliamentary 

authority for the autonomy bills of 1905 creating the provinces 

of Alberta and Saskatchewan. This legislation, a statute of the 

Canadian parliament, was arranged entirely by federal and 

territorial delegations. Similarly, in the case of Newfoundland’s 

entry into the nation, the necessary provisions were effected by 

unilateral procedure without any form of consultation with the 

provinces. 

 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2754 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the body and soul of the Canadian nation 

would be altered substantially had previous constitutional 

development been dictated by the inflexible amending 

provisions of the Meech Lake accord. 

 

More often than not, the creation of new provinces has met with 

considerable opposition, an opposition ordinarily focused on 

regional interests, articulated at the provincial level. It is 

reasonable to suggest, therefore, that had unanimous provincial 

consent been the order of the day, Canada would look 

substantially different today — likely with four provinces 

surrounded by massive territories and a British colony or two. 

 

It is highly unlikely, Mr. Speaker, as an example, that 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Newfoundland would have been 

admitted into the dominion had the Meech Lake provisions 

been in place. And I say this because for at least a decade prior 

to the autonomy bills, Manitoba had been persistent in its desire 

for an extension of its western boundaries, attempting numerous 

times to influence the course of events in this direction. In 1901, 

Indian Head was the site of a relatively massive public meeting 

which was convened to assess the costs and benefits of 

Manitoba’s annexations . . . annexation proposals. 

 

I have with me, Mr. Speaker, a copy of the Regina Leader, 

dated December 26, 1901, and the headline reads: 

 

Haultain and Roblin 

 

All Night Debate at Indian Head on Annexation to 

Manitoba 

 

Large and Important Meeting 

 

A Vehement Wooer and Determined Resistance — A 

Tempting Offer Boldly Repulsed — Haultain’s Masterly 

Reply and Roblin’s Bad Break — Presentation of the 

North-West Policy — Railways, Taxation, Land and Other 

Questions Thoroughly Discussed. 

 

This was a major meeting, Mr. Speaker, for the people of the 

territory which would soon become the province of 

Saskatchewan. In 1905, Manitoba, continuing its efforts, sent 

several cabinet ministers to Ottawa while autonomy 

negotiations were under way. But the national political will was 

determined, and according to the political scientists, Evelyn 

Eager, Manitoba could not overcome the political handicap of 

being a provincial Conservative government seeking an 

extension of its boundaries from a federal Liberal 

administration. 

 

At the same time, the terms of Saskatchewan admission into 

federation occasioned weeks of opposition and protest in both 

Ontario and Quebec, on the very deep-rooted, sensitive issue of 

separate education and provincial rights. While other issues 

were also involved, the next several years saw a growing 

disenchantment with Laurier and the Liberals. In 1905, the 

Liberal government of George Ross in Ontario was turfed out 

by James Whitney and the Tories. In Quebec, as well, 

opposition to the eventual amendment restricting religious 

guarantees certainly contributed to the  

withdrawal of support for the provincial and federal Liberal 

Party. 

 

Under these circumstances, Mr. Speaker, it is not unreasonable 

to suggest that at least one province would have used the power 

of veto to stop the proceedings had such a powerful tool been 

available. And we must ask ourselves, would Saskatchewan 

have become a province in 1905 if all of the other provinces at 

that time would have had the right to veto such a step? Would 

the terms of entry have been changed? Would we have the 

boundaries we have now? Would we have provisions, as an 

example, for the funding of separate schools, as we have now? 

 

In the case of Newfoundland, it is clear that had Quebec 

enjoyed the veto power now proposed, both the timing and 

terms of entry would have been substantially different. Given 

Quebec’s position on the ownership of Labrador it is not only 

reasonable, but very likely that the settlement negotiated by the 

delegates from the governments of Newfoundland and Canada, 

would have been opposed by the province of Quebec. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Frederick Dorion who was member of parliament from 

Charlebois-Saguinay, spoke directly to this subject when he 

stated in the House of Commons, and I refer to the House of 

Commons debates of February 6, 1948, unequivocally, that 

Quebec could never accept the terms of entry predicated on 

Newfoundland’s ownership of the vast resource-rich territory of 

Labrador. 

 

And I would just quote here, Mr. Speaker, from Mr. Dorion’s 

remarks, and he says: 

 

I contend that this offer by the Canadian government to 

the Government of Newfoundland is not worth the paper 

on which it is written, and I am sure that the province of 

Quebec will never assent to such an agreement. 

 

More recently, the Canada Act made provisions for territorial 

consultation and discussion concerning aboriginal issues and 

constitutional adjustment. In contrast with Mr. Mulroney’s 

determination to involve Quebec in the constitutional 

mainstream of the nation, he has refused Northerners even a 

voice in the process, which will clearly have a long-term direct 

impact on their lives. 

 

The representatives of the territorial government were not 

invited to the meeting at Meech Lake, nor were they permitted 

to attend the all-night session which provided for ratification of 

the accord. 

 

The Prime Minister did not ignore Northerners entirely, 

however, as Mr. Tony Penikett, the government leader of the 

Yukon territories, has indicated in a letter sent to every MLA in 

Canada. On the evening before the ratification meeting, he 

received a short letter from Mr. Mulroney promising that he 

would represent the interests of the North. But clearly Mr. 

Mulroney’s perception of northern interests differed 

dramatically from that of territorial residents. 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2755 

 

A further affront to the democratic tradition is the parliamentary 

decision not to hold constitutional hearings in the North. The 

establishment by this accord of such an inflexible legal 

construct must be viewed as an unnecessary violation of 

historical precedent and democratic traditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, provincial status has been matter of necessity for 

planning by territorial administrations. With the growth of 

population, demands for local control over certain facets of life 

have generally increased in both intensity and frequency. 

Representative governments, without a responsible executive 

council, have not satisfied regional interests in this nation. 

Without constitutional responsibilities and an independent 

source of financing, territorial administrations will remain as 

the last vestige of a colonial mentality. 

 

The problems faced by northern people will not be resolved by 

the dictates of Ottawa. And I say this, Mr. Speaker, not only in 

an academic sense, but as one who has lived in northern Canada 

for a number of years. Solutions must be found in the region by 

the people involved. Provincial status may in future contribute 

to the problem solving by providing instruments for local 

control and self-sustaining economic development. That is not 

to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people and the government of the 

Yukon are, to use Mr. Penikett’s own words, in a mad rush for 

the Yukon to become a province. 

 

And I would quote Mr. Penikett further when he says: 

 

We recognize our limited resources and, at this stage of 

our history, our dependence on the federal government. 

 

Now he, Mr. Penikett, feels a strong obligation to ensure that 

provincehood remains a viable option for future Yukoners, and 

I’d like to take a look at that future. Suppose, for example, that 

the Yukon at some future time were to benefit from a major 

resource boom and an increase in population. The question I 

have, and others may have, and certainly those in the Yukon 

would have, is: would the Government of British Columbia 

move to prevent provincial status for the Yukon and propose 

annexation if it perceived this to benefit the province of British 

Columbia? Should we deny the people of the Yukon and 

Northwest Territories the opportunity to achieve provincial 

status? Should we deny them the opportunities that present-day 

provinces benefited from? 

 

These opportunities, Mr. Speaker, that were made available to 

present-day provinces should not be blocked by this regressive, 

archaic requirement. This is fundamentally unfair. If we accept 

this amendment as proposed by the accord, we are erecting, I 

would submit, formidable barriers to constitutional adaptation 

for generations to come. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by my 

colleague from Regina North: 

 

That section 9 of the schedule be amended: 

 

(a) by striking out paragraph 41(i) of the Act as  

being enacted by section 9 of the schedule and 

renumbering paragraph 41(j) as paragraph 41(I); and 

 

(b) by adding the following section after section 41: 

 

42. An amendment of the constitution of Canada in 

relation to the establishment of new provinces may be 

made only in accordance with subsection 38(1). 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am indeed 

happy to second the amendment from the member from Regina 

Victoria, my colleague. This amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is one that will strengthen the Meech Lake accord by ensuring 

future provincehood in the foreseeable future of the Yukon, and 

ultimately for the Northwest Territories. 

 

Mr. Tony Penikett, the president of the Executive Council and 

government leader in the Yukon, has written to all MLAs in 

Canada about this very issue. And I responded to his letter, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in part, as follows: 

 

There are a number of concerns I have with the Meech 

Lake accord: your major concern; lack of aboriginal 

rights; uncertainty about provincial opting out of future 

national programs such as the national day care program; 

and other concerns. 

 

We are dealing with the Meech Lake accord in our 

legislature and are pushing for amendments addressing our 

mutual concerns. 

 

I wish you the very best in your fight. Again, thank you 

for your July letter. 

 

And that was written in August to Mr. Penikett. 

 

Now following up on some of those mutual concerns that Mr. 

Penikett and I share, and indeed we all should as responsible 

legislators in Canada, Mr. Penikett wrote — and I’m only going 

to quote three paragraphs from his letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but they are important. And he writes: 

 

The proposed package of amendments also contains a new 

formula requiring unanimous approvals of all the 

provinces for the admission of new provinces. To 

Yukoners, your fellow Canadians, this is unfair and 

inequitable. 

 

I am writing you today to ask for your support in retaining 

the current constitutional requirement for the admission of 

new provinces, approval of the federal government, and at 

least two-thirds of the existing provinces, with at least 50 

per cent of the population of Canada. 

 

Even this is a much more difficult standard to meet than 

when Saskatchewan joined Canada. It is more difficult 

than is used elsewhere in the Commonwealth. The 

standard in Canada and the  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2756 

 

Commonwealth has been for a new province to negotiate 

its entry into the nation directly with the federal 

government. 

 

And I end my quote from Mr. Penikett’s letter there. 

 

Historically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the original Canada had only 

four provinces, as you no doubt know — Nova Scotia, New 

Brunswick, Quebec, and Ontario were those four. Prior to 

confederation the London Resolutions of 1866 required that in 

the future Prince Edward Island, British Columbia, and any 

provinces created from the Northwest Territories be admitted to 

Canada on equitable terms. When Manitoba was created out of 

the Territories, the constitutional Act of 1871 clearly stated 

parliament’s authority to admit new provinces. 

 

The federal government negotiated the terms of entry to 

confederation for six provinces — Manitoba and British 

Columbia in 1871, Prince Edward Island in 1873, Albert and 

Saskatchewan in 1905, and Newfoundland in 1949. 

 

The Constitution Act of 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, changed the 

admission formula to require the approval not only of the 

federal government but also of two-thirds of the provinces 

having at least 50 per cent of the population of Canada. 

 

I reviewed that little bit of history, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because it seems to me that the majority of Canadian provinces, 

simply put, would not have been part of confederation had the 

new rules that are now being proposed gone into effect. 

 

Imagine a map of Canada with only four original provinces 

surrounded by some pretty huge territories and perhaps a British 

colony or two. It would have been a very much different nation 

than what we have today. It would not be the Canada that I am 

proud to be a part of; indeed Saskatchewan may not have 

become Saskatchewan anywhere’s nearly as the province that 

we know it today. That would have been sad. 

 

The Yukon government is not in a hurry. They’re not chomping 

at the bit to become a province. Yukon has recognized their 

limited resources, and they also recognize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that in this stage of their history they are very dependent on the 

federal government for support. 

 

But preserving the option for future Yukoners and Northwest 

Territories people when they are ready to join confederation is 

what this amendment is all about, this amendment proposed by 

the member for Regina Victoria, and the one that I am very 

proud to have seconded here today. 

 

The leaders of the elected governments of the Yukon and the 

Northwest Territories, as was pointed out, were not invited to 

the original Meech Lake meeting, even though, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, their fates were very much at stake, arguably as much 

or more than Quebec’s or any other province’s. 

 

And their concerns were explained to the Prime Minister’s 

office and later, a short time later, to the  

Premier’s. And although some of the premiers were 

sympathetic, it became apparent that the first ministers could 

not be counted on to defend northern interests. 

 

(1600) 

 

Yukoners then went to the courts for a declaration, not an 

injunction, to protect their rights. You’ll recall that that is 

exactly what eight of the provinces did in 1981 when the federal 

government attempted to repatriate the constitution unilaterally 

— in other words, without agreement. The Supreme Court of 

Canada in that case acknowledged the legal power of the federal 

government to act, but noted — and this is important — they 

noted that there was a constitutional convention against doing 

so without substantive provincial agreement. 

 

Similarly the Yukon, and in a separate case the Northwest 

Territories, is seeking a court injunction to be treated according 

to historic convention regarding the constitution. Further, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, even though Mr. Sibbeston and Mr. Penikett 

went to Ottawa on June 1, they were not invited to the first 

ministers’ meeting — that famous or infamous meeting that 

lasted all night — the meeting where the Meech Lake accord 

was ratified by the Prime Minister and the first ministers. 

 

On the evening before the meeting, they did finally receive their 

first acknowledgment from the Prime Minister. It was a short 

letter and it said, don’t worry, I’ll defend you; don’t worry 

about it, I’ll look after you. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Trust me. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Trust me, he said to the northern representatives, 

the duly elected northern representatives. Trust me, he said. 

And what have they gotten ever since? The cold shoulder and 

no ear, and certainly no representation from a Prime Minister 

that is up to his eyeballs in problems, and simply doesn’t know 

which way to turn, how to get out from the political fiasco that 

he has created and, indeed, that he has done. 

 

The Prime Minister’s failure to stand up and represent northern 

Saskatchewan is what prompts me today to speak out on behalf 

of the people of the Yukon because it’s fundamentally unfair 

that their fate should be decided by others — first of all, at 

ministerial meetings at which the Yukon and the Northwest 

Territories are not represented; and secondly, by awarding votes 

on future provincehood to Canadians, all Canadians, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, except the very Canadians that this 

amendment will protect, and I’m of course speaking of 

northerners; Yukoners and residents of the Northwest 

Territories. It’s just not acceptable. Parliament — to add insult 

to injury, the Prime Minister in his lack of wisdom has decided 

not to hold constitutional hearings in the North. 

 

Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me say that I am just as 

pleased as every other Canadian to see that national unity is 

promoted through the signing of the constitution by Quebec, 

and we welcome Quebec formally into the constitutional 

arrangement, the make-up of what we call Canada. And as I 

have said, I am very proud to be a Canadian, and I’m very 

proud that Quebecers now feel, or should feel, closer to being 

Canadian, as I am, and as  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2757 

 

you are, and as everyone else in Canada is. 

 

But despite this significant step, it is not necessary to sacrifice 

the North in order to save Quebec. The two issues are simply 

not related, not in the least. Amending the constitution and 

creating new provinces are simply not the same thing. They 

never have been, and they don’t need to be now, and nor should 

they be. And it should not be done in the same process. Keeping 

the door to confederation open for the North in the future in no 

way threatens Quebec today or in the future. 

 

The North’s dilemma is our dilemma, both in practice and in 

principle. You see, in practice, either us as legislators in 

Saskatchewan, or our successors, will face yet another 

unnecessary constitutional crisis. And that will happen, of 

course, when Northerners apply for provincehood, as they 

ultimately will. It’s just a question of whether we’re talking two 

years, five years, 10 years, or some other period of time, but 

surely they will be applying for provincehood. 

 

The current formula or unanimity will, indeed, prove 

unworkable, and a new method will, at that time, have to be 

found. Why should we put future Canadians, future legislators, 

in that terrible position of having to try and work out a 

compromise when it is so simple to do it right here, right now, 

and right today? 

 

We’re not saying: bring in the Yukon or bring in the Northwest 

Territories as a province. That’s not what we’re saying. We’re 

saying: give them, let’s preserve for them, the same right to 

become a province as we had, as we enjoyed in Saskatchewan 

and in Alberta in 1905, and as some other provinces enjoyed 

after that. 

 

Why would we allow it to be imposed on others, on our fellow 

Canadians, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s simply not acceptable for 

us to be that careless, that callous, that nonchalant with 

Northerners and the feelings that they have about Canada and 

their rights. They’re looking for, simply, similar guarantees to 

what other Canadians have. 

 

The very same arguments, only on a different topic, could be 

used for Northerners as is used for Quebec. We’re just 

transplanting a problem from Quebec to Northerners, and 

there’s no reason for it because the two are not connected at all. 

The only connection is they both are tied into the constitutional 

agreement, and we have a golden opportunity today to do 

something about it, to help the Yukoners and the Northwest 

Territories. 

 

So I urge you to accept this amendment of the proposed 

constitutional amendment on the admission of future provinces. 

The amendment of the member for Regina Victoria strengthens 

the constitutional agreement that was started at Meech Lake. I 

urge all members of this Assembly to support this important 

amendment strengthening the Meech Lake accord and 

guaranteeing the potential for future provincehood of northern 

Canadians. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. 

 

Amendment negatived by the following recorded division. 

Yeas — 20 

 

Blakeney Prebble 

Brockelbank Koskie 

Tchorzewski Thompson 

Rolfes Mitchell 

Simard Solomon 

Kowalsky Anguish 

Goulet Hagel 

Lyons Calvert 

Trew Smart 

Van Mulligen Koenker 

 

Nays — 28 

 

Muller Duncan 

McLeod Andrew 

Berntson Lane 

Taylor Smith 

Maxwell Schmidt 

Hodgins Gerich 

Hepworth Hardy 

Klein Meiklejohn 

Martin Toth 

Johnson McLaren 

Hopfner Swenson 

Martens Baker 

Gleim Gardner 

Kopelchuk Britton 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I will be moving my amendment 

. . . (inaudible interjections) . . . after I make some statements 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. If the member had 

spoken to the motion, then he couldn’t move an amendment, 

but apparently he hasn’t spoken to the motion yet, so the 

member from Cumberland is in order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I will be moving my amendment, 

then, after I finished my presentation, which will be done both 

in Cree and English. 

 

I will say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that, on a personal level, 

the debate on the Meech Lake accord is extremely important. 

 

As Métis person, there is section 16 which refers to aboriginal 

people, and of course that pertains to my background as a Cree 

in Saskatchewan, and also, Mr. Speaker, my grandparents were 

also of the French cultural heritage. So as I speak about Meech 

Lake-Langevin accord, I do it not only as a member of the 

opposition but also as a Metis person born of the two cultural 

heritages that are mentioned within this accord. 

 

So I’ll begin by presenting my own knowledge and  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

2758 

 

argumentation in favour of the amendment I will be moving at 

the end. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll refer then and go back to 

my own language. 

 

(The hon. members spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

(1630) 

 

I guess in relation to the Meech Lake-Langevin accord, I will be 

presenting my argumentation in regards to the historical 

background to the issue. And then I will deal with specific 

sections, especially as related to the amendment I will be 

bringing forth at the end. 

 

And I will then make some . . . you know, before I make the 

amendment, I’ll make some concluding remarks. 

 

I guess when you look at the Meech Lake-Langevin accord, one 

has to look at in conjunction with the total constitutional 

process of 1982 to ’87. That in fact the consideration of 

bringing home our constitution, which is the supreme law of our 

land, is an extremely important and significant process for all of 

us Canadians. 

 

I guess it is extremely significant for us in a sense that two 

important outstanding issues amongst others had not been fully 

addressed during the five-year process, which was only one 

month apart from the other. The conclusion of the aboriginal 

rights accord and the start of the Meech Lake accord were only 

one month apart. 

 

It is important because it was recognized this year that the 

constitutional process had not been finished. I think that’s the 

main point — it was unfinished business, especially as it related 

to aboriginal people. And as I look over all to the Meech 

Lake-Langevin agreement, I must state all . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. It being 5 o’clock this House will now 

stand recessed until 7 o’clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


