













































August 24, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 24, 1987 

 

 

1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

National Railway Dispute 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 

Premier and, in his absence, for the Acting Premier, the Deputy 

Premier, and it deals with the industrial dispute at Canada's 

railways which have closed down our railway system and, if 

prolonged to any degree, would pose a clear threat to the economy 

of western Canada. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier is this: what contact have you, 

sir, or the Premier, had with the Prime Minister regarding this 

situation, and have you urged the Prime Minister, in the strongest 

possible terms, to use his good offices to get the parties back to the 

table so that the railways may be operating again? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it's in everyone's 

interests to do just that, to get the railroads operating again. And, 

Mr. Speaker, since I . . . the Premier, of course, is out of the 

province, and since I have been out of the province until 15 

minutes ago, I will turn the question over to the Minister of 

Transport who has been dealing with this matter in my absence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, we on the government side 

of the House are extremely concerned by the developments in the 

labour dispute between the railways and the unions. 

 

And just to give you a little bit of history about what this 

government, what our Premier, and what a few of our members 

have done with respect to this, we have not waited till the last 

moment to bring the item up at all. A few weeks ago our Premier 

met with the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Mazankowski, as well as 

with Mr. McKnight. Further to that, our Premier has written a 

letter to the Hon. Pierre Cadieux a week ago or so. As late as this 

morning I sent a telex to the Hon. John Crosbie, urging Mr. 

Crosbie, the federal government, and the Minister of Labour to 

take whatever action is necessary to protect the interests of our 

citizens here in this province of Saskatchewan. This is greatly 

distressing to our economy, and we have urged with all the 

strength and power that we can, we have urged the federal 

government to take whatever action is necessary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister will be aware that the dispute appears to surround major 

lay-offs and firings of railway employees and, at the bargaining 

table, the issue takes the form of job security. 

 

Mr. Minister, in the fact of what are certainly rising profits by CN 

Rail and CP Rail, do you feel that your government can support a 

policy of massive lay-offs without proper protection for 

employees, or do you feel that your  

representations . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about the farmer, Al; what about the 

farmer? Are you worried about him? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The Leader of the 

Opposition is asking a question, and I don't think we should 

interrupt him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

this: in the face of the rising profits, Mr. Minister, do you feel that 

your government can support a position by the railway companies 

which involves continued massive lay-offs without any sufficient 

measure of job protection; or do you feel that your representations, 

which you tell me you're making to Mr. Crosbie and Mr. Cadieux, 

would involve a compassionate approach to massive lay-offs so 

that there would be a measure of protection for employees while 

pursuing an efficient railway system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would firstly say that the 

policy that our government will support and will always support 

will be, first and foremost, the benefits overall to the citizens of 

this province. And I think we have to understand that this latest 

development can be absolutely disastrous for our farmers who are 

already pressed with very, very low prices. 

 

We already have a disastrous situation in potash. This latest 

escapade is going to further erode our competitive nature, our 

competitive position in the market-place. When it comes to, you 

speak of massive lay-offs, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to find a 

reasonable balance. And certainly I don't think there's any 

reasonable, sound-thinking person that can say we can absolutely 

give job security to every single worker, and I don't think that any 

reasonable person in the province believes that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to find a balance whereby our rail and 

transportation systems can be competitive, and yet we can keep a 

good number of people employed. So again, Mr. Speaker, our 

number one position is to protect the interests of all citizens in the 

province of Saskatchewan, keeping in mind that we have to 

certainly protect workers to a certain degree. But we will not, Mr. 

Speaker, take the position that we can absolutely guarantee jobs 

for everyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are in a competitive market-place, an 

international competitive market-place, and that is the position of 

our government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I think no 

one is suggesting an absolute guarantee of jobs. 

 

Are you aware of the fact, Mr. Minister, that taking one class of 

railway employees, the car men, their number of people working 

in that category in railways has decreased from 14,000 to 7,000 

during the last 15 years without any work stoppage? Now, Mr. 

Minister, will you  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

1994 

 

not admit that this does not represent an absolute guarantee of job 

security? And will you not admit that when a union asks that these 

lay-offs be staged in a manner so that there may be some measure 

of protection for their families, that's not an unreasonable position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is absolutely crystal 

clear the position that the NDP have now put forward on this 

issue. The NDP is saying to this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and 

saying to the people of Saskatchewan, that no matter what the 

costs, no matter what the costs there is going to be job security for 

people; no matter what the cost to the hard-pressed farmers of this 

province; no matter what the costs are to our economy with 

respect to potash, coal, uranium, or whatever else — with no 

respect to that, they say, we are taking sides with the union bosses, 

we are going to provide job security for everyone. And the 

ex-Leader of the Opposition has failed to mention the word 

farmer, has failed to mention the word potash, or coal, or uranium, 

or any of the key exports that we put out in this country. The 

member opposite, in the absence of the labour lawyer from 

Saskatoon, who is probably out right now . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

Order, please. For the sake of good conduct of the House, I would 

like before the next questions starts to just draw the attention of all 

members to keep your questions in a reasonable length of time, 

and let's keep our answers the same way so we can have a good 

question period. 

 

Order, please. Just allow the member for Regina Centre to proceed 

with his question. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 

public of Saskatchewan are a good deal more interested in what 

you have said, and haven't said, and what the federal government 

hasn't said, than they are about what the labour bosses may have 

said. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you'll give us your position rather than 

the position of the labour bosses for whom you pretend to speak 

apparently today. 

 

Mr. Minister, some 30 per cent of Saskatchewan's freight traffic 

moves by rail, and virtually all of the grain, potash, mining, 

forestry. I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you're satisfied with 

the "hands-off" approach that the Government of Canada has 

taken to this issue, and if you're not satisfied with that, will you 

urge the Government of Canada to take strong action to get the 

rails back? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, at the urging of our 

government, the federal government, through various ministers 

has taken very, very recent action. You may be very interested to 

note that just a short while ago the Hon. Pierre Cadieux ordered 

that both the bargainers — the bargainers for both sides, for both 

the railways and the unions — he ordered that those two sides 

come to Ottawa. 

 

A negotiator and a mediator have been appointed, Mr. Mac 

Carson, and associate deputy minister, Bill Kelly will be working 

at negotiating a settlement. I think the federal government has 

taken action. I think a good reason, and good reason why the 

federal government has taken this action, has been at the insistence 

and at the encouragement of our Premier, who, as I have stated 

earlier, has met with the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. 

Mazankowski; has sent letters; I have sent a telex as early as this 

morning. Our government has taken a very, very strong and 

proactive position on this, and I find it very, very strange that the 

members on the opposite . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned something the 

Government of Canada has done today. The Government of 

Canada, in fact, before today, I think, has done nothing but allow 

the railways to precipitate a strike with completely unreasonable 

demands with respect to the jobs of the workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you will not 

contact the federal government and urge the federal government to 

communicate to the railways the public displeasure with their 

unreasonableness, and the public demands that they adopt a more 

reasonable stance and get the railways back working again? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is asking if 

our government will contact the federal government. I think I have 

made it abundantly clear and stressed to you the chronology of 

events that have taken place over the past weeks. Our government 

has done everything possible. We have contacted the federal 

government on many, many occasions. We have been in almost 

constant communication with the federal government. 

 

I find it very, very strange that the members of the opposition have 

to wait till the last dying moment and all of a sudden stand up and 

pretend to be the protectors of . . . probably, the union bosses is the 

only people that you are interested in protecting. 

 

This government has taken a strong position. We do have 

confidence in the federal government that they will deal with this 

issue as they have this morning and appointed a mediator. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Minister of Transport. The minister has referred us to a telex 

referring to the appointment of the mediator and the associate 

deputy minister, Mr. Kelly. He didn't quote another part of that 

same telex which I will quote: 

 

Transport Minister, John Crosbie, says it's up to the railways 

to manage their business the best way they can. (Adding that 

he's) not going to get involved. 

 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

1995 

 

Now this is the federal Minister of Transport announcing that he's 

not going to get involved in a railway strike. I ask you, Mr. 

Minister, is that conduct satisfactory to the Saskatchewan 

government, or are you going to get in touch with your counterpart 

in Ottawa, Mr. Crosbie, and ask him to get involved in this strike 

which is very much at the root of many problems facing 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Here again, Mr. Speaker, the ex-Leader of 

the Opposition has chosen to take certain lines and twist them a 

little bit. Let us be very, very clear that the responsibility, the 

direct responsibility for employment and labour is Mr. Hon. Pierre 

Cadieux. Pierre Cadieux this morning has ordered that both sides 

come to Ottawa. He has said we will appoint a mediator — a 

bargainer. We'll get both sides to the table and we will hammer 

this thing out. So I believe that the federal government, through 

the direct responsibility of the Hon. Pierre Cadieux, has taken a 

responsible approach, and we have every confidence that the 

federal government will take whatever action is necessary to put 

an end to the strike. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. I ask the 

minister: are you aware that Mr. Crosbie is the responsible 

minister for CN? And do you think it's acceptable that the Minister 

of Transport would not be interested himself in a railway strike? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely ridiculous 

— absolutely ridiculous. The Minister of Transport — the federal 

Minister of Transport — has said no, he's not getting involved at 

this time; that the responsibility directly lies with the minister of 

labour and employment, the Hon. Pierre Cadieux, and that 

minister has gotten involved. And once again, Mr. Speaker, we do 

have every confidence that this thing will be hammered out. 

 

And I think once again, Mr. Speaker, the most important point, the 

most important point is that the members of the opposition have 

chosen to wait till the last moment, and all of a sudden they get 

terribly interested. But where have the members of the opposition 

been when it comes to debating agriculture in this House over the 

last 30 or 40 days? Where have they been when there's a 

disastrous situation with respect to potash? The members of the 

opposition have not brought it up once. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does 

the Minister of Transportation concede that Mr. Crosbie has said 

he's not going to get involved and that Mr. Crosbie is the minister 

responsible for CN? Do you concede both of those points? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I will not concede a thing, 

but I will once again state, I will once again state that at the 

encouragement and the insistence of our  

government, through various ministers including our Premier, the 

federal government has taken responsible action, and we do have 

every faith that, once again at our encouragement, the federal 

government will take whatever action is necessary to put the 

railway workers back to work. And that may well be in opposition 

to what the members of the NDP party want. 

 

Duties Imposed on Saskatchewan Potash Industry 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 

to the acting Premier. 

 

Mr. Minister, the United States commerce department decision to 

impose preliminary dumping duties of 9 to 82 per cent on 

Saskatchewan potash shipped out of Saskatchewan by potash 

producers here is a severe blow, I'm sure all will agree, to the 

industry in Saskatchewan. We have here a situation where a dying 

industry in the state of New Mexico is using its political influence 

to prevent Saskatchewan producers from selling more products to 

the American farmers. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, what specific action has your government 

taken since last Friday to protect Saskatchewan jobs and to get this 

political decision overturned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 

member's question, since last Friday . . . The decision to be 

overturned, of course, would have to be overturned at subsequent 

hearings by either the Department of Commerce or the ITC 

(International Trade Commission) which comes forward in 

November, then later on in December. 

 

Of course, as you will appreciate in an anti-dumping action, the 

action is: (a) commenced by producers; and (b) against producers 

or defended by producers. And as a result, following the 

preliminary determination, now the various players or various 

companies will appear before the Department of Commerce and 

advance their arguments as to why they should not do that. So that 

will in fact be done. 

 

As to what will the government and what options or proposals are 

the government taking, I can advise the hon. member and I can 

advise this House that we are looking at several steps, dramatic in 

many situations, that we can take. Those decisions have not been 

taken by the government yet, by either the cabinet or the caucus. I 

would anticipate those being dealt with this week or early next 

week, at which time the government would state as to the direction 

that we would be taking pursuant to the particular decision by the 

U.S. Department of Commerce. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, to put it mildly, I think I and 

others in Saskatchewan are more than surprised that the minister 

who just responded has no specific announcements or actions that 

we can talk about here today. 

 

It is unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, that last Friday's announcement 

and ruling by the commerce department caught this government 

off guard. They knew since last  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

1996 

 

February, seven months ago, that this was being considered and 

what the result might be. I ask the minister: where has the 

government been all that time, and what has this government been 

doing since the application was made to protect 3,500 jobs in 

Saskatchewan's potash industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 

member's questions, this government, both in the Department of 

Economic Development and Trade and Department of Energy and 

Mines, the Premier, have for some time been involved with and 

dealing with this particular question. The hon. member from 

Regina North East says he finds it unbelievable that we were 

caught off guard — nobody was caught off guard — someone was 

somewhat concerned as to the level of the rule. And now we 

intend to respond, but before responding we must consult with (a) 

lawyers, both within Canada and outside of Canada; consult with 

some of the people in the industry, and consult with some of the 

people in the federal government before we respond in the way or 

the various options that we have. 

 

If anything would be incredible it would be the fact that the hon. 

member, for the first time in this House, and this House is now 

sitting its 60th day — this issue didn't start on Friday; this issue 

started some time ago. This is the very first time that the members 

opposite have raised the question of potash; the very first time they 

have raised, in concern, about the potash question, something that 

they used to believe was their flagship. But now, after we see what 

is unfolding, is their billion dollar boondoggle, as we've seen from 

the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. It is clear 

that the government seated opposite has been the author of much 

of this problem that we face today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, and 

the Premier, helped induce this decision by the United States 

Commerce Department by their claims and announcements that 

they will take $800 million, so they say, of debt of the potash 

corporation and write it down. They encouraged the decision by 

doing that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I say to the minister, and I ask him, 

Mr. Speaker: -why did your government not use your political 

influence with the Prime Minister of Canada so that the Prime 

Minister would use his influence with the President of the United 

States to let him know the seriousness of such a decision on the 

industry and the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member shows his 

complete lack of understanding how an anti-dumping action 

works, if he is to somehow suggest that a statement made that 

indicated that we would be  

writing down, or contemplating writing down, the debt of PCS 

(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) would somehow impact on 

an anti-dumping action, simply demonstrates that the hon. member 

is absolutely ignorant of the way that the process works, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If we have said . . . if there is a mistake been made here, the 

mistake was made back when, in their great wisdom, the member 

from Regina Elphinstone believed that somehow the people of this 

province wanted their money into the risk venture of potash. He 

dumped billions of dollars into potash, and now it's coming home 

to roost — the terrible mistake taken by the members opposite, 

probably the most single, most ludicrous single mistake ever made 

by any government in this province in the history of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, there is nowhere in the financial statements 

of PCS that can justify or support a write-down of the debt of PCS 

— nowhere. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, how can you stand up in this House and 

say that when the commerce department in the United States, or 

the industry in New Mexico is saying, alleging — wrongly, I 

might add — that the potash industry is being subsidized in 

Saskatchewan, your proposals to write down a debt in PCS 

wouldn't be considered a subsidy of some sort? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I mean it's absolutely silly to suggest 

that even it would, it . . . The particular ruling come down: 

Noranda's duty was assessed at 85 per cent, which is almost . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. I 

don't think we should be interrupting the Minister of Justice 

unduly, and I would ask the co-operation of the hon. members to 

allow him to continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Noranda did not write down 

any debt, and Noranda was assessed an 85 per cent dumping duty. 

PCA (Potash Corporation of America) did not write down a debt, 

and it was assessed a 77 per cent dumping duty. 

 

So for the hon. member to somehow suggest that the allegation of 

writing down the debt led to the decision is absolute foolishness. 

The decision was based on the prices of selling and constructive 

costs from September of 1986 to February 1987. So to suggest that 

is (a) wrong, and (b) to hold on to that concept simply 

demonstrates that the hon. member simply does not understand 

what he is talking about, and that does not come as a surprise to 

me or the members of this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, this latest slap in the face that we have 

received from the United States government  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

1997 

 

through the commerce department decision shows one thing 

clearly. It shows the absolute folly of trying to negotiate a free 

trade deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — If never before, it should be clear to you 

now that it's quite clear that the Americans will not give up their 

ability to launch anti-dumping petitions and countervailing duty 

suits to protect their industries — no matter what the nature of the 

deal is. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, are you now prepared to go to the federal 

government and tell them that these free trade negotiations should 

be ceased immediately unless the Americans publicly agree to a 

comprehensive trade dispute mechanism? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let me make this very, 

very clear: the position of the Government of Saskatchewan has 

always been that on the bilateral negotiations, two fundamental 

requirements were necessary for a deal: one was that we must 

have assured access to the U.S. market. That's very important to: 

(a) whether it's potash, softwood lumber, oil, whatever — red 

meat industry. Number one, you had to have access to the U.S. 

market, and number two, you had to have some form of dispute 

settlement mechanism that we saw to be fair to both sides. That, 

we suggest, is not in existence in the potash case on either counts. 

What we have said is that we must have that; that is our bottom 

line before we can take a deal. 

 

As I understand, that has been the position taken forward by 

Reisman, that he would not support a deal unless it also required 

those two requirements. The members opposite of the NDP, what 

they're really saying is that we don't want to negotiate a deal with 

the Americans for bilateral trade. Now what that really means is 

that we walk away from a market that buys 60 per cent of our 

potash. Now where, pray tell, are we going to sell that potash to? 

Somebody that buys about 80 per cent of our uranium, and where 

are we going to sell that to? 

 

If we're going to expand the red meat industry, where's it going to 

go but to the United States. Sixty per cent of the oil that we've 

produced in this province as export oil is exported to the United 

States . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, please. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 

 

National Railway Dispute 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

rise pursuant to rule 39 of the Assembly to seek leave to move a 

motion on the matter of urgent and pressing necessity. I will take a 

moment to indicate what the issue is, and to indicate the sort of 

motion I seek to move. 

 

The issue, of course, is the national industrial dispute that has shut 

down Canada's national rail transport system.  

This dispute, between the railway companies and their employees, 

threatens to have very serious consequences for the Saskatchewan 

economy, and particularly for Saskatchewan's agricultural 

economy. This is a problem not confined to Saskatchewan; it's a 

national problem; it calls for an urgent national resolution. 

 

I therefore seek leave to move a motion along the following lines, 

which I hope will be non-controversial: 

 

That this Assembly regrets that the nation-wide industrial 

dispute between the railways and their employees has 

disrupted the rail transportation system which is critically 

important to Saskatchewan's economy, and especially to 

Saskatchewan's agricultural economy; and further, that this 

Assembly hereby urges the Prime Minister of Canada to use 

his good offices to achieve an immediate resolution of this 

dispute. 

 

I therefore ask leave of the Assembly to move the motion. I hope 

that leave will be granted. Would you take that motion to the 

Deputy Premier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, you'll like 

that. If leave is given, then I will say a few more words. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I 

will move, seconded by the hon. member for Regina Centre, the 

motion which I have just read. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada is facing its first major railroad strike in 14 

years. A long history of labour peace has been shattered. I will 

first deal with the impact of this strike or this work stoppage on the 

Saskatchewan economy. I will obviously not seek to cover all 

aspects of it, but I will say enough to indicate that any prolonged 

railway dispute would have a major and very serious impact upon 

the Saskatchewan economy, particularly on those parts of the 

Saskatchewan economy which ship goods in bulk. 

 

I turn first to grain. Virtually all of the grain exported from 

Saskatchewan moves by rail, and virtually all of it moves either to 

Thunder Bay or to the west coast ports. At Thunder Bay the 

situation is not crucial at this moment, since the elevators are fairly 

well stocked. The elevators there haven't been working at capacity 

over the summer, from which I conclude that they're fairly well 

filled, and accordingly a short work stoppage would not work a 

great hardship. However we are not in a position to take many 

gambles with respect to this, and any work stoppage of any 

significant length of time at all would undoubtedly cause problems 

even at Thunder Bay where the elevators are fairly well stocked. 

 

And while the situation has some cushion in it at Thunder Bay, I 

think there is less cushion at the west coast ports. Vancouver and 

Prince Rupert are not, according to the best information that I 

could bring to bear, not as well stocked with grain as is Thunder 

Bay. Here I may be in error, but I think not, so we don't have the 

same cushion on the west coast ports. 

 

I was disturbed, as I'm sure a good number of hon. members were 

disturbed, to read some of the reports  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

1998 

 

which have been about in the press recently about the movement 

of grain to Thunder Bay. I noted that in a clipping headed, "CN 

Rail gets its knuckles rapped," there is an indication that the 

Canadian Wheat Board has not been getting the grain into position 

at the west coast ports that it sought to get into position. 

 

For each quarter targets are set, and the railroads have a target of 

how much grain they should get to Vancouver and Prince Rupert. 

And in the last quarter, that's the May-June-July quarter, CP Rail 

moved something in excess of its target — 4 per cent more than its 

target. But I regret to say that CN Rail was 20 per cent short — 

that's a lot of grain — 20 per cent short of its target, very nearly 

3.5 million tonnes of grain short by CN Rail. 

 

They have a number of explanations as to why this came about, 

but the long and short of it is that CN Rail, in the last three 

months, not counting August, have simply not got the grain to the 

west coast ports as it should. I will quote briefly from this: from 

May 3 to July 18 the unload target for CN was 17,775 cars, but the 

railroad unloaded just 14,265 cars, missing the target by 19.8 per 

cent. 

 

I should correct myself, Mr. Speaker. I just said 3.5 million tonnes, 

and I meant 3,500 cars, and that will make it more accurate. I am 

sorry for speaking from some notes which are somewhat less than 

organized, since we were not aware that this debate was coming 

up until obviously this morning. 

 

I don't know what happened, I don't know why it was permitted. 

But at any rate, so far as the west coast is concerned, we have less 

grain in position than we had hoped to have. 

 

Grain is not our only problem. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, I should 

make clear that when I speak of grain, I include oil seeds because 

we're talking about those things which move in bulk for export . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Indeed they do. But the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena points out that that is the normal 

interpretation, but I wouldn't want anyone to think that I was 

thinking only of grain and forgetting our canola producers who are 

major, major producers who depend upon export, particularly 

from Vancouver. 

 

I now turn to potash, and a very large per cent of Canadian potash 

moves by Canadian rail. Some moves by truck to the U.S. border 

and then by U.S. rail. And we're all familiar, I think, with the 

potash-hauling operation on Highway No. 9, but most flows from 

the mine by Canadian rail. Potash stocks are in storage at many 

U.S. locations, and at Vancouver and Thunder Bay, so that the 

problem is perhaps not immediate. But here again, the size of the 

cushion is such that any prolonged dispute would impact very 

heavily on the Canadian industry. There is no question that 

producers of grain, producers of potash, depend upon rail 

transport, and we need, we need assured rail transport. 

 

And there are other producers. Pulp moves mainly by rail. There 

was a reference earlier today to uranium. I'm not aware of any 

uranium being shipped by rail. It is almost all shipped by truck, 

but that is not a bulk shipper in any case. 

 

When we look at industries such as grains and oil seeds, potash, 

and pulp, we are looking at a very substantial portion of our export 

economy. To that I could have added lumber. Most of that moves 

by rail. And when we look at all of the things shipped from 

Saskatchewan, excluding livestock — and even some of that 

moves by rail — we have a very large amount of this product 

moving by rail, a very large part of our total export economy 

which will be adversely affected by any prolonged rail strike. So 

there can be no doubt that Saskatchewan people have a very major 

interest in seeing that this rail strike is not prolonged. 

 

Now how did we get to the situation we're now in? Well there are, 

of course, many explanations. A long record of bad relations in the 

industrial relations field in the railroad is not one of them. 

Fourteen years without a major work stoppage indicates that there 

is not aggressive activity, either on the part of the management or 

labour up to now. 

 

But a year ago CN announced that it proposed to eliminate 14,000 

jobs by 1990. Now that's a 25 per cent reduction in the work-force. 

Not surprisingly, the employees are alarmed, and raised the issue 

urgently during negotiations. And this is the first negotiations 

since that announcement. 

 

Now this comes on the top of already big cuts in railway staff. No 

one can suggest that the railroad unions are somehow looking for 

job security if that means the protection of every job. I said earlier 

in the House that the car men have seen their membership drop 

from 14,000 to 7,000 in the last 15 years. Now that is a rapid rate 

of attrition, to see a group of employees reduced by 50 per cent 

over a period of 15 years. But it was managed; it did not produce 

any work stoppages. 

 

And in many other areas of railway labour there is free 

acknowledgement that there are going to be fewer jobs. That, I 

think, is not the issue. The issue is: how is the down-sizing to take 

place? And that, I think, is a legitimate concern of the railway 

management and the unions which represent the employees. 

 

And that's why, in this particular dispute, the matters which have 

been front and centre have not primarily been wages — which is 

the normal thing — or working hours, or working conditions, but 

job security and pensions. And job security should not be 

misinterpreted to mean a desire that every job should be secure. 

That has never been the position, and certainly it hasn't happened 

over the last several years. 

 

Everybody knows that all the jobs can't be saved. Rather the issues 

are about how the down-sizing is to take place, and what's going to 

be left for the workers who are turned out of their jobs. These 

issues are delicate. It's not simply money; it's not simply whether 

or not there'll be a wage increase of something that amounts to the 

cost of living or 1 per cent more or 1 per cent less. That's the sort 

of thing that an arbitrator can saw off, can make a judgement on, 

and the parties go back to their respective positions of 

management and labour realizing that that is settled. 

 

When you get into these sensitive areas of the way in  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

1999 

 

which a work-force should be down-sized, whether or not there 

should be early retirements, whether or not there should be special 

pension benefits for people who are moved out prematurely, those 

are very, very difficult for an arbitrator to cope with. You're 

getting right into the management of a company, and those issues 

are certainly best settled, if at all possible, by the parties 

themselves. And so I very much hope that we will see the parties 

back at the bargaining table sorting out this issue. Users of the 

railways want the problem solved, and users of the railways are 

not too troubled as to how the solution comes about; they just 

want the trains operating. 

 

(1445) 

 

But if the users of the railroad are perceptive, they will know that 

they want the problem solved because they don't want them back 

again in another year. They want someone to attack this problem 

of how to down-size the railways, how it can be done in a way that 

our railways can continue to be competitive and still be fair and 

reasonable to the employees. And that's the sort of thing which is 

best sorted out at the bargaining table. 

 

Some people, perhaps unkindly, have been suspicious of the 

tactics which apparently are being employed by CN. We have 

seen an instance of CN not being able to deliver grain, and a very 

substantial shortfall of grain — 20 per cent over a three-month 

period — at a time when they have adopted a policy of massive 

lay-offs. 

 

We don't need to tell this House that CN is embarking upon a 

policy of massive lay-offs. The member for Melville knows this, 

as does this the mayor of Melville, Mr. Don Abel, who's made a 

crusade of attempting to at least slow down the lay-offs in his city. 

There have been substantial CN lay-offs in Saskatoon, all recently. 

 

This, combined with a failure of CN to deliver the goods to the 

extent of a 20 per cent failure of delivering grain to Vancouver, 

makes one wonder whether CN is conducting its operations in 

good faith, or whether CN isn't attempting to create a difficult 

situation out in Vancouver in order to mount a little pressure for 

their union negotiations. I hope that's not true. I hope that's not 

true, and I hope that CN will make clear that it's not true. 

 

I'm not ordinarily here defending the CPR, but the CPR has been 

reducing its work-force, as has CN, without nearly the difficulties 

that CN has been encountering, and CP has been delivering the 

goods, so far as grains is concerned, both to Thunder Bay and to 

Vancouver. I don't know whether this reflects well on CP's 

forward planning or whether it discloses another agenda that CN 

has which CP is not following. 

 

Whatever the reasons are, I think we in this House and in this 

province have an interest in seeing that this rail dispute is settled 

— settled quickly, and, if at all possible, settled by the parties 

dealing with these difficult and intricate problems so they won't be 

back again. I fear that if we get an arbitrated settlement, it will be a 

very broad-brush, rough-cut thing which will leave the problems 

unsettled. And while they'll be lived with it for a year, they'll be 

back again. Because all of us, I think,, know that this is 

symptomatic of a problem which is going  

to arise in other areas of our economy. We're talking about 

deregulating, and this is one of the costs of deregulating. 

 

We're talking about down-sizing and we know that as automation 

comes into more and more areas of our economic activity, there 

will be displacements of employees from their employment. And 

we've simply got to find mechanisms where these people can be 

eased out and not turfed out, and where we can find alternative 

opportunities for them. 

 

I think we all know that in our heart of hearts. And we have here 

an example of a number, a large number of employees, 14,000 in 

one company alone, being moved out in a period of four years — 

25 per cent of the work-force. By anybody's standards that's a big, 

big move, so we've got to seek ways of solving these sorts of 

problems. 

 

But right now, so far as western farmers and western potash 

producers and western pulp producers are concerned, those are 

longer-range problems. We're faced with a shorter-range problem 

now — one where I have attempted to illustrate, if this dispute is 

prolonged, there is going to be significant hardship imposed upon 

a great number of producers. And so we're looking for action, and 

action now. 

 

And we naturally look to the federal government. We look to the 

federal government because it is their constitutional and legislative 

jurisdiction to regulate rail transport. And we look to the federal 

government because they are the owner of the largest single 

employer — the CNR. 

 

Now first I want to compliment the federal government on their 

selection of their mediator, Mr. Mac Carson. I'm not familiar with 

Mr. Carson, but I'm certainly familiar with the associate deputy 

minister of Labour, Mr. Bill Kelly, and there are few better 

operators in the field of industrial relations in Canada than Bill 

Kelly. And I hope very much therefore that Bill Kelly can get 

those . . . and Mr. Carson can get those people back to the table, 

solving this problem. 

 

I urge the Prime Minister to involve himself in this issue. I'm not 

suggesting that he should involve himself at the bargaining table 

— that would not be appropriate. But I would like to think that he 

would involve himself in the sense of being a strategist. He is 

skilled in this area. 

 

It's in nobody's interest to prolong this dispute, and I would very 

much urge the Prime Minister to devote some of his personal time 

to this, to give some strategic assistance to the government 

negotiators because he is in the unique position of having some 

leverage on both parties. He has some leverage in the sense that he 

is appointing the mediator and Mr. Kelly. He has some leverage in 

the sense that he can undoubtedly influence CN if they are the 

obdurate ones, and I'm not suggesting they are. And he has 

leverage in the sense that he can ultimately threaten to lay this 

matter before parliament, and then the parties have to take what 

they get. So with that sort of leverage, and with his particular skills 

which are acknowledged, I would hope that he would be able to  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2000 

 

give some strategic assistance to those who are seeking to solve 

this problem. 

 

We are looking here, and the problems surrounding, as I say, the 

rate of lay-off and early retirement schemes and pensions. And as I 

say, if possible, this ought not to be subject to arbitration since I 

fear it will not get solved by arbitration. It will get dealt with, but it 

has the prospect of recurring. 

 

All the weapons open to the government should be used. And I 

say that again — all the weapons open to the government should 

be used. And therefore I regret the statement, at least attributed to 

Mr. Crosbie, that he was going to leave it to the Minister of 

Labour and he, the Minister of Transport, was not going to involve 

himself. I think he is the minister responsible for CN Railways. 

And I think that it is not possible for the responsible minister for 

the CNR to wash his hands of a rail dispute involving the CNR, 

which hauls half the rail freight in Canada. 

 

It's got to involve that minister and Mr. Crosbie just as surely as 

it's got to involve the Minister of Labour. Simply because Mr. 

Crosbie doesn't have any railways in his constituency, or indeed, 

so far as I'm aware, in his province, except for a line up to 

Labrador City, should not induce Mr. Crosbie to regard this matter 

as of no account. 

 

It is a serious matter. It needs the attention of every federal 

minister who can constructively contribute to the solution of it. 

That certainly includes the Minister of Labour; it certainly 

includes the minister responsible for CN; and I suggest it might 

well include the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Mazankowski, who 

is very familiar with western grain problems and with rail 

transportation problems, he having been minister of Transport; and 

it, I suggest, includes the Prime Minister who has special skills in 

this field. 

 

In my judgement the Prime Minister should instruct Mr. Crosbie 

to change his position — his position of not getting involved — 

and he should instruct Mr. Crosbie to get involved because this is 

a matter which concerns all Canadians, and certainly concerns 

western Canadians. 

 

I want now to suggest, and to close my remarks, by calling once 

again on the Prime Minister and all of his cabinet, and this would 

include perhaps Mr. McKnight, a former minister of Labour, and a 

person who is familiar with the grain situation here on the Prairies, 

to take whatever steps they feel would be useful and desirable to 

get this dispute resolved, get it . . . dispute resolved in a period of 

time measured in hours and days, and certainly not weeks, and to 

give the leadership which I think Canadians are asking of their 

Prime Minister and their federal cabinet. 

 

I would like all members of this House to share with me that 

thought. And in order that we may have an opportunity to do that 

in an organized way, I will move the motion, which I referred to 

earlier, which is in the following terms. Seconded by my 

colleague, the member for Regina Centre, I move: 

 

That this Assembly regrets that the nation-wide industrial 

dispute between the railways and their employees has 

disrupted the rail transportation  

system, which is critically important to Saskatchewan's 

economy, and especially to Saskatchewan's agricultural 

economy; and further, that this Assembly hereby urges the 

Prime Minister of Canada to use his good offices to achieve 

an immediate resolution of this dispute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

add a few words to those given by the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. I'm pleased that this motion is being debated. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that this legislature needs to send a strong 

message to Ottawa with respect to the conduct of public business 

and the conduct of public affairs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to touch briefly on the whole question 

of privatization and the mind-set that Conservative governments 

have with respect to economic activity. They appear to be of the 

view that there is no proper activity in the public sector, that 

everything should be in the private sector, and that everyone ought 

to be able to treat their activity, and everyone ought to be able to 

act out of nothing but self-interest. And that is what has led us into 

this mess. 

 

The government in Ottawa has been of the view that there's no 

proper activity in the public sector, that everything ought to be run 

as if it was in the private sector, and railways should be able to 

behave in the 20th century as they did in the 19th, and act entirely 

out of self-interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's been said that in this country there are two 

railways — the government owns one, and the other one owns the 

government. And when you look at their behaviour, there's 

something to that because their behaviour in this matter is almost 

indistinguishable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, corporate profits . . . the corporate profits are 

up constantly. The CP Rail's profit for the first half of this year is 

$61 million . . . for the second quarter, I'm sorry. I've not been 

doing those people justice. For the second quarter of 1987, their 

profit was $61 million. That's double what it was last year. CN's 

figures are the same. You can't, since one is a negative figure and 

this year's is a positive figure, you can't state it in percentage 

terms. Last year, in the first quarter, they lost $11 million; this year 

it made 17 million in the first quarter. The second quarter figures 

are not out for CN. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these railways have been behaving like 

swashbuckling 19th century capitalists. They've behaved, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, as if they have only one interest in mind and one 

concern, and that's their own self-interest, and how to fatten profits 

— never mind that the almost inevitable outcome of their activity 

is a strike in the railway — that isn't their concern. Their concern 

is the bottom line. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that railways should be 

. . . I have a personal belief that the railways should be 

publicly-owned and treated as public utilities. 

 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — While I may not be a particular hero of CP 

Rail, but I say, Mr. Speaker, that these services ought to be treated 

for what they are. These are services which are vital to the 

Canadian economy, and particularly vital to the Saskatchewan 

economy, Mr. Speaker. They should be treated as public utilities, 

and if they aren't — and that won't happen, I guess, as long as the 

current government's in office — at the very least they should 

recognize that they have a public responsibility for the public of 

this country, and they have a responsibility beyond their own 

shareholders and their own bottom line, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the importance of the railways to Saskatchewan 

cannot be overstated. Virtually our entire economy is engaged in 

primary production, and virtually everything we produce we 

export, and the vast percentage of it goes by rail. 

 

I would doubt, Mr. Speaker, that there's another economy in 

Canada as dependent on rail traffic as Saskatchewan. All of the 

grain goes by rail, a vast majority of potash goes by rail, a majority 

of forest products go by rail, and although it isn't a factor in the 

Saskatchewan economy, it is in some; virtually all of the mining 

products go by rail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is just simply not satisfactory for railways to 

disregard public interest and to behave like rapacious capitalists, 

which is what they are doing. The time is long overdue when 

railways have to recognize that they have to have a responsibility 

to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased that we're having this debate. I'm pleased 

that we're going to be able to send to Ottawa a strong message that 

the approach which Ottawa has had, the hands-off approach, that 

railways run their own affairs and we don't interfere, just simply is 

not satisfactory. I refer, as was referred to in question period, to 

John Crosbie's comment, "It's up to the railways to manage their 

business the best way they can." That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is just 

simply not a satisfactory statement of railway policy in this 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public are involved. The public have a vital 

interest, and we call upon the federal government to take an active 

role in the settlement of this dispute, something which they have 

not done. 

 

I want to deal briefly with the dispute itself. It is not primarily 

about wages; it is about job security. Mr. Deputy Speaker, one can 

hardly be surprised that when, as is the case, one of the railways is 

reducing their staff by more than 25 per cent, one can hardly be 

surprised that the employees are alarmed by that state of affairs. 

That's almost inevitable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to quote from a . . . to lay the 

groundwork for this, I want to quote very briefly from a Canadian 

Press story of August 27, 1986: 

 

Canadian National plans to eliminate 14,000 positions by 

1990, reducing its work-force by almost a quarter . . . 

 

And they go on to say that unnecessary staff won't be replaced: 

 

But we won't be able to achieve this goal through early 

retirement alone. Some will lose their employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as one would expect, the union which represents the 

employees has taken strong exception to that. They have stated 

that the plans of CN are frightening. Mr. Speaker, assuming that 

the — and I'm not prepared at this point in time to do that — but 

assuming that some reduction in staff might be justified, there are 

other, better ways to do it, and I call upon the federal government 

to express to the railways in no uncertain terms that this approach 

is not satisfactory. They have a public responsibility, and they 

should recognize it. 

 

It is not satisfactory for the railways to disregard public interest, as 

they have clearly done, and to let the public interest be 

disregarded. The time is long overdue when railways should 

recognize their public responsibility and when the federal 

government should recognize than an appropriate and proper 

policy with respect to railways requires that railways, if they are 

not to be public utilities, then they must behave in much the same 

manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's not unknown in the Canadian 

economy. I refer very briefly to the banks. They are privately 

owned, but they behave in many ways as if they were state banks. 

And they follow federal government policy with respect to 

economic and fiscal matters, and that's what the railways should 

be doing. If they're not to be privately owned they must, Mr. 

Speaker, accept the requirements of the public needs in this 

country and follow them. 

 

Now one must excuse the railways for disregarding it. As far as I 

know, the current government at least has never articulated any 

particular public need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one might ask: what could the federal government 

do? Well, the federal government could get directly involved and 

bring pressure to bear on both sides. That used to happen in this 

province in the days when we had a real Labour minister and not 

the parody of a Labour minister that we have at the moment. But 

in the days when we had a real Labour minister, more than one 

strike was averted because the Labour minister of the day went to 

both sides and did some good, old-fashioned jaw-boning, and 

brought the two sides together. 

 

The Government of Canada exerts enormous influence on the 

railways, whatever their ownership. If the Government of Canada 

were to bring, and if the Prime Minister were to bring his offices 

to bear, I suspect that he'd find an attentive ear when he spoke to 

both railways and unions. This is something the Prime Minister 

takes — as my colleague from Elphinstone said — this is 

something the Prime Minister takes pride in — his ability to 

negotiate. He ought to bring the parties together and keep them 

together until they have reached a settlement. . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I say to the member from Kelvington-Wadena, I 

honestly hope you make a contribution from your feet, because 

you're not making  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2002 

 

one from your seat. 

 

But I say to members opposite, the Prime Minister of Canada did 

this with respect to the constitution of Canada — brought them 

together, kept them in the room until they made an agreement. 

Some would say that's not an appropriate way to arrive at a 

constitution, but if it's a satisfactory way to settle a constitutional 

question, surely it's a satisfactory way to settle a labour dispute. 

 

So I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we call upon the Prime Minister 

and the Government of Canada to recognize their responsibility 

and to get the railways back to work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure 

to speak on this motion, and it is a very, very timely and sensitive 

subject. And I suppose, when there are labour disputes of any sort, 

whether it's in a province or whether it's across the dominion of the 

country of Canada, and when a labour dispute such as this affects 

each and every single person in our country, I believe that it is 

time the politicians stand on their feet and talk about it. I think it's 

time politicians stand on their feet and take some very, very strong 

action. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what our government has done in 

the past, and this is exactly what our government proposes to do 

today. Mr. Speaker, I think it has to be very, very clearly 

understood that in today's economy — it's an international 

economy — that competitiveness is the key word. And I think 

when it comes to being competitive in all of our major sectors, 

whether it's agriculture or potash or coal or any of our resource 

industries, we have to be extremely competitive. 

 

And the reason is, in the province of Saskatchewan the costs of 

transportation as a percentage of the price of our end-product are 

approximately 23 per cent. So almost a quarter of the price of any 

product that we export from the province of Saskatchewan is made 

up in transportation costs. That is nearly six times the average. 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, this is because in the province of 

Saskatchewan we are remote to a good number of the markets that 

we sell to. So, Mr. Speaker, the importance of transportation to our 

provincial economy can never, never be understated. It is 

extremely important. So when we have a labour dispute such as 

this, the impacts on our economy are indeed very, very significant. 

 

I don't believe that this labour dispute can be a prolonged labour 

dispute. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we have to 

narrow this down to not a matter of weeks or months, but to a 

matter of hours — to a matter of hours, Mr. Speaker, because if 

this strike continues, the costs in dollar terms — and I wished I 

had an estimate here today, but the cost in dollar terms will 

absolutely be phenomenal. 

 

And this comes at a time, Mr. Speaker, when our farmer friends 

can absolutely not afford to have one more hardship imposed upon 

them. This comes at a time, Mr. Speaker, when our potash 

industry has already received what I would call crippling blows — 

crippling blows to  

our potash industry, Mr. Speaker. And any undue hardship 

imposed upon our potash industry will be absolutely disastrous to 

this economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this debate that we speak of here today is not one 

that anyone should take lightly. It is one that we should all be 

extremely concerned about, for this particular dispute impacts 

each and every one of us in this province, and it's reaching right 

into every one of our pocket-books, Mr. Speaker. So I say very, 

very sincerely that this is a matter that has to be dealt with today. It 

is a matter that has to be judged not in days or weeks or months, 

but in a matter of hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, competitiveness is extremely important, once again. 

Transportation today is in a very, very much of a changing state. 

The federal government has introduced a new national 

transportation Act that has called for the deregulation of many, 

many sectors, and one of those certainly is rail. And the reason for 

this, Mr. Speaker, once again, is competitiveness — extremely 

important. 

 

This labour dispute, this labour dispute is having extreme 

implications on our ability here in Saskatchewan to be 

competitive. And if we want to have companies enjoying profits 

and paying taxes, those companies have to be competitive. And if 

they are not, they will not pay taxes, they will not make profits, 

and we, as a result, will very, very much suffer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suppose the debate today, the debate today should 

take into account, and our provincial government should be judged 

on, what steps we have taken. Mr. Speaker, this strike did not 

come about without some advance warning, at least to members 

on this side of the House. We were well aware a number of weeks 

ago that the railways were in a position to strike, and I believe that 

our government should be judged on what steps did we take. Did 

we stand idly by, or did we make representations and, I say, make 

strong representations? Did we make strong representations to 

Ottawa? And I am very pleased to inform the Assembly, and to 

inform the people of Saskatchewan, that yes indeed, our 

government was aware of the situation. Yes indeed, our 

government took steps. 

 

And I will once again go through the chronology of events of what 

our government did in respect to contacting our federal 

counterparts. Our Premier met just a matter of about 10 days ago 

with the Deputy Prime Minister of our country. Right on our own 

soil here in Regina, our Premier met with the Hon. Don 

Mazankowski, Deputy Prime Minister. Our Premier spoke with 

another very influential cabinet minister, the Hon. Bill McKnight, 

here in Saskatchewan, and our Premier made strong 

representations to those two powerful individuals. Our Premier 

told those individuals in no uncertain terms what the position of 

this government is. And the position of the government clearly is: 

we would respectfully urge the Government of Canada to take 

whatever steps are necessary to avert a rail strike, in very, very 

short order. So it was well-known by our federal counterparts. 

 

(1515) 

 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2003 

 

Our Premier, in fact, wrote another letter to the Hon. Pierre 

Cadieux, Minister of Employment and Immigration. Further to 

that, this morning I sent a letter off directly to the Hon. John 

Crosbie, urging exactly what we're speaking of here today; urging 

the government to do whatever is necessary. And whatever 

powers they have, which are quite wide-ranging, I will admit, 

whatever powers they have, we said, you use those powers 

because if you do . . . if you do not, that will be detrimental to our 

provincial economy. It will hurt every citizen that we have in this 

province. 

 

Further to that, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to announce that the Hon. 

Pierre Cadieux has called both of the parties together. He is a 

powerful minister and he ordered . . . he said, both of you parties 

— both railways and both union negotiators — you come to 

Ottawa; you sit down; we will appoint a mediator; and you 

hammer this thing out. And he has done so with a great deal of 

insistency. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe, and I have every faith that those 

negotiations, I trust, will be forthcoming, and a very, very quick 

end will come to this dispute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I think those steps, when you take a look at the 

overall situation, have been responsible, and I believe that the 

outcome will be favourable. I do not want to turn this debate into 

anything partisan at all, but I do find it very, very interesting that 

the member from Regina Centre, who spoke just previous to 

myself, has stood up, and he offered many, many good 

suggestions. But underlying, and underlying there is a great fear 

on my part when I saw the member rise because I knew where he 

came from. He came from the old NDP, who haven't changed, by 

the way, and it's very, very significant to note that one of the key 

parts of his speech that he just gave was, I believe he said: I 

believe that the railways, all of the railways should be 

nationalized. 

 

I do not think that that is the answer to the problem we face today. 

I don't think it is the answer to the problem we face in the medium 

term or the long term. I think it was quite "off-the-wall" that he 

would stand up and say that one of the ways we could fix this 

would be to nationalize the railways. I don't think, really, that is 

sound thinking on the part of any persons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again I don't care if it's a dispute with the 

railways or with any other fundamental economic service that is 

provided here in this country, it is up to the politicians of the day 

to stand up, to stand up and say: well perhaps it is a little 

heavy-handed — it may appear to legislate workers back to work 

or to take those types of extreme measures. But, Mr. Speaker, it is 

time that the people in this country realize the importance of such 

sectors as transportation. And, Mr. Speaker, a prolonged strike, or 

even a strike that would last more than a few days, would be 

absolutely crippling to our economy. And I believe that it's only 

responsible politicians who will stand up and look at the overall 

impact on all of the citizens of Canada, all of the citizens of the 

province of Saskatchewan, and take whatever legislative actions 

are necessary. 

 

And there are those who may say, well, you know, we have to 

protect all of the jobs. We have to protect all of the  

jobs, and they only keep that in mind. I think, Mr. Speaker, that is 

extremely narrow thinking. And I'm not about to say that this 

government is not concerned with job lay-offs or job security. Of 

course we are, Mr. Speaker. Our goal is to have more and more 

people working. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it is not responsible to just stand up and 

say: at all costs we have to have complete and total job security for 

everyone. Mr. Speaker, there are technological advances in 

absolutely every industry that you would see across this country, 

and at times there are going to be efficiencies that will cause less 

people to work, will cause people to change their type of 

employment. And any responsible employer would take the view 

that these people may not have the same job today, but we'll put 

them into something else, we'll help them with retraining, we'll 

offer some early retirements and take those types of steps. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it would only be those who would stick 

their head in the sand and say, we have to have absolute job 

security for everyone. Mr. Speaker, that simply is not possible 

today. And I believe that those types of thoughts are going on 

across the country by some members, and I think, quite frankly, 

predominantly those of the NDP, who represent a lot of the union 

bosses, who really do not have the best interests of the entire 

country at the time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, you 

certainly are, sir. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that our government has taken a 

reasonable and a responsible approach to this. Mr. Speaker, once 

again the importance of the transportation system to the citizens of 

this province cannot be understated. This dispute comes at a very, 

very difficult time for the province of Saskatchewan — difficult 

time with respect to the farm crisis, if you like; difficult with 

respect to the potash crisis that we are undergoing. And, Mr. 

Speaker, very, very strong actions are needed. 

 

And as such, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving an amendment to the 

motion. It is an amendment that will go a little bit further than 

what the members of the opposition have stated. And what we will 

be asking for in our amendment is that after a certain period of 

time, after a period of 72 hours, that if a negotiated settlement or a 

mediated settlement does not appear to be achievable, that after 72 

hours we would urge that the federal government take such 

legislative action that is absolutely necessary to end the dispute. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, can be viewed by some as being a little 

harsh. But, Mr. Speaker, it is high time that politicians of all 

stripes stood up and said: you bet. If the interests of a few are 

going to jeopardize the interests of the people across this country, 

it is incumbent upon the federal government . . . it is incumbent 

upon that government to take whatever steps are necessary. 

 

And if that includes, Mr. Speaker, going into parliament and 

saying, I'm sorry, but you workers are legislated back to work, our 

government will stand behind that and we will say, Mr. Speaker, 

that that is in the best interests of the people all across this country. 

 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2004 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to move that motion; it will be 

seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena. The motion 

reads as follows: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding "and should a negotiated 

or mediated settlement appear to be unachievable after 72 hours, 

to move immediately to take such legislative action as necessary to 

resolve the dispute," thereto. 

 

And I so move that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I appreciate 

the opportunity to speak on this motion and to support the 

amendment to it. The ex-Leader of the Opposition got up and 

moved a motion under rule 39 that we're debating at the present 

time. He looked a little bit out of place talking about grain and 

farmers, and so he didn't talk very much about agriculture; he 

spoke more about the unions, the workers; he mentioned the word 

"car men." That's fine. He shows that he knows a little bit about 

railroads. Well let's talk about workers; let's talk about farmers and 

their relationship with one another; let's talk about technology, 

technological advancements and the changes it's meant in every 

industry, not just in agriculture; let's talk about rationalization. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the grain handling industry over the last 

20 years we have seen some major changes. Elevator companies 

are closing down, there are smaller plants in every small town and 

going to more centralized locations. That's partially because of the 

size of the vehicles that are being used to deliver grain to the 

elevators at the present time. It's also because of the improvements 

in transportation systems, roads have gotten better. Farms have 

gotten somewhat larger, and elevator companies find a certain 

amount of economy in the scale of their operation getting 

somewhat larger. Railroads, too, have experienced the same thing. 

 

Today we have hopper cars capable of carrying 4,000 bushels of 

grain. In the past, boxcars carried 1,800 bushels of grain. A hopper 

car requires very little maintenance. There's no coopering 

involved, and for members of the opposition who know very little 

about agriculture, that means putting in removable doors inside the 

boxcar that are removed when the grain is unloaded. The hopper 

car has the advantage, as well, of modern technology on its 

wheels, its bearings, its brake pads, and the rest of the systems — 

the air systems that are involved with the braking of the vehicle. 

 

And what do car men do? Well, my understanding of what they do 

. . . the members of the opposition shrug. They don't even know 

what they do. I understand that they are responsible for the 

maintenance on these types of vehicles. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you are now hauling twice as 

much in the same vehicle, in the same type of vehicle as you used 

to haul, it only stands to reason that there are going to be fewer of 

them. And that's exactly what's happened. We've replaced 25,000 

boxcars with 15,000 hopper cars. As well, the turn around time on 

the  

hopper cars at the ports has now increased in efficiency. The turn 

around time is becoming less and less. So you're having fewer 

vehicles on the road for car men to check. And that's what the 

Leader of the Opposition was talking about — the guys who are 

checking the cars and making sure that they're serviced. Well it 

looks as though technology, through no fault of those workers, has 

caught up to them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, technology has caught up to a lot of people. 

Let's take a look at farming, for example. We no longer use horses 

to pull our ploughs. We no longer use horses to pull our hay rigs. 

We use tractors. If we were going to worry about the income level 

of every person in Canada because of changes in technology, it 

would break the federal and provincial treasuries. And the Leader 

of the Opposition conceded — you cannot protect everyone's jobs. 

But I think you have to be cognizant of the fact of who pays the 

bills. 

 

Let's take a look at moving grain today, Mr. Speaker. The farmer 

gets approximately 98 to 99 cents for a bushel of barley today. 

When I started farming in 1975, I was getting 2.12 a bushel. My 

costs have gone up, yet what I receive for my product has gone 

down, but nobody's worried about my job security as a farmer. 

Nobody's worried about my family; nobody's worried about my 

cash flow; nobody's worried about those things for the other 

farmers in Saskatchewan, and I think I can speak fairly well for 

them — unlike the members of the opposition who have only, I 

believe, one practising farmer in their ranks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about our families? What about the families of 

the farmers in Saskatchewan and the people who depend on 

agriculture? We've got 65,000 farmers in Saskatchewan, but we 

also have several thousand people who work in industries that 

support them. We've got the agricultural implement industry. 

We've got the ag chemical industry. We've got the grain elevator, 

the move industry. We've got . . . the Pool elevator has farm 

service centres. For the Pool elevator, UGG, Cargill, whoever 

have got people working in elevators receiving grain — what's 

going to happen to them? They're going to have to be laid off, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think it's absolutely essential that a quick resolution to this strike 

be reached. We cannot afford to have another shortage in cash 

flow as that which we experienced last year when another sector 

of the grain-moving industry went on strike. 

 

I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm beginning to get tired of 

farming. I'm beginning to worry a lot about farming. It isn't bad 

enough you've got grasshoppers and hail and drought and flood 

and frost, but now we've got the unions going on strike — one a 

year. Take your choice; it's your turn this year; you can go on 

strike this year; let's bring those farmers to their knees. God, we're 

on our knees already, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We're hurting very 

badly — very, very badly. 

 

And it's backed up by statistics that members of the opposition 

have brought up on a number of occasions. It's backed up by 

statistics that members on our side of the House have worked on 

long and hard. It's backed up by  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2005 

 

every farm group that comes to the government and says, we've 

got to do something; we have to more, we have to try to work at 

this rationally; we have to protect our agricultural sector. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been trying to do that. And every time we 

try to do something constructive in the province of Saskatchewan 

and in the country of Canada, somebody else decides to go on 

strike. It isn't bad enough Mother Nature's against us, we've got to 

fight the unions too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not union bashing. I am saying that there are 

some people who are not considering the good of the country 

when they are looking after themselves. And I can't blame them 

for doing that — I can't blame them for doing that. The union 

bosses sure like the fancy jobs they've got. I'll bet you if you asked 

the average guy working the railroad whether or not he was 

satisfied with his job, he'd say, yes I am. If you explained to him 

that there was going to be a rationalization in that industry and that 

some of the people would be phased out, he'd say, yes, I can agree 

with that, provided they have got a reasonable separation package. 

 

We've seen attrition, normal people, normal age limitations being 

reached, people moving out of the work-force, that sort of thing, 

Mr. Speaker. This side of the House, this government, has been 

very compassionate in our dealing with people into the 

government sector, in the public service, in attempting to reduce 

the size of that public service, to reduce the tax burden on the 

people of Saskatchewan. We've dealt fairly with the people, and 

most have accepted the early retirement packages, so on and so 

forth. And I would expect, Mr. Speaker, that the railroads would 

have such negotiated packages in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this is an attempt by people to look after that type 

of a rationalization, to deal fairly with the owners and operators of 

the railroads, if these negotiations are aimed at trying to look after 

the average, ordinary railroad worker, I can agree with the 

negotiations. I can agree with wage settlements, with retirement 

packages, all those things, Mr. Speaker, but I cannot agree with a 

few union bosses deciding to use this as a political tool to 

embarrass the federal government at the expense of the 

Saskatchewan farmer. 

 

And the two members who are still on the other side of the House 

— the rest of them have left, Mr. Deputy Speaker — they 

instituted this emergency debate and there's only two of them there 

— sit there and shake their head. Oh, two more came back . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member shouldn't 

make reference to people being in the House or not being in the 

House. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

apologize for referring to the fact that there is only two members 

left in the House. I won't do that again. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many? 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Oh, there's four now, you're right. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, commodity prices for farmers are at an 

all-time low. We have got 20 per cent of the farmers in 

Saskatchewan, 20 per cent of the farmers in Saskatchewan facing 

very serious debt problems. The last thing that we need is another 

cash flow problem, and it's here, it's here. 

 

Of course members opposite would say, well what's your problem. 

You can get a cash advance as a farmer, and that should stave off 

your immediate concerns. It might pay the fuel bill and the 

fertilizer bill, but it doesn't address long-term debt payments. It 

doesn't address other payments that are being expected by people 

in the service sector. The cash advance does not cover much more 

than $25 an acre, which is a good thing, Mr. Speaker, it covers off 

some immediate short-term debt. But there are many farmers 

today who are sitting in the unenviable position of trying to deal 

with a financial institution in reaching an agreement on how 

they're going to perhaps down-size their farm or change their 

farming practices to meet the cash flow available to them at this 

present time. 

 

And this latest strike, Mr. Speaker, will throw into doubt many, 

many hours of long, hard negotiation that these farmers have 

entered into. Many of those farmers are now facing a lot of 

uncertainty they didn't have on Friday. And, Mr. Speaker, the last 

thing we need is more uncertainty in the agricultural industry. 

 

I could go on for some time, and we could stand here as members 

of this Assembly and throw facts back and forth. We could toss 

numbers around all day, and we can quote how many people are 

going to lose their jobs in the railway and how many people are 

going to lose their jobs on the farms and how many people are 

going to be hurt in the industries that serve agriculture, but, Mr. 

Speaker, I don't think that would serve any useful purpose. I think 

what we have to consider here is the economic realities that this 

type of action imposes on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

As far as I can understand, Mr. Speaker, the union that went on 

strike did so as soon as it was legally possible for them to do it. 

Now if I'm wrong in that, I'm sure a member of the opposition will 

correct me. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that is the case, I would be 

very, very upset with that particular union. 

 

So you run to 12 o'clock midnight, Sunday night. There it is. 

That's it. Pow! They're in a legal position to strike. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, those people who are so concerned about their rights and 

their legal position, I'm sure, are reasonable Canadians. I'm sure 

they have brothers and sisters and maybe relatives in the 

agricultural sector or in one of the other sectors, in coal or potash, 

and I'm sure they don't want to see those families hurt. But, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they will hurt and they will hurt very badly. 

 

I would have preferred to see these people continue to work, 

continue to move grain, continue to move coal, potash, all the 

other commodities, and at the same time continued their 

negotiations. They could have asked the  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2006 

 

federal government to institute a mediator instead of going on 

strike, but they didn't do that. They went on strike first. And it was 

only because of the responsibility of the federal government that 

we have a mediator in place now. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to support the motion by the Minister of 

Transport . . . amendment to the motion, pardon me, because of all 

of the reasons that I have just stated. I think that any member of 

this Assembly in reasonable conscience will also have to support 

that amendment. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to be able 

to enter into this debate. I listened very carefully as the member 

for Kelvington-Wadena just said to this House that he would be 

happy to support a negotiated settlement in this dispute for the 

sake of the average railroader, the average rail worker. 

 

Well I would like to say to that member, and to all members 

present, the perspective of some of those average rail workers. 

This morning, before leaving Moose Jaw to come to Regina, I 

took the opportunity to meet some of those workers who are on 

the picket line and visit with them. And I found from them, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they don't enjoy being on that picket line. They 

don't want to be on that picket line. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people who are going to suffer first and 

foremost in this dispute are those rail workers. And the people that 

I met on that picket line this morning are predominantly young 

men and women, many of them with young families, mortgages 

commitments. They will be the ones who suffer first and foremost 

because of this dispute. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can point out from the Moose Jaw 

Times-Herald that, as late as last week, rail workers in Moose Jaw 

were expressing the view they did not want to see a strike; they 

were hoping for a negotiated settlement. If I can just quote from 

this article from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, dated August 18 of 

this year: 

 

Moose Jaw railway union officials are paying close attention to 

negotiations under way in Montreal trying to avoid a railway 

strike. Allan Gallagher, local chairman of the Brotherhood of 

Locomotive Engineers in Moose Jaw, said, "Seven unions in 

the Band City are represented by the associated railway unions 

in negotiations." He noted that the unions are prepared to go out 

if necessary. However, Gallagher said he definitely hopes there 

will be no strike. (Quote, Mr. Gallagher) "Preliminary reports 

indicate there may be some hope. The unions appear to be 

leaning toward the conciliation report recommendations, but I 

don't know about the railway management." 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rail workers that I know in Moose Jaw 

South and in the city of Moose Jaw and, I believe, rail workers 

across this country, want a negotiated settlement. They want to be 

at work. They  

don't want to be on the picket line. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rail workers want a transportation system 

in this country that will serve this nation, that will work for 

everyone's advantage — for the advantage of the agricultural 

community in Saskatchewan, for the advantage of the potash 

industry in our province, for the advantage of passenger travel. So, 

Mr. Speaker, why are they this day, then, out? Why are they on 

that picket line? What has forced this situation? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these workers are up against the rail 

empires of this country. Particularly in the Moose Jaw situation, 

they are up against the CPR railroad, who over the past dozen 

years have forced cut after cut after cut on these workers, and 

they're saying to themselves: how long can we endure these cuts? 

How long can it go on? 

 

Two very significant issues for rail workers in the constituency 

that I represent are, one, the matter of the caboose. As you will 

know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the national railroads in this country 

are proposing to remove the caboose from the freight trains that 

cross this continent and cross our province. They are proposing to 

remove the caboose and replace it with what's called the ETU, the 

end of the train unit, a little black box that to my understanding 

simply monitors brake pressure and speed and distance travelled. 

They are in essence wanting to replace the caboose and the 

conductor — the employee — the worker who rides in that 

caboose — with this little black box. 

 

They are saying that you can take a human being off the end of 

that train, replace it with a little electronic device, and ensure the 

same level of safety. They are saying that you can take that little 

black box and replace a human being, and the five senses of a 

human being. 

 

When we consider the volume of hazardous goods that is 

transported across our province, the hazardous goods that travels 

through every community which we represent, that ought to be of 

concern to all of us and not simply the rail workers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rail workers know that this is a safety 

issue as well as an employment issue. They're on that line today 

because they believe the caboose ought to be maintained. The 

railways say they need to reduce costs, and the way to reduce costs 

is to reduce people. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe the men and 

women I met with this morning are there because they're 

concerned about safety, and they're concerned about jobs for 

themselves and other Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I say to myself: is it any wonder these folks in Moose Jaw are 

concerned when we consider the record, particularly of the CPR, 

in our community over the past three and four years? Let me just 

give you an example of the cuts we've seen in the city of Moose 

Jaw over these past three and four years. 

 

From the inside workers — these are people that work in the 

station — in the past four and five years we have lost 35 jobs in 

the city of Moose Jaw — 35 jobs out of our community, out of our 

province. From the car men out of  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2007 

 

Moose Jaw, over these past three years — three years ago there 

were 72 permanent employees; there were 15 relief employees. 

Today there's a total of 60. That's 27, 27 positions gone in three 

years. And from the maintenance of way, from the section crews, 

those crews have been cut almost 50 per cent. So we used to have 

crews of eight; those crews are now down to three. Is it any 

wonder the people who work for the railway in Moose Jaw are 

concerned about their jobs and how this down-sizing of the 

railroads is taking place? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe this strike is occurring because of 

railroads who are more concerned with profit than they are with 

people, because of railroads who are more concerned with their 

profits than they are with the safety. 

 

And if we're looking for the cause of this dispute, I think we 

should be looking into the boardrooms of the CNR railroad . . . the 

CNR and the CPR. This strike has been forced upon rail workers 

and, indeed, upon we, the people of Saskatchewan, by the 

railroads of this country. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is good hope for a solution if indeed 

our Prime Minister will use his good office to intervene, to bring 

pressure, particularly on the railroads, to get back to the table, to 

bring some fair and just proposals. 

 

And frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am a little disappointed in the 

amendment that has been brought to this House. If members 

opposite were sincere in their desire for a negotiated settlement, I 

ask: why then, why introduce this threat? Why at this time put a 

threat into these talks? I'm sorry to hear that; I'm sorry to see it. I 

was hoping that we could have a positive discussion here today 

with some positive feelings on all sides, and let's leave the threats 

out of it. But we've seen them introduced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I join with members on our side in hoping that this House will 

send a strong and clear message to Ottawa that indeed our Prime 

Minister will use his good office to intervene, to bring the parties 

back to the table to resolve the issues of safety and job security 

and strive for a negotiated settlement, because clearly a negotiated 

settlement is a settlement that will best meet the interests of all 

parties, will meet the interests of our province and all the 

consumers of the rail, and will be best for rail workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this issue deeply affects the people I represent, and I 

would hope that all members could be sincere in their desire to see 

this dispute settled fairly and justly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I'm quite 

pleased to join with my colleagues in this debate. I'm a former 

railroader. I used to work with the CNR back in the early 1970s as 

a trainman. At that time we as employees, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

really believed that the company we worked for, and the industry 

we worked in,  

was the best company and the best industry a person could work 

for anywhere in Canada. 

 

The member from Kelvington-Wadena said in his remarks that if 

you ask an employee now who worked for the railway whether 

they liked their jobs, he said that the employees would in almost 

every case answer yes. I think the member is partially right, and I 

concur with part of his statement. 

 

In the days when the railroads treated their employees with 

respect, in the days when the railways led the industrial wage 

composites and salaries offered to employees, that was, in fact, 

almost unanimous among all employees. What we've seen over 

the years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an erosion, a clear erosion of 

that subsistence, of that subsidy in terms of high wages. We've 

seen an erosion, in terms of railway commitments to the 

work-force, to the employees that have got them to the position 

that they're in now. 

 

Back in 1970 a study was done on the CPR, and I know the study 

quite well because I undertook the study myself at the university. 

The purpose of the study was to determine what Canadians in 

1867 to the period, the mid-50's, provided to the Canadian Pacific 

Railway in terms of dollars, and grants, and tax breaks and so on 

to get them to build this railway coast to coast. In 1970 dollars, the 

figure was somewhere between 3 and $4 billion of taxpayers' and 

Canadians' property and land and oil rights and so on. Now that 

number would be double or triple, depending on the inflation 

factor, but somewhere between 8 and $10 billion, '85-'86 dollars. 

That money was given to a corporation, I might add, Mr. Speaker, 

that was supposed to develop a national railway system and 

employ workers and deploy immigrants across the country so we 

could build our nation. 

 

What we have seen over the decades since those grants and dollars 

and land and oil rights were provided is a clear divorcing of the 

obligation of that company to the Canadian nation. What we have 

seen are these assets numbering in the over $10 billion, is a 

carving out of other companies from CPR, the Canadian Pacific 

Railway — we have seen CP Air, CP Hotels; we have seen 

mining corporations; we have seen CP shipping and CP trucking 

and Pan Canadian Petroleum ad nauseam. There's just a host of 

companies they've spun-off from the assets they were given to 

provide a complex and comprehensive and modern railway system 

to this country to build our nation. 

 

We've seen these assets carved out and sold off into other areas. 

And in effect, what we've got in this country are two national 

railroads. One that we've paid for but don't own, which is the CPR, 

and we've got the CNR, which we own but haven't paid for. Two 

railroads. 

 

We're paying double for the railroads, and we're seeing now in this 

country, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a divorcing of responsibility from 

these railroads to the commitment of this country. I see it in 

broader terms than just labour and grain shipments and those kinds 

of disputes. I see it as a lack of obligation of the railroads in this 

nation to fulfil what they were supposed to fulfil as a result of 

financial commitments of the people of Canada. 

 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2008 

 

Like my colleague from Moose Jaw South, I visited some of my 

former colleagues, some railway workers at the CNR, this 

morning on the way to the office. What they told me, I concur 

with the employees in Moose Jaw told my colleague, that they are 

concerned not for getting more dollars out of the railroads but 

they're concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about job security. And 

that's fairly important. They're not concerned about having 

guarantees in writing to have a job for ever. What they're 

concerned about is what government should be more concerned 

about — that when times of tough economy are upon us, we don't 

blame the international markets; we don't blame the governments 

that are here entirely; we don't blame the opposition or former 

governments. What we try and do in this respect, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is to realize that the obligation of government in tough 

economic times is to provide some leadership to get involved in 

the economy, and if that means . . . 

 

Before the power interruption, Mr. Speaker, I was making some 

comments about the obligation of government, that I believe many 

of the workers who are on strike now agree with, and that is that 

government is obligated in tough economic times not to extract 

themselves from the economy, not divorce themselves from any 

responsibility that they were elected to carry out, but, in effect, to 

become more involved in the economy and to provide some 

leadership. 

 

If that means saying to the railroads and to the negotiators of the 

railroads, you should try and resolve this settlement in the interests 

of our nation because we want to ensure that people are working; 

we want to ensure that there is some security for jobs; want to 

ensure that the grain handling system is working to its capacity, 

then that's what we should do. If they did not have that interest, 

then maybe they should extract themselves. 

 

But what we see in terms of economy, when a government 

extracts themself from the economy, is that we see contract 

workers proliferating; we see part-time jobs growing at alarming 

rates, and of course a major decrease in full-time employment. 

With that, the part-time employees do not have the security of 

extra benefits like Canada Pension payments and other pension 

benefits such as dental plans and drug plans. 

 

We see therefore, Mr. Speaker, more people operating on lower 

income, not going into businesses and spending money, not 

providing basic needs for their families and, therefore, through the 

programs and the policies of the government, stifling the 

economy. For every dollar the government spends in the economy, 

Mr. Speaker, that generates a multiplier effect of three times the 

amount as an economic activity spin-off. So that if we're giving 

these workers full-time jobs, they are more able to care for their 

families as well as to spend money in the business community, 

thereby supporting other employees in the province and in the 

nation. 

 

One of the major problems that I have with the railroads, other 

than the fact they have spun off a lot of the assets that we have 

given them as Canadians, is that during the Crow rate hearings in 

the '70s, some of you may recall, the railways appeared before the 

Canadian Transport Commission and the federal government and 

pleaded  

their case for doing away with the Crow rate which was enshrined 

in legislation. They whined and they squealed that it was far too 

costly; they weren't able to pay their employees enough; and they 

weren't able to keep up in terms of the rolling stock, the good 

quality rolling stock; they weren't able to provide adequate 

passenger train equipment for these people in our country. 

 

And they went at this tack and they said, if the Crow rate was 

abolished and they could charge higher rates for moving grain, 

they'd be able to pay their employees a better wage, because at that 

time the wage station in terms of the overall payments to 

employees had decreased in the railway industry significantly and 

alarmingly; and that rolling stock had been depreciating not only 

in value but in terms of quality. It was a good argument from their 

point of view. And they said, if you give us more money for 

hauling grain, we'll be able to ensure our employees are well paid, 

to ensure that they're working; we can improve our rolling stock, 

and we'll have good passenger equipment to haul Canadians 

across this nation. 

 

The Crow rate is gone. We have seen tens of millions of dollars 

more paid from farmers to the railways. And what we've seen as a 

result of this is a total lack of obligation, an extraction by the 

railways from the commitment to the CTC and the Liberal 

government — and in those days supported by the Conservative 

opposition in Ottawa — to commit more funds to paying their 

employees and to purchase new rolling stock. 

 

We've seen the passenger stock not only depreciate, but it's almost 

at a point where it's embarrassing for people to be using that stuff, 

it's so outdated — not only embarrassing but ultimately very 

dangerous. We have seen as well, Mr. Speaker, the rolling stock 

numbers not increase as the railways had committed, and we've 

seen a massive decrease in the number of employees for the 

railways. 

 

What they are talking about now, what they have been since last 

year — almost a year now in terms of negotiating this contract 

which expired at the end of December of '86 — is to have some 

sort of security that if new technology is going to be introduced, 

that the number of employees that are employed by the railways is 

protected in some fashion. 

 

What we have seen, a number of instances lately, very clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, is the increased danger of moving hazardous goods on 

the railway. We've seen the increased danger to the public and to 

employees alike because of the reduction in the number of car 

men and other railway employees who maintain not only the lines 

but also repair and maintain boxcars that travel on those lines. 

We've seen a reduction from 14,000 to 7,000 for care men. And 

what that means is when a train of a hundred boxcars rolls into a 

yard, rather than having sufficient number of car men to check 

every boxcar, every axle — there's rolling bearing boxes that have 

to be oiled, there's dragging equipment that has to be checked for, 

and there are repairs that have to be made. 

 

And people may not know this, but if you don't provide oil to 

these bearings on a regular interval, not from  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2009 

 

Thunder Bay to Regina, but from Thunder Bay . . . and they 

should be checked at Rainy River; they should be checked at 

Symington, and points in Winnipeg; and they should be checked 

in Regina, in Moose Jaw, and Broadview. They should be 

checked, because if they're not and the oil is used up, as in many 

cases it is from here to Thunder Bay, you will see hot box occur, 

which means the axle's starving for oil and they break, and there's 

accidents occurring. And if they happen to be hauling in that train, 

Mr. Speaker, some hazardous commodities, we will see examples 

of Mississauga repeated throughout this nation, and that concerns 

me a great deal. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a former member of the United Transportation 

Union, and a former member of the CNR, and a son of a farmer, I 

feel torn between what the railroads are trying to do and what the 

negotiators for the unions are trying to do on their behalf. And I'm 

torn because I believe it's very important to have a grain handling 

system that is efficient, but at the same time I believe that 

members who are employed in the transportation industry, such as 

the railroads, require a basic kind of security in terms of their job, 

and a basic minimum level of income for the wages . . . for the 

work that they've put forward on their wages. 

 

So in summary I'd like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I hope the dispute 

is settled through the free collective bargaining process. I would 

feel concerned if we were to put a limit of 72 hours over the 

negotiating process, because in effect what that means is we have 

a sword of Damocles hanging over these people who are 

negotiating and who are mediating the dispute. I'd like to see a 

quick and beneficial resolve to this dispute on behalf of the 

employees, on behalf of the people that the railways serve, and I'm 

sure all members agree with that. 

 

So I'd like to say that I do support the motion moved by the 

member from Regina Elphinstone. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address 

myself to a few points in relation to this discussion on this motion 

as amended. And I want to first of all begin by saying, Mr. 

Speaker, that it's very inopportune, I believe, to have had the strike 

come at this time. The stress on the agriculture sector has been 

indicated to some extent. I want to deal a little bit with that, and I 

also want to deal with some other aspects that relate to volumes 

and traditional moving directions in the area of transportation as it 

relates to grain. 

 

We have to take a number of things into perspective, Mr. Speaker, 

in dealing with this subject, and I want to place them before the 

Assembly today. We have come from a place in the market and 

production of grain in Canada to a very highly technical method of 

transportation, production, and we have to recognize some of the 

opportunities that we have put into place and are using at this time. 

 

If we take a look at . . . go back in history even till 1979,  

Mr. Speaker, the total consumption in grain in the world exceeded 

that of the production. We have come to the place in 1987, Mr. 

Speaker, where we have today more production than we have ever 

had in the history of the world as far as grain is concerned, and 

also, Mr. Speaker, we have come to the place where we've had the 

highest consumption, which has led us to some very serious 

problems as it relates to transportation in western Canada. 

 

We have had the railroads, together with a lot of the grain 

companies, dealing with rationalization of their system. And I 

know that has been happening for quite some time, because it's 

happened in my constituency. I've had one railroad taken up in the 

last 15 years. I've had another one that has been applied for, and 

these are very serious problems that relate to the rationalization of 

the system in the railroads. We've got serious problems there. The 

communities, they die; they quietly steal away. And all you hear is 

the negatives that have occurred, for two reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

One is the railroads, and in my case it's the CPR and the elevator 

companies, and both of them are somewhat to blame for the 

problem. 

 

The second thing I want to deal with in relation to this flow of 

grain into the market-place — we're doing it with fewer elevators, 

less railroad track, and we're doing it better than we've ever done 

before . . . or we're moving more volumes; I should put it that way. 

The reason why we are having a problem and a concern today in 

this discussion is that western Canada produces about 5 per cent of 

the world's production in grain, and we have moved from about 15 

to 17 per cent of the international trade to 20 per cent of the 

international trade in the volumes that have to move to market. 

And we in Saskatchewan are extremely vulnerable to all of those 

movements because we are moving it the greatest distance, 

whether you go from here to Thunder Bay or whether you go from 

here to the Pacific coast. 

 

Now in dealing with that, the railroads have, to their benefit, have 

— and to compliment them — they have developed some very 

intricate systems within the framework of going through the 

Rockies, going west, and I think that some of those things have 

been fairly well dealt with. 

 

We have had, as it relates to the CNR, high volumes of grain 

moving to the west coast in Prince Rupert, through some of the 

ruggedest rocky mountains you could ever imagine. And they 

have, through that port, moved almost five million metric tons 

themselves. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, they have dealt very 

precisely with some of the problems that relate to the mechanics of 

moving that grain. We have had a lot of grain moved through that 

port. That port was expected to deliver and move into ships at a 

maximum of five million metric tons, and they were expected to 

do that over a longer period of time. But, Mr. Speaker, they have 

done that, or they're very close to that, in this crop year. And I 

think what we have seen, Mr. Speaker, and what I'm trying to say 

here, is that the focus has been on delivery, and it's been done. But 

what has that created? It has created a dependence that we have on 

the marketing system, the transportation system, to deliver the 

product to the market and offshore market. And we need that to 

happen. 

 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2010 

 

However, there are some things that need to be addressed, as it 

relates to this, and I just want to point out a couple of things that 

deal with that. First of all, the movement of grain to the western 

ports — about 60 per cent of all the grain moves that direction, or 

has moved in 1986-87. And most of that influence has come from 

the grain movement through the port at Prince Rupert, and that's 

why it's a very valuable part of the grain transportation system. 

 

I'm just going to quote a couple of things here that need to be 

addressed, and what it demonstrates, Mr. Speaker, is the 

seriousness of the problem. As I said, we have a dependence on 

the transportation system in Saskatchewan far more than anyone 

else. It deals with things like potash; we've discussed that. We 

have to deal with aspects like lumber and other commodities — 

coal, for example. The one I want to deal with specifically is grain. 

 

The effects of the disruption of the rail service could impact as 

early as tomorrow. And the reason that it has that significant 

impact is because we have been delivering about 6 to 7,000 cars 

into the ports in only going to the west coast. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is a fairly significant amount of volume. And how does 

that impact on me as a producer in not being able to move that 

freight to the west coast? And I'll tell you. 

 

Today in Vancouver there are five ships loading. Four ships are 

waiting to load, and six are due for loading. So we have 5, 10, 15 

ships close or in position to load grain from western Canada. We 

have come to the place, Mr. Speaker, where we have to deal with 

some very competitive competition in the market-place. Other 

countries are able to access their grain from other parts of the 

world if ours are cut short. And what we do in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

we do a disservice to those people in Saskatchewan who are grain 

producers who aren't able to access the market because of people 

being on strike. 

 

And I think that that's very, very serious when you take into 

consideration that one of these ships out of the west coast ports 

could be the equivalent of all the grain in my constituency — one 

of them. And that is the impact that it is to my constituency, and 

it's a very, very serious one. And I think that the way the resolution 

has been moved and amended, I think is absolutely necessary. It 

impacts very, very seriously in my constituency. 

 

I want to also say that in the ports as it relates to Thunder Bay, 

there is a lot of grain there. However, the way the system works is 

that grains are graded and moved out into the shipping areas by 

grade. People buy them by grade. They buy various kinds of 

commodities — they have feed grains no. 1, no. 2, no. 3. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is what they buy. And if that isn't in position in those 

ports, and there's no access into that position because they've been 

moving it through on the direct flow, then we have a very serious 

problem. 

 

The other thing that I want to say about the northern half of the 

province, and that I think is very important, is that CN delivers to 

Churchill. And Churchill really only delivers in the summer time. 

It impacts in your seat, Mr.  

Speaker. It impacts all of the north-east, and we need to have an 

opportunity to move that grain out of that port at Churchill. And I 

think that we have to seriously consider the impact that this has in 

our province here. 

 

Now the problem deals with a couple of other things that I want to 

mention, and that is the hurt imposed on the people of 

Saskatchewan who are grain producers. And the hurt is felt in 

many. many areas. What it does really, Mr. Speaker, it gives every 

one of the problems that we have in agriculture today an emphasis. 

And we have to deal with them in specific ways. You have the 

impact it is on the cash flow in Saskatchewan today. It's negative. 

 

What does it do to the opportunity for people to recognize that 

Canada is a consistent deliverer of a quality product? What does it 

do to us as it relates to that? It says that they can't rely on us to 

provide for that kind of opportunity to deliver the grain. That's 

what it says. And that, Mr. Speaker, is reputation. What kind of 

reputation do we have when we consistently, as the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena said, have a strike in one sector last year; we 

have a strike in another sector this year. What are they going to 

strike on us next year? 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is consistency of supply. It's absolutely 

necessary for that grain to move into the market. That's what 

customers want. We have the highest quality; we produce well; we 

have 20 per cent of the market. Do we want to lose that for our 

producers in Saskatchewan? No, we don't. And therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe it is imperative on the people of this Assembly 

and of the people in Ottawa to move on this as quickly as possible. 

 

The thing that I think is also necessary to do, and why it is 

important that we discuss this in a reasonable way, is that the 

federal government has to be made aware of the problem it is 

creating for us. And, Mr. Speaker, our Premier has done this on a 

number of occasions, as has the Minister of Transportation and 

Highways. And that is extremely important, and I want to deal 

with that to some extent, too. 

 

The Premier has emphasized agriculture in many, many ways. 

And I believe that because of who he is and what he is and what 

he does, the kinds of things that he talks to the Deputy Premier 

who was in Saskatchewan recently, the Minister of Indian and 

native concerns — these are high-ranking cabinet officials. In 

discussions with them, the Premier presented these ideas to them. 

They have to deal with them, and we have to place that emphasis 

upon them. 

 

I want to just point out another thing, Mr. Speaker, that is very, 

very important. The Premier is meeting this week with all of the 

premiers in Canada. It is extremely important that this message be 

related to those other premiers who are impacted just as negatively 

as we are. For example, the negative impact in the province of 

Alberta in relation to their grain production; the negative aspect it 

is to the Premier of British Columbia in moving those 

commodities off of his ports. We don't want to have a negative 

reputation about the kind of port facilities that we have in western 

Canada. We don't, and neither do they. But we will have a 

negative impact on our customers if we don't deliver those 

commodities on time  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2011 

 

and when we've said we would. 

 

(1615) 

 

And we pay — that's the way it's always worked; it's the producer 

who pays — we pay for those boats to sit there. We pay for them 

to . . . in the delay in loading. And all of them, Mr. Speaker, are 

negative to the grain production, to the kind of payments we 

already have had slashed because of high world production. And 

that is a serious problem. 

 

Those aspects, Mr. Speaker, are some of the reasons why I will be 

supporting this motion as amended. And they re very, very 

important. 

 

I want to deal with a couple of other things. And one was raised by 

the member from Moose Jaw, and I can sympathize with some of 

the things that he said. However, I want to deal with one of those 

issues. I can recall, Mr. Speaker, as a young boy, standing and 

watching the people thresh on the threshing machine. And there 

were about four or five people standing around that threshing 

machine. They were busy. Their work was important, because 

they were with a squirt can putting oil on every one of those 

bearings. 

 

But today, Mr. Speaker, it isn't that way. One guy, one person — 

whether it's male or female, it doesn't matter — they can go and sit 

down in a combine. They have almost every turning . . . a bearing 

with a monitor on it. They know when one quits; they know when 

it stops. They know when they're pushing too much grain over. 

These are technological things that we have put into place in our 

farms in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have a delivery system second to none in the world. We have 

the capacity, if we want to change with technology to deliver even 

more grain than we have, in almost record volumes this year, 

which is a credit to those railroad workers. However, we have to 

begin to look at rationalizing ourself in relation to the kinds of 

grain we can deliver, and that is through technology in the delivery 

of grain. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that we vote for 

this motion — the motion as amended, and I will be supporting it 

completely. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

anxious to say a few words in this emergency debate this 

afternoon under rule 39. By the terms of the motion that is now 

before us, Mr. Speaker, we are concerned with the work stoppage 

in Canada's rail system, the first such major disruption in about 14 

years. As negotiations between the railways and their employees 

began to falter last week, some unauthorized work actions began 

to take place, mostly in eastern Canada. And as the bargaining, 

Mr. Speaker, ground to a full halt over this past weekend, the 

problem grew into a full-scale, nation-wide strike. And as of 

today, nothing is moving by rail anywhere. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is obviously a big problem everywhere  

in Canada, but I submit to you that it's a special and severe 

problem for us here in Saskatchewan. As in so many other 

instances in this country, our geography and other factors work 

against us, and we're caught in a very serious disadvantage. 

 

Among other things, Mr. Speaker, two of our prime bulk 

commodities, grain and potash, move almost exclusively by rail. 

Without fully functioning and expeditious rail service, our grain 

and our potash are in big trouble. And that trouble comes, Mr. 

Speaker, not when grain and potash are otherwise buoyant, but 

when both are under very extreme pressure. 

 

Every informed commentator, particularly from the farm sector, 

Mr. Speaker, that I have heard speak on this problem in the last 

few hours, including the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Western 

Canada Wheat Growers Association, and others, have indicated 

that a disruption of only a few hours, or at most a few days, might 

be tolerable. But beyond that I think there is common agreement 

across Saskatchewan, the damage that would be inflicted would be 

irreparable. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I raised the subject-matter which is 

before us in this motion and the amendment this afternoon, I 

raised that same subject-matter in this House last week, and that is 

recorded at page 1928 in Hansard. 

 

In my question at that time, Mr. Speaker, I tried to put, as carefully 

as I could, both sides of this delicate matter. I emphasized the 

importance of the bargaining process and the need to give it every 

opportunity to succeed, every encouragement to succeed, every 

assistance to succeed. I also acknowledged though, Mr. Speaker, 

last week, the possibility that the bargaining might not succeed, 

and that legislated action might be required. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, under rule 39, I had a draft motion in 

hand to bring this matter back before the House for special 

attention this afternoon. with the motion presented by the Leader 

of the Opposition, and with the subsequent amendment moved by 

the Minister of Highways, my motion will not now be necessary, 

but it was ready to go. 

 

The exact language, Mr. Speaker, that is used in the main motion 

and then in the subsequent amendment would not be exactly my 

first choice for the wording that we should use today. But in the 

general sense and in the general direction, I believe the motion, 

together with the amendment, are basically on the right track. 

 

First — and this is very important, Mr. Speaker — give the 

negotiations their final best chance, with every possible 

encouragement and assistance, their final best chance to succeed. 

But secondly, within a specific and rather tight time frame, if the 

bargaining proves fruitless, then move promptly with legislation, 

and get the grain and the potash and the other commodities 

moving again. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to make one specific point. When I call 

for legislation, if necessary, to resolve this argument between the 

railway companies and their employees, I do not want to be taken 

as necessarily being on the railway's side of the dispute. Often in 

the debate  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2012 

 

that flows back and forth in this kind of a dispute, or any other 

kind of industrial dispute where legislation is contemplated, Mr. 

Speaker, there seems to be the underlying presumption that if there 

is to be legislation, then it must be by definition anti-worker 

legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that that need not be 

the case. Legislation may indeed be needed in the next two or 

three days to end the work stoppage and to get the goods moving 

again. But the specific legislation that is chosen to do that job must 

be fair. It must be even handed and it must be respectful of the 

railway employees and it need not be anti-worker legislation. 

 

I think for example, Mr. Speaker, of the first occasion when I 

entered an elected Assembly in this country. It was in 1974 when I 

became a member of parliament for the Assiniboia constituency. 

And the very first piece of legislation that had to be dealt with by 

that new parliament in 1974 was a piece of legislation to bring to 

an end another work stoppage that was affecting farmers and the 

grains industry. 

 

It had to do with grain handlers, if I remember correctly, on the 

west coast. And in that particular dispute, Mr. Speaker, there was a 

conciliator's report that had been written. The union had accepted 

that report, management had not, and parliament was faced with 

the dilemma of what to do. And in those circumstances, in 1974, 

parliament chose to legislate not the position of management but, 

in fact, the conciliator's report which was the position of the 

employees. And with that report legislated, it turned out to be a 

pro-worker settlement. And as it turns out after the fact, Mr. 

Speaker, there was no major disruption in that particular aspect of 

our grain handling system for many, many years. 

 

And accordingly, I cite that example simply not to use it as any 

precise precedent to deal with this particular problem that we're 

faced with this afternoon, but to make the point that those who 

seem to presume that legislation is necessarily going to be 

anti-worker or anti-employee should not necessarily make that 

presumption because there are other alternatives. And if the 

legislation is carefully and thoughtfully drafted, if it turns out to be 

necessary then, Mr. Speaker, I think we can have a Bill that would 

deal with this situation in a fair way. And I would certainly say to 

the Government of Canada, if it comes to that — if it comes to 

legislation two or three days down the road; if it comes to that — 

then the Government of Canada should be well-advised to think of 

the safety issue, to think of the technology issue, to think of the 

railway promises that have been broken — broken not only to 

their employees, but broken to farmers and others in western 

Canada. Think of all of those factors as you go about drafting the 

right kind of Bill to deal with the job. You must be fair. You must 

be even handed. You must be reasonable. And the Government of 

Canada should not leave itself open to accusations, justified or 

otherwise, of it being anti-worker in its orientation as it moves 

about to settle this particular dispute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure all of us hope that it doesn't come to that. 

I'm sure all of us hope that with every encouragement and every 

possible form of assistance brought to bear on the situation, that a 

solution can be found short of legislation, where in fact the 

bargaining  

process can yield the right result. That, I'm sure, is what we would 

all hope to see happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if in fact that is not possible, if in fact with the best of 

intentions and the best of efforts there is not a negotiated 

settlement, then I ask members to think ahead 72 hours, two or 

three days down the road. If there is no settlement by then by 

negotiation, Mr. Speaker, then I think the problem that we'll have 

on our hands is a problem, from the point of view of the farmer or 

the potash producer or the bulk shippers in Saskatchewan, the 

problem that we will have on our hands then is going to be near a 

crisis. 

 

The burden will fall very heavily on some within our country, Mr. 

Speaker. I submit it will fall inordinately heavily upon farmers in 

Saskatchewan. The Government of Canada, in that eventuality of 

failure in the negotiations, the Government of Canada must be 

prepared to legislate. And in speaking in support of both the 

motion and the amendment, Mr. Speaker, I think we in this 

legislature have to be prepared to say so. Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to enter into the 

debate today because of the seriousness which we in 

Saskatchewan and we, as agricultural producers, find ourselves in. 

We find ourselves caught in the middle of a dispute between the 

railway workers of Canada and the two major railroads. 

 

And I have listened with great interest to the debate today, Mr. 

Speaker, as members from both sides have laid out their points of 

concern. I've seen the members from the opposition benches 

stating that for the employees it is necessary to address the 

question of job security. I've heard members on this side of the 

House talk about the seriousness of the resource industries and the 

grain sector for the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

(1630) 

 

I think that it's imperative that we recognize that the federal 

government has addressed the collective bargaining procedure to 

the best of their ability. Since the threat of strike has been hanging 

over the heads of the people of Saskatchewan, that collective 

bargaining procedure has moved ahead to the best of its ability. It 

has obviously not been working. The federal government has 

sought to put in place both a mediator and an arbitrator to try and 

facilitate the process. I hope that that process is successful. 

 

And as the member from Elphinstone made in his opening 

remarks, if the constitutional process in Canada can be done 

overnight, then surely the railroads and their employees, with the 

seriousness of the situation facing Canada, will be willing to go 

into Ottawa and work with a federal mediator and resolve this 

process in short order. If, however, they are reluctant to use this 

process to settle this dispute, then for the good of Canada, and 

particularly for the good of Saskatchewan, it is incumbent upon 

legislators in this country, both at the federal and provincial level, 

to move this process forward and get the railcars moving again. 

 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2013 

 

I have heard members opposite talk about the nationalization of 

the CPR. And I want to make it very clear that the CPR doesn't 

have a lot of friends on this of the House. Those of us who farm 

for a living know the history of the CPR and some of the 

shenanigans which that particular company has pulled in regard to 

the western Canadian farmer and western Canadians in general. 

And I certainly wouldn't have wanted to belong to a party which 

would have appointed the former president of the CPR, Mr. 

Sinclair, to the Senate. And I don't think that anyone in these 

benches would condone that type of action. So I think I've made it 

very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the sin is obviously on both sides. 

 

And I think that both the union and companies involved should 

have been thinking down the road to the employment 

opportunities which will have to be provided to some of the 

employees as technology and rationalization takes place in the 

transportation sector in this country. And it is not suitable for 

either the employer — who, in this case, half of it is the federal 

government — or a large, strong union of 50,000 strong like the 

amalgamated rail unions are, to not be addressing this question 

prior to strike action. 

 

It is incumbent upon all parties, when faced with technological 

advance, to start thinking and talking about these things well in 

advance of any possible strike action. And I think it's incumbent 

upon those two bodies to start addressing these questions before 

they cannot talk to each other over a bargaining table. 

 

It's very sad, Mr. Speaker, that history must always repeat itself in 

western Canada. The last time we went through this exercise in 

'72-73, we were just coming out of a four-year slump in grain 

markets. Those were the days of $1.28 wheat and a four-bushel 

quota. And you, Mr. Speaker, being a agriculturalist, know that the 

pressures put upon rural Saskatchewan during that time-frame 

from 1969 to 1973, and how we were scraping and clawing our 

way out of that particular recession, and then we had a rail strike. 

And it went on for some 10 days, I believe, before legislation was 

used to solve that particular situation. 

 

So it is sad that the railroads, that the Government of Canada, and 

the unions cannot learn from past experience and resolve these 

issues before it comes down to strike action, especially when the 

western Canadian grain producer is down and out and needing 

every available dollar that he can get his hands on. 

 

I am told that Saskatchewan's contribution to the national grain 

sales works out to about 300,000 tonnes per week. That means 

$40 million in delayed revenue into the hands of producers in this 

province — a delayed revenue, Mr. Speaker, that isn't making 

bank payments, that isn't paying fuel dealers, is not paying 

equipment dealers, is not putting repairs on those combines which 

are now in the middle of harvest time. 

 

A 40 million delay per week is totally unacceptable to the grain 

sector in this province. And if we add on the potash sectors, the 

timber sectors, and the other commodity sectors, it is simply 

unacceptable to the province of Saskatchewan to bear those losses 

on an ongoing basis. 

 

I understand that the negotiations, the settlements that have been 

proposed are in the 2 to 4 per cent range. And I suppose, Mr. 

Speaker, that in the realm of labour relations in Canada today, that 

is not totally unacceptable. But when you compare it to a 40 per 

cent cut in real income for a large sector of the Saskatchewan 

economy in the last two years, it makes it very difficult for rural 

Saskatchewan to look upon any wage increase. When it is brought 

together with a national strike causing such great hurt, I don't think 

then a wage increase is acceptable. 

 

If this thing can be done through the arbitration process, Mr. 

Speaker, then perhaps people out in rural Saskatchewan will live 

with it. But they certainly aren't prepared to suffer enormous hurt 

and then grant a wage increase to the employees. 

 

My colleague from Morse talked a great deal about the 

market-place out there today, and I think he outlined to all 

members of the House the precarious position that Canadian 

producers are in. We have been able to attain market share by 

good marketing, good transportation, and reliability of delivery to 

our customers, a reputation which has been built over the last 25 

years. 

 

There are competitors out there who will certainly take advantage 

of the situation if those ships are not filled on time, do not reach 

their destinations on time, and fulfil our obligations. We know that 

other countries and other associations, like the EEC (European 

Economic Community), are prepared to step in, take our markets 

away, and we cannot afford that, Mr. Speaker. It is incumbent, 

now of all times, to meet those commitments and keep our 

customers in the years to come. 

 

I say to the members of the railway unions: I know that the 

pressure is on for rationalization. But I say to them that they must 

clean up their own act too. 

 

And I think back, being a Moose Jaw boy, to a cabinet minister 

who sat in this House for 11 years when the former party were in 

power, and that person maintained his bumping rights over 

younger people in the city of Moose Jaw the whole time he sat in 

this House drawing down a very good salary. And there were 

young men back there who were raising families, trying to educate 

their children, and the very fact that a man could sit in this House 

for 11 years as a cabinet minister and walk back in there and tell a 

younger man to sit down because I'm taking that trip, to me seems 

to be totally unacceptable. If people are going to maintain an 

archaic system such as that in this day and age, then I don't think it 

is acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent upon both sides to get down to 

business. Mr. Kelly has a reputation Canada-wide for solving 

labour disputes. I think he is a fair gentleman. And as the member 

from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg pointed out, legislation is not always 

detrimental to the worker in these situations. And I'm sure if, 

through the mediation and arbitration process, that it comes out 

and is well spelled out, that in this particular situation the 

grievances are honest and well put forward, then, Mr. Speaker, I 

would not hesitate to back legislation that brought that fact 

forward. 

 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2014 

 

But I think in the interests of Saskatchewan and, indeed, Canada, 

we cannot afford to have this situation prolonged any great 

duration, and that is why the amendment to the motion, I feel, is 

both fair and honest in assessing the situation which is before us. It 

gives a limited amount of time for some very hard-nosed 

bargaining. It gives a limited amount of time for the people 

involved in this process to realize how utterly serious the situation 

is. 

 

And as the member from Elphinstone pointed out, it seems when 

there is a will in this country to solve a question, it can be done 

overnight with some hard bargaining. Well, the will must be there 

from both sides, and it must be done, and if it is not, then, Mr. 

Speaker, legislation is essential for the good of all in this country, 

and I'll be happy to support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased, 

Mr. Speaker, to enter into this debate and I begin, Mr. Speaker, by 

making it very clear that I enter into this debate supporting the 

main motion and opposing the amendment put forth by the 

members opposite. 

 

The motion that I support, Mr. Speaker, and as a reminder to all: 

 

That this Assembly regrets that the nation-wide industrial 

dispute between the railways and their employees has 

disrupted the rail transportation system which is critically 

important to Saskatchewan's economy, and especially to 

Saskatchewan's agricultural economy; and further, that this 

Assembly hereby urges the Prime Minister of Canada to use 

his good offices to achieve an immediate resolution of this 

dispute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suppose there won't be a lot of occasions, but I wish 

to begin by agreeing with a point made or raised by the member 

from Morse, who said that he saw the issue facing the nation today 

being one of reliability of Canada's national rail transportation 

system. 

 

And I think that is the point, Mr. Speaker. That is the issue that is 

facing Canadian people today, be they taxpayers, be they people 

who are shipping goods, be they agricultural, or be they railway 

workers, Mr. Speaker. That is an issue that is confronting us here 

today, not only reliability of the national rail transportation system 

in August of 1987, but very possibly for years into the future. 

 

And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the most reliable national 

rail transportation system is one, as a matter of fact, in which 

management and labour are working together — working together 

with common objectives, Mr. Speaker, that are in everyone's best 

interest, not only each of them from their prospective — their own 

objectives — but in the best interests of all of us, all Canadians 

who rely on a national rail transportation system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this morning before coming over to the Legislative 

Assembly I stopped to speak with some of the  

525 CP Rail employees in Moose Jaw who were out on the picket 

lines today. And they told me, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I would appreciate it if the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena would cut his wisecrack remarks and listen to 

some serious comments for a change, and maybe he'll learn 

something. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Because those workers, Mr. Speaker, those 

workers told me they wanted to go back to work. They want to go 

back to work moving Saskatchewan grain to the ports in Canada. 

That more than anything else, Mr. Speaker, is what those railway 

workers were telling me they want to be doing. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that I join with them. I join with those 

railway workers in Moose Jaw and, I believe, across this province 

and across this nation who want to go back to work to move 

Saskatchewan grain to Canadian ports. 

 

(1645) 

 

So what are the issues? What are the issues, Mr. Speaker . . . 

(inaudible interjections) . . . The member from Regina South — 

he's an expert on these issues, obviously. He has comments from 

his seat; perhaps he'll share some of his wisdom from his feet. He 

asks, Mr. Speaker, why don't they? And there are basically two 

issues that have led to this dispute and that lead us to the point that 

we find ourselves in today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of those issues is not wages. I understand that that's not really 

a critical issue keeping the management and employees apart in 

this negotiations, but basically there are two issues that divide 

them. One is the issue of contracting out, and the other is the issue 

of job security, where people who have dedicated their careers to 

an employer, ensuring that as a result of their efforts that we have 

a reliable transportation system, are being threatened, Mr. Speaker, 

with a loss of their jobs. 

 

And I understand, as well, that the associated railway union, by all 

reports and by all comments I have heard, are more than willing to 

be realistic. Most important of all, Mr. Speaker, they're willing to 

talk and they're willing to arrive at negotiated solutions. And that 

has to be the objective. That has to be the objective. Anyone, 

anyone understands insecurity and the threat of loss of 

employment, the threat of the loss of opportunity to provide for 

families and people, Mr. Speaker, who are affected as employees 

in this dispute, are not living with fictitious threats being made. I 

refer, Mr. Speaker, to a Canadian Press story dated August 27, 

1986, Mr. Speaker, in which it says, and I quote: 

 

Canadian National plans to eliminate 14,000 positions by 1990, 

reducing its work-force by almost a quarter. 

 

By almost a quarter, Mr. Speaker. And it goes on to say, quoting 

CN spokesman, Don Law: 

 

We certainly won't be able to achieve this goal through early 

retirement alone. 

 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2015 

 

And then he continues: 

 

People will be bumped, and others may lose employment. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, strikes me as being a fairly straightforward 

statement which would be a statement of concern, I think, to 

anyone who is employed by a rail company. And can you blame 

them? Can any of us blame them for wanting to have some degree 

of security in providing for their families? Well these are tough 

times, Mr. Speaker, we all agree. These are tough times for 

farmers — farmers who with this particular situation that's before 

us need reliable rail transportation system. 

 

These are tough times for railway workers, Mr. Speaker — 

railway workers who also need the railways to be running to 

provide for their families and to participate in their communities. 

These are tough times, Mr. Speaker, for all Canadians, in many 

ways, and Canadians who rely on a national transportation system 

to move goods across the country. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, these are not tough times for railways 

— they're not tough times for railways. Let me refer you, Mr. 

Speaker, to some quarterly reports from CN Rail and CP Rail. I 

see the railway expert from Weyburn is speaking from his seat. 

I'm sure he too will want to entertain us with his insightful view of 

the world, and I await that speech with deep anticipation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me refer to the facts, Mr. Speaker, that Canadian 

National Rail, in the first quarter of this year of 1987, had . . . is it 

in tough times, Mr. Speaker? Well I don't know. Is a profit of 

$17.7 million in the first quarter, is that tough times? I think there 

are a lot of people in this nation who would enjoy having tough 

times where you make $17 million in the first quarter. 

 

Well how are Canadian Pacific railroad — the good friends of the 

members opposite, and we'll get to that later — how are Canadian 

Pacific railroad doing after having wrapped up 1986 with a $119 

million in profit — how's Canadian Pacific Rail doing now, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Well in the first quarter they made a profit of $24.471 million, as 

compared to nearly 19 million last year in the first quarter. In the 

second quarter, Mr. Speaker, they're still . . . these are tough times, 

they're going . . . this is negative tough times, because in the 

second quarter, Mr. Speaker, CP Rail declared a profit of $61.549 

million. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's tragic. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Not only is that tragic for Canadian people, Mr. 

Speaker, it's also double what they made in the second quarter last 

year. So tough times for farmers, tough times for railway workers, 

tough times for Canadians, but not tough times for the railways, 

Mr. Speaker, and most of all, not tough times for CP Rail. 

 

Well we come to the amendment, Mr. Speaker, the amendment 

which says that . . . will show the flag for 72 hours, I believe is 

what it says, and then after we show them the flag, and all gone 

through a little song and dance routine, we're going to bring in 

legislation. The PC  

solution — bring in legislation. 

 

And I ask: whose agenda would bringing in legislation fit? Whose 

agenda would lit fit, Mr. Speaker? Would it fit the agenda of 

farmers who need a reliable rail transportation system in which 

management and employees are working together? I suggest not. 

Would it fit the agenda of the railway workers who are looking for 

job security more than anything else, Mr. Speaker? I suggest not. 

Would it fit the agenda of CP Rail? Mr. Speaker, very clearly I 

say, yes. And why do I say that? I say that, Mr. Speaker, because 

there's an old saying. The old saying is he who pays piper calls the 

tune. 

 

And so what do we notice, Mr. Speaker? I find it interesting — the 

member from Thunder Creek says CPR doesn't have friends on 

this side of the House. Well that's either an oversight on his part or 

an attempt to be humorous, Mr. Speaker, because let me refer you 

to the 1986 federal contributions by the Canadian Pacific 

companies to the federal Progressive Conservative Party — the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Canada, which is the 

government of the day, which would put forth the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And what do we find in 1986? Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd. 

contributed to the federal PC Party $9,048; Canadian Pacific 

Airlines Ltd. contributed $954.50; Canadian Pacific Express 

contributed $607.30; Marathon Realty Company Ltd. contributed 

$1,514.70; and Pan-Canadian Petroleum Ltd. contributed $5,000. 

 

But what about the big one, Mr. Speaker? What about the big one? 

What about Canadian Pacific Ltd. which is a holding company for 

all CP companies, including CP Rail? How much did the 

Canadian Pacific Ltd. . . And the member from Meadow Lake, 

you'll take great interest in this. I don't know if you've got your 

share from the trough here yet, but we'll look forward to your 

words of wisdom later on as well. 

 

How much did Canadian Pacific Ltd. contribute to the federal PC 

Party of Canada in 1986? $56,375, Mr. Speaker. From the 

Canadian Pacific companies, in Canada, last year to the federal 

Progressive Conservative Party of Canada, donations of 

$73,499.50. Now, Mr. Speaker, he who pays the piper calls the 

tune. And if you believe, I say to all members of this House, if you 

believe that legislation would be in the best interest of anybody but 

Canadian Pacific Rail, then you believe in the tooth fairy. 

 

I call, Mr. Speaker, on this motion that is put forth by the member 

from Regina Elphinstone, for the Prime Minister to use his good 

office, to use his good office in the interest of all Canadians, not in 

the interests of Canadian Pacific Rail, but in the interest of all 

Canadians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We saw, some months ago, the Prime Minister of this nation 

engage the first ministers of the provinces of our country in a style 

of negotiation similar to labour negotiations, where he gathered 

them together in a room and they sat together all night and they 

hammered out an agreement that they could all live with. 

 

Now many have questioned the wisdom of that style of  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2016 

 

negotiations in arriving at that kind of an agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

But I say this: if the Prime Minister, in the purported best interests 

of the nation, will bring together the first ministers of the 

provinces of Canada, and involve them in round-the-clock 

negotiations until they hammer out an agreement that they can all 

live with, why then, Mr. Speaker, can the Prime Minister of 

Canada not offer that same kind of service to the people of Canada 

bringing together management and the employee representatives 

of the railways in this country to sit around the clock and hammer 

out an agreement that they can all live with? 

 

Because we know, we know, Mr. Speaker, that when management 

and labour hammer out an agreement with which they can all live, 

that that is the kind of agreement that provides the best security to 

the rail transportation system of Canada, to its people, to our 

farmers here in Saskatchewan who want to get their grain to port. 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it is for those reasons that I stand 

here today opposed to the amendment calling for a legislative 

conclusion, and in support of the motion, which urges the Prime 

Minister of Canada to use his good office to achieve an immediate 

resolution of this dispute, a resolution for the good of all Canadian 

people, including the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would 

like to join in the debate on this motion and the amendment. I 

think I, like all other farmers across Saskatchewan, and for that 

matter I suppose, many potash workers and those who've worked 

in the forest industry — virtually any of those industries, of which 

Saskatchewan has many, where our goods are shipped to our 

customers by rail — have been concerned over the past several 

days and weeks when listening to their radios or televisions or 

reading the newspapers, there was constantly stories on a possible 

rail strike. 

 

And I have no doubt that it's been weighing on, certainly, the 

farmers' minds now for some several weeks as these press reports 

continue to abound. And now our worst fears have been realized 

and, in fact, we do have a national rail strike, Mr. Speaker. And I 

say that it . . . Our farmers have been . . . this has been weighing 

on their minds for some several days and weeks now, and I'm sure 

brought back remembrances of last summer when we had a grain 

handlers' strike, which once again put our farm economy in 

jeopardy and was a serious situation, albeit that places like 

Weyburn, I might add, Mr. Speaker, were able through the 

Weyburn Inland Terminal to accommodate our export shipments 

by sending out unit trains, and doing cleaning there to export 

standards. So to some degree some of the hurt there was averted. 

 

But because this has been weighing on farmers' minds for some 

several weeks, Mr. Speaker, and because our Premier has an 

excellent sense of what makes this province tick, he, in early days 

of August, wrote to the Hon. Pierre Cadieux, Minister of Labour. 

And just to quote a couple of paragraphs from this letter of the 

Premier's to Mr. Cadieux, Mr. Speaker, it starts off by saying: 

 

I send this letter to respectfully request that you use the 

powers of your office to ensure a successful completion of 

the current negotiations between railway management and 

labour. 

 

And he ends up by again saying, and I quote: 

 

Again, I would implore you to take whatever action is 

necessary to avoid a rail strike. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, our Premier, sensing the economic 

devastation that could be wrought upon our farmers if a national 

rail strike were to happen, had already made an intervention to the 

federal government in early August of this year. 

 

As well, because of the seriousness . . . When the Premier met 

with the Hon. Bill McKnight, the minister in charge of western 

diversification, a very important initiative for the federal 

government, indeed, all of western Canada, this issue was raised, 

as it was with the member for . . . member of parliament and the 

Deputy Prime Minister, Don Mazankowski, when they visited 

with our Premier just a few short days ago. 

 

As well, given that the situation worsened this morning, our 

Minister of Highways and Transportation wrote Mr. Crosbie. And 

the opening line in his telex . . . rather, it was a telex, Mr. Speaker, 

the opening line in his telex said it all, and I quote: 

 

I am requesting that you take whatever action is necessary to 

end the current railway strike. 

 

And in that one short sentence I think our minister said it all. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, we were happy to see today the Minister 

of Labour, federally, Mr. Crosbie, announce that he's asked for 

both parties to come back to the bargaining table to have one more 

go at negotiations with the view to solving this strike and this 

dispute that can wreak hardship on all of our resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It being 5 o'clock, this House now 

stands recessed until 7 o'clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


