













































July 24, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 24, 1987 

 

 

1371 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Deputy Clerk: — I beg to inform the Assembly that Mr. 

Speaker will not be present to open this sitting. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Sauder: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I shall 

on Tuesday next move, pursuant to rule 16 of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly encourages the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada to pursue 

strategies that will provide access to Canadian, United 

States and world uranium markets in order to ensure a 

viable uranium industry in Saskatchewan, to provide 

employment for northern Saskatchewan, and to protect the 

significant investment of Saskatchewan tax dollars that has 

been made. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next move: 

 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 

Canada its strong opposition to a comprehensive free trade 

treaty with the United States; and further, that this 

Assembly sees a negotiation of such a bilateral trade treaty 

as a threat to the future of prairie agriculture harmful to the 

continued health of our unique social program and 

incompatible with Canadians’ desire for economic 

self-determination. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker . . .  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member for Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next move: 

 

That this Assembly call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to reverse its harmful and senseless 

cost-cutting decisions at Saskatchewan’s technical 

institutes including: the dismissal of 140 instructors, the 

elimination of dozens of programs offered at all technical 

institutes, and reduction in number of student training 

spaces at the technical institutes by 1,100; and further, that 

this Assembly go on record as being opposed to any 

attempts by the Government of Saskatchewan to reduce 

the deficit on the backs of Saskatchewan students. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Legal Aid Commission Fees 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I direct my question to the 

Minister of Social Services, the minister who attempts to 

continue to deny his responsibility for the Legal Aid 

Commission. 

 

Mr. Minister, you will be aware, I’m sure - if you aren’t, you 

should be - that yesterday afternoon a spokesman from the 

Legal Aid Commission confirmed that beginning on Monday, 

August 3, a week from next Monday, legal fees shall be charged 

to legal aid clients in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: can you tell this 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan what that new policy 

will be? And will you not agree that charging fees for legal aid 

clients, people who qualify because, by definition, they are not 

able to afford legal services on their own, will you not agree 

that that move defeats the whole purpose of legal aid in the first 

place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Possibly the member opposite and I 

both saw the same media report which indicated that a member 

of the commission had made some statements. The official 

spokesperson is the chairperson of that commission, or the 

acting chairperson, and I have no communication or further 

word from the acting chairperson that they have made a 

decision. 

 

You will note that the same media report also indicated that 

legal aid had not yet decided how they were going to go about 

meeting their budget. So, therefore, once I have the information 

officially, rather than through the media and as part of leaks and 

everything else, then I will consider the matter and take 

everything into account. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, and Mr. Minister. You are 

the minister in this House responsible for the Legal Aid 

Commission, and you are telling us today that following 

yesterday’s question period, in which this was a topic of 

discussion, you failed to communicate with the chairman of the 

Legal Aid Commission. 

 

Will you tell this House today, Mr. Minister, and will you tell 

the people of Saskatchewan, what that new fee schedule will be 

that is intended to be implemented one week from this coming 

Monday? Will you tell us the facts, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, when the Legal Aid Commission 

has decided, I’m sure that your sources of information will tell 

the public. But right now they haven’t decided. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — You’ve got to start coming clean with us on 

this issue, Mr. Minister. The fact of the matter is, and 

practically everybody in Saskatoon knows it, that the 

commission decided to impose a contribution system as early as 

June 26. And it stretches my credibility that you don’t admit 

knowing that. I mean, what kind of a minister are you if you 

don’t know that sort of thing? 

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1372 

 

You must also know that the commission met yesterday 

morning at a meeting that ended before your telephone call with 

the acting chairman, and that at that meeting all the commission 

was considering was how this fee schedule was going to settle 

on certain people - would there be any exemptions. Now I ask 

you, Minister, to stand in your place and admit that that is a 

correct statement of the facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m not denying it isn’t correct because 

I can only go by what the chairman tells me. All right? I believe 

that the media reports are accurate. I don’t doubt that they will 

come up with some sort of fee structure, but they haven’t 

decided. And if they haven’t decided what it is, how am I 

supposed to know what it is? 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

the whole thrust of your answers has been that you don’t know 

anything about a fee schedule. And all I’m asking you to do for 

now is to admit that as of June 26 the Legal Aid Commission 

has decided that there will be a contribution system and that you 

know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I have already stated publicly, and I 

have stated to the media on television, that I’m not opposed to 

some form of fee structure for those people who have some 

money to pay something towards their legal services. Surely the 

prostitutes of Regina and drug dealers, who have capital to deal 

in drugs, can come up with a little bit of money towards their 

defence. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A shocking statement - a shocking statement 

from the minister in charge. You know perfectly well . . . I’ll 

wait until the Minister of Finance stops briefing you. 

 

You know perfectly well the kind of people who are coming to 

your legal aid commission for help, and they’re not prostitutes, 

and they’re not drug dealers. They’re people without money 

who need legal services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now I want to know what happens; what’s to 

happen under this fancy new plan that you apparently now 

admit you approve of. I want to know what happens when a 

person in trouble, without money, comes to the commission and 

the legal aid clinic asks for its fee, and this person says, I don’t 

have any money. 

 

Now what’s that kind of a person going to do who doesn’t have 

the money and isn’t able to put up the cash in advance? Are 

they going to be denied legal representation? Is that the decision 

that you’re apparently supporting, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No one . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Where’s the swastika? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, I take exception to the  

allegations the members are making from their seat, and I don’t 

think they would be proud of them. Publicly accusing the 

member for Melville of being a Nazi is not parliamentary 

language, and I take exception to that type of conduct. 

 

With respect to the provision of legal services to those people in 

need and to families in particular - I’m also the Minister of 

Social Services - all families will be protected and will be 

receiving legal services, if necessary. And the Department of 

Social Services has the ability to allocate special needs, so you 

need not be concerned; all families will be able to receive legal 

services in this province. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well, supplementary, Mr. Minister. Why go 

ahead with this stupid program then? If you’re going to extend 

legal services without fee to the people who don’t have any 

money, why are we standing here debating this ridiculous idea 

now? 

 

I ask you again: where are your priorities? What is it that impels 

this government to seat another $500,000 out of the legal aid 

program and put this commission into a position where it has to 

try and decide whether to cut this or cut that, or charge fees to 

poor people, or deny service to other people? What’s it all 

about, Minister? You’ve got all kinds of places where you can 

make cuts without taking it from the pocket of people who 

don’t have any money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I say to the member opposite, who is 

also a lawyer, that he must have information such as I have that 

the legal aid system could be run better administratively. 

 

A few days ago I phoned a clinic at quarter to 5. There was no 

answer. I understand they don’t work after 4:30 at that 

particular clinic. You know that they are one of the only, is not 

the only, unionized law firms in Saskatchewan. You also know 

that they have paralegals that are paid substantial sums of 

money . . .  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I can’t hear the 

minister’s response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The member opposite may not have 

personal experience of court the way I have, but I have personal 

experience to see what paralegals have been doing all day while 

legal aid lawyers were practising law. And there are some 

efficiencies that can be made at legal aid. 

 

And if all of Saskatchewan has to be run efficiently, surely legal 

aid can be run efficiently, and should consider their 8 per cent 

reduction and do their best to run their affairs efficiently. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. I am not a 

person who is easily shocked, but you’ve shocked me a second 

time within the last 10 minutes. Now you’re telling this 

Assembly that the staff at the legal aid clinics around 

Saskatchewan are inefficient, and the minister must know that 

that’s not true. These people are  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1373 

 

overworked. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Everyone in the legal system knows the legal 

aid lawyers have got about four times as much work as they can 

now handle. And, Minister, what you’re saying has got beans 

all to do with the nefarious scheme to charge legal fees to 

people who are there because they don’t have any money. 

 

Now I ask you to stand in your place in this legislature and 

assure us that you’ll tell the commission that this idea isn’t on, 

and that you’ll restore proper funding to the Legal Aid 

Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I think the member opposite also 

knows - he’s a lawyer - that we are having difficulty having the 

criminal court sit on Fridays because legal aid, the lawyers are 

not available on Fridays. We’re having to run a court system 

four days a week, and therefore we have to examine how these 

legal services are delivered. 

 

Collapse of Investment Firms 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier. It deals with the negligence of his government and his 

Minister of Consumer Affairs in the adequate regulation of two 

collapsed investment firms, First Investors Corporation and 

Associated Investors of Canada. Some of the 3,000 

Saskatchewan investors who have lost their money in the 

collapse of these two firms are considering legal action to 

protect their interests. 

 

The latest meeting of investors, which I attended Monday 

evening in Saskatoon, discussed such action. But only those 

investors who have the financial resources to pay their share of 

the legal expenses will apparently benefit from these court 

decisions. Those who can’t contribute to the group are in danger 

of being left out. 

 

Mr. Premier, why are these investors, who in many cases have 

lost their life savings, being left to organize and to pay for, on 

their own, the legal representation? Your government’s 

negligence contributed to their loss. Why don’t you have the 

decency and the fairness to provide these people with assistance 

in preparing their legal cases so that all the people will be 

helped? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Allow the minister to answer 

the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I advised the 

Assembly a few days ago that the Department of Justice is 

investigating this. I can advise the Assembly that the RCMP are 

now involved in the investigation of this particular issue and 

that we will proceed to review any alleged offences that might 

have occurred in this particular situation. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question was to the 

Premier, and my supplementary is to the Premier. I  

asked a straightforward question and I would like a 

straightforward answer. Your government failed to adequately 

protect Saskatchewan consumers who had invested in these two 

failed companies. Your government’s negligence . . .  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I want to remind 

members that: 

 

A brief question seeking information about an important 

matter of some urgency which falls within the 

administrative responsibility of the government or of the 

specific minister to whom it is addressed, is in order. 

 

It must be a question, not an expression of an opinion, 

representation, argumentation, nor debate. 

 

The question must be brief. A preamble need not exceed 

one carefully drawn sentence. A long preamble on a long 

question takes an unfair share of time and provokes the 

same sort of reply. A supplementary question should need 

no preamble. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be clear and precise, 

if I can get a clear and precise answer to the question. Why 

should 3,000 Saskatchewan people now be left on their own to 

arrange for legal representation and to pay for it, a great 

personal expense, to protect their interests? My question to the 

Premier: do you not feel any obligation to provide these people 

with assistance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the hon. 

member with the same question last time, that the Department 

of Justice is investigating, the RCMP is investigating all 

offences - all offences, Mr. Speaker. And in that way we are 

looking into this particular situation in the interests of those 

people. 

 

Call for Investigation into Collapse of Investment 

Companies 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 

Premier or the Minister of Justice, and it deals with Pioneer 

Trust. Mr. Premier . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Principal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Oh, I’m sorry, Principal Trust. Well, 

there are some similarities . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, the need, I think, is 

crystal clear for a full public inquiry into the affairs of the 

Department of Consumer Affairs, who failed to discharge their 

clear legal obligation to regulate the two companies to which 

we’ve referred. 

 

My question to you is this: will you not agree that a public 

inquiry into what happened in Saskatchewan, to Saskatchewan 

people, is the least that your government  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1374 

 

can do to assist the many hundreds, perhaps thousands, of 

Saskatchewan people who have lost money because of your 

failure to regulate these two companies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I indicated to the 

hon. member from Saskatoon Centre that there is an 

investigation under way today, and for some time now, by the 

Department of Justice, by the RCMP, looking into allegations 

of breach of the law. That is being done. I think the hon. 

member should wait that investigation and proceed from there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Back to the Premier, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Your minister is saying that he is going to investigate the 

activities, presumably, of people who may have broken the law. 

What I’m asking you is: who is going to investigate the clear 

incompetence displayed by your Minister of Consumer Affairs? 

And I suspect it will not be the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, we believe that this 

particular case is a serious case and we are approaching it in a 

serious manner. It is being investigated by the Department of 

Justice. It is being investigated by the RCM Police. And I 

believe that is the proper way to proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

In view of the fact that the public of Saskatchewan lost many 

millions of dollars with respect to Pioneer Trust, and in view of 

the fact that no single person was prosecuted for any single 

offence with respect to that, why do you expect Saskatchewan 

people to have any confidence that a criminal investigation 

carried on by your department will in any way assist them to 

make recovery which these citizens have lost, because of the 

incompetence of you and your colleagues in the cabinet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let’s take what the Leader of the 

Opposition is basically saying. You are saying to this Assembly 

and to the people of this province that you have no confidence 

in the RCMP of this country, and you have no confidence in the 

justice system and the Department of Justice of this province. I 

think that is shameful, and I think you should apologize to both 

of those very significant and important institutions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I don’t think I will debate with the 

minister on who should apologize for what. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But, Mr. Minister, how can you hide 

behind the fact that you have called for a criminal investigation 

in order to defend what is clearly a failure on the part of your 

government to regulate two companies? And as a result of that 

failure of you, not somebody else,  

but you and your colleagues, thousands of Saskatchewan 

citizens have lost their life savings. 

 

How can you say that this problem will be met by an 

investigation by the RCMP? They won’t investigate your 

incompetence; somebody else must. Why will you not have a 

public inquiry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we take this 

particular situation in a very serious light. There’s a number of 

people who have lost their money in Saskatchewan and Alberta 

and British Columbia and other parts of the country. We take 

that very seriously. 

 

We are presently . . . the Department of Justice and the RCMP 

are presently investigating any wrongdoing involved in this 

particular situation. That is the way the process should unfold, 

Mr. Speaker. They are investigating any wrongdoing involved. 

 

And I think it is rather unfortunate that the Leader of the 

Opposition somehow says it’s all the fault of the Minister of 

Consumer Affairs and not the fault of anybody else and not the 

situation of anybody else that should be investigated. And I 

think that is improper. 

 

Call for By-election in Saskatoon Eastview 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll direct a new question 

to the Premier. Mr. Premier, it’s been close to four weeks since 

the member for Saskatoon Eastview resigned his seat in the 

legislature, and there are more than 18,000 eligible voters in 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

An Hon. Member: — All Tories. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Allow the Leader of the 

Opposition to ask his question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — In view of the fact that your Deputy 

Premier believes that all those 18,000 are Tory, would the 

Premier give the people of Saskatoon Eastview an opportunity 

to express a view. And my question, sorry, is: when do you 

believe you will be in a position to call a by-election in 

Saskatoon Eastview? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will inform 

the Leader of the Opposition and the public about that decision 

in due course. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We understand that the decision is with the Premier. But in 

view of the fact that these large number of voters will be 

without representation and the legislature is sitting, could you 

give an assurance that you will make a decision so that there 

will . . . so that these people will be represented at least by, say, 

October? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be 

informing the members opposite and the public with respect to 

the date of the by-election. We want to make  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1375 

 

sure everybody knows the position of the parties on issues that 

affect Saskatoon a great deal, like uranium and potash, and 

make sure that they’re very clear prior to a by-election, and 

we’ll do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

In view of the fact that the people of Saskatoon Eastview are 

really a particularly well-informed group, and in view of the 

fact that we will be debating many of the issues which you have 

suggested, including fiscal mismanagement and the resulting 

huge tax hikes and the savage cuts to health care and the like, 

would you give the people of Saskatoon Eastview an 

opportunity to express their views on the subjects I have 

mentioned, and the subjects you have mentioned, and would 

you give an undertaking that they’ll have that opportunity to 

express their views at the ballot-box by, say, October? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will assure the 

member opposite and the Assembly and the public that the 

people of Saskatoon Eastview will have an opportunity to 

express their views in the ballot-box, and the precise date is up 

to me, and I’ll let them know in due course. 

 

Grant to Ile-a-la-Crosse Pharmacy 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question 

from the member from Athabasca regarding the Ile-a-la-Crosse 

pharmacy. The question was: what conditions were placed on 

those grants, and if this company leaves Ile-a-la-Crosse, how 

much of the 60,000 will the taxpayers get back? 

 

The situation is that the Ile-a-la-Crosse pharmacy received a 

grant of 20,500 under the Northern Economic Development 

Subsidiary Agreement. That grant was made on December 12, 

1985 as part of a total expenditure of $59,000. 

 

At this point in time, the pharmacy is still continuing. When 

that pharmacy ceases, under the agreements with NEDSA . . . It 

is a two-year agreement that they have to keep their pharmacy 

operating for . . . or the business operating for. If it should go 

the duration, then they have met the requirements. If they do 

not, then appropriate action will be taken. 

 

But at this time, to the best of my understanding, is that the 

pharmacy is still operating on an interim basis. And I know that 

the Minister of Health and the Health department are working 

to see if there’s some way that pharmacy services can be 

continued to that area in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 

wonder if you could indicate when that two-year period will 

expire. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, as I say, the grant was subject to the 

letter of offer dated December 12, 1985. So two years from 

December 12, 1985. 

 

Operations at Duck Mountain Provincial Park 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is to the Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture, and 

it deals with contracts your department has signed with respect 

to Duck Mountain provincial park. 

 

Can the minister confirm that a company called Madge Lake 

Cabins Inc. has been given a contract to administer the publicly 

owned rental united at Duck Mountain provincial park? And 

can he confirm that a second company called Duck Mountain 

Lodge Inc. has been awarded a contract to build a new resort in 

that park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, the proponent is Duck 

Mountain Lodge Inc. Construction substantially complete, 92 

per cent; the new lodge, July 20, 1987, operational; 

accommodation, May 1, 1987. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Uranium Industry in Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

this morning regarding a recent development in the United 

States which has the potential to seriously affect this province’s 

uranium industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It also jeopardizes the 

livelihood of many northern workers, their families, and it put 

at risk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the taxpayers’ investment in this 

industry in this province. 

 

The event to which I refer is the decision by the United States 

Appeals Court to uphold a district court ruling which prohibits 

the United States Department of Energy from enriching foreign 

source uranium. 

 

This court case came about when a number of United States 

producers launched court action in late 1984 seeking a 

judgement which would restore the viability of their industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the mid 1970’s this province committed 

many millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money to expand the 

uranium industry for the economic benefit of this province, but 

in particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the economic 

development of northern Saskatchewan and its peoples. 

 

This province’s three producing uranium mines currently 

employ some 1,300 people directly, who took home a payroll 

last year of over $66 million. Ongoing uranium exploration 

activities saw a further $22 million invested in northern 

Saskatchewan. In terms of sales, the uranium sector in 1986 

generated revenues of $460 million. And the industry, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, paid royalties to the people of this province of 

some $30 million. In short, the uranium industry represents an 

opportunity for solid economic development for this province in 

terms of jobs, investment, and provincial royalty revenues. The 

direct benefits of uranium mining and milling are, of course, 

most visible and most meaningful in northern Saskatchewan. 

Many of the workers in the mining and milling operations are 

native Northerners, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and their ongoing 

employment in the industry is bringing greater stability and a 

chance for prosperity to those communities. 

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1376 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the industry is important to all of the 

people of Saskatchewan. In addition to the royalties paid by the 

uranium industry, there is a provincial interest in protecting the 

private and the public capital that has been invested. The 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation alone has over 

$800 million invested in northern mining properties, primarily 

through joint venture mining and milling operations at Cluff 

Lake and Key Lake. 

 

Not only is the uranium mining sector important to the 

province, it is also of importance to Canada and, in fact, the 

world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a most serious situation on our hands. In 

short, the impact on Saskatchewan, if the United States 

producers are successful, is as follows. In the near term, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this ruling will result in a total ban - total - on 

the import of our uranium to the United States. We will see a 

complete shut-down. Over the longer term, however, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker - and this is assuming the Department of 

Energy in the United States is not successful in appealing the 

case - the impacts on the industry are more uncertain. 

 

It also does this, as follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Over a billion 

dollars of investment dollars will be lost, $30 million annually 

in royalties down the drain. But, more importantly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, jobs, employment opportunities, will be lost to the 

northern people - 1,300 jobs and about 5,000 indirect jobs from 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the potential harm that 

any form of the United States import restriction on uranium 

would have for Saskatchewan. While the province is limited in 

the action it can take, since this is a matter before the courts in 

another country, the government has a plan of action which it 

will be pursuing with the co-operation of the Saskatchewan 

uranium-producing companies. 

 

The government’s course of action, Mr. Speaker, includes a 

number of steps. Officials of our government have already been 

in contact with those of the federal Department of External 

Affairs, the Department of Energy, Mines, and Resources, and 

with the Canadian Embassy in Ottawa, urging action to ensure 

that Canada-U.S. uranium trade can continue as in the past. We 

have offered Saskatchewan support for federal supports. Canada 

has formally advised the United States administration of its 

objections to the Appeals Court decision. I believe that the 

sense of frustration that I have seen within the Saskatchewan 

uranium industry is shared by the federal government. I would 

hope it is shared by this Assembly. 

 

In addition to diplomatic steps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hon. 

member from Kindersley, the Minister for Economic 

Development and Trade, and myself will be meeting with the 

Saskatchewan uranium industry on Monday to discuss the 

recent events in the United States, the implications for 

Saskatchewan and the implications for the industry and the 

possible steps that could be taken by government and industry 

together, to address this serious problem. 

In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government intends to 

pursue every reasonable course of action available to it to 

ensure that the livelihood of the people in the North and their 

families, the large investment of taxpayers’ dollars, and 

government revenues, are protected for the future economic 

benefit of the North and the province as a whole. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to assure 

the House at the outset that I will be able to compress my 

remarks into a little shorter compass than was achieved by the 

Minister of Mines. 

 

May I say first, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I was puzzled by the 

assumption in the statement that all our customers for uranium 

are in the United States. And that any inability to process 

Canadian uranium in the United States 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the Minister of 

Education to be a little quiet while . . . Order! I would ask 

members - all members to be quiet when the speaker’s on his 

feet. Would the Leader of the Opposition . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

puzzled by the assumption that there is no other place where 

uranium can be enriched or upgraded or reprocessed, and there 

are in fact a number of others, and we have a number of other 

customers. 

 

However, having said that, and having made the point that this 

does not affect the entire industry, I concede, out of hand, it 

affects a significant portion of the industry. And if this event 

illustrates one thing with clarity, it illustrates the fact that 

Canada and Saskatchewan - but I’m speaking nor of 

Canada - should diversify its trading partners and not find itself 

dependent primarily on one market for any commodity we 

produce. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — If we had more diversification, we 

would not have a situation whereby a cabinet minister in this 

House stands up and reports a crisis because of a single legal 

decision in a single country which is our customer. So I think 

that that is illustrated by the statement of the minister. 

 

May I make one comment further. This incident offers an 

opportunity for the Premier. It offers an opportunity for the 

Premier to illustrate his special relationship with the Prime 

Minister, and the Prime Minister to illustrate his special 

relationship with the President of the United States, so that this 

situation, which is opposed, as I understand it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, by the Government of Saskatchewan, the Government 

of Canada, and the Government of the United States, can be 

appropriately remedied so that the particular situation, referred 

to by the minister . . .  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Members on both sides 

of the House have been speaking from their seat. It’s very 

difficult for me to hear the person that is addressing  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1377 

 

the Assembly, and I would ask you to allow the Leader of the 

Opposition to finish his remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — As I was saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I think that this offers an opportunity for the Premier to display 

his particular relationship with the Prime Minister, and the 

Prime Minister to display his particular relationship with the 

President, since it is clearly a situation which the Government 

of Saskatchewan, the Government of Canada, and, if we can 

believe the news reports, the Government of the United States 

does not welcome. 

 

We have an opportunity here for the display of statesmanship 

which has been advertised frequently by the members of the 

Progressive Conservative Party, and we now will see whether 

the advertisements were in fact fraudulent, or whether in fact 

there’s a good product behind that which was advertised. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just like to 

apologize to the Leader of the Opposition for interrupting. I 

thought it strange that the Energy critic didn’t respond, and I 

would just encourage . . .  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! Order! Order! 

The member from Saskatoon Riversdale keeps talking from his 

seat. Order. When the Speaker is on his feet no one is supposed 

. . . Order. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENT 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I would at this time like to 

rise for the purpose of tabling a document, and it is a document 

with respect to a question that was asked in the House with 

respect to the practices of the international boilermakers and 

their Saskatchewan content. And it is a communication to their 

members which I will table and I ask all members to examine it 

carefully. 

 

It possibly contains contempt of the legislature and interference 

of citizens of Saskatchewan in speaking to the members of the 

legislature. It also provides the proof that the union 

representative asked for, and therefore I am tabling this 

document today in proof of the allegations. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, if that was anything at all it 

was a ministerial statement, and I request the right to respond to 

it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister was out of 

order, is not allowed to make a statement when he’s tabling . . . 

Order . . . when he’s tabling documents. And there’s no room 

for response. 

 

Order. Order. Order! Order! Order. The member for Regina 

Centre, state your point of order. 

 

(1045) 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you sat in your chair 

and listened to him make an allegation against a  

trade union in Saskatchewan which is unfair and uncalled for. 

And after it’s made and on the record, then you decide that the 

statement was out of order. If it was out of order, but the 

statement was made, then it should be responded to, and we 

should have a right to respond to that statement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Order. A ministerial statement by a 

minister is a matter of government policy. I listened, and it was 

a very short statement. I couldn’t make a ruling until after he 

was done. I have now ruled it out of order, and no response is 

necessary. And with that we move to . . . The point of order is 

not well taken. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I want to ask you a question. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Labour has made an allegation 

and . . .  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — There’s no question to the Speaker. 

Order. Order. Order. The member’s opening remark when he 

rose was that he wanted to ask the Chair a question. There’s no 

question to the Chair. You can’t ask a question of the Chair. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — To raise a point of order in respect to . . . My 

understanding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that when the minister 

rose, he did not indicate that he was making a ministerial 

statement. He indicated that he was filing a document before 

this House. And there was the key. And what you did is to 

allow him to go on to make a political statement. And now 

you’re denying this side of the House the right to rebut. And I 

say it’s unfair and you should reconsider your ruling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order! The Chair has already ruled 

on this. The point of order is not well taken. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, sir, with all due respect. 

Given the fact that there   

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, given the fact there is 

before this House a motion of non-confidence in yourself, and 

that you have lost confidence from members of this side of the 

House, and given the fact that we have just gone through a 

series of events which shows that you have not got the 

confidence of this side of the House, will you consider 

withdrawing from the Chair until the motion that is before the 

House is dealt with? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The point of order is not well 

taken. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1378 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, earlier in question period I put a question to the 

minister with respect to Duck Mountain provincial park. In 

reply he read what seemed to be statistics from the building 

permits. I wonder if the minister can confirm for the House that 

a company called Madge Lake Cabins Inc. has been given the 

contract to administer the publicly-owned rental units at Duck 

Mountain provincial park. And can he confirm that a second 

company called Duck Mountain Lodge Inc. has been awarded a 

contract to build a new resort in that park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the member’s correct. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank the minister for the brevity of 

his response, Mr. Speaker. We would commend the same to 

him during question period. Can the minister confirm that one 

Darryl Binkley is a member of the board of directors of both 

Madge Lake Cabins Inc. and Duck Mountain Lodge Inc.? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That is correct, hon. member. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And can the minister tell Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and this Assembly if this is the same Darryl Binkley 

who at one time served as chief of staff to the current Minister 

of Rural Development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m sorry; did you say current chief of 

staff? I missed a piece of your question, I’m sorry. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — The question was, Mr. Chairman: is this 

the same Darryl Binkley who at one time served as chief of 

staff, the chief executive assistant, political assistant, to the 

current Minister of Rural Development, the member from 

Tisdale. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe he was a member of the staff 

of the member for Kelsey-Tisdale, but he was not chief of staff. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can I ask the minister another question? 

Is this the same Darryl Binkley who sought the PC nomination 

in the federal riding of Mackenzie? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe he did. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Is this the same Darryl Binkley, Mr. 

Minister, who was appointed by the current administration, by 

your government, as a high-priced consultant to the 

Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m sorry, I have no knowledge of  

his involvement with other areas other than when he was a 

ministerial assistant to one of our ministers. He may well have 

been involved with that. With all due respect, hon. member, 

you’d have to direct that question to the minister responsible for 

Sask. Forest Products. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can 

comment and explain to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan how a 

former PC hack, a well-known PC Party supporter, has gotten 

. . . has become involved in these contracts at Duck Mountain 

provincial park? 

 

Mr. Chairman, while the minister is trying to find the answer 

here, I wonder if he can also tell us when the contracts were 

signed with Madge Lake Cabins Inc. and Duck Mountain 

Lodge Inc. with respect to both the administration of the rental 

units and the new development, the new resort that’s being built 

in that part. When were those contracts signed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I want to find all of the 

background information that’s being requested here. We’re 

having some difficulty digging everything out - dates, times, 

process - but I’d like to go through it step by step with the hon. 

member. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, might I ask then if that 

information might be made available later today, or when will it 

be forthcoming? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — In five minutes, hon. member. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I can’t find the paper I 

wanted to use for you, because it’s got the complete 

chronological history of events leading up to the successful 

proponent and the construction being at the state it is now, at 92 

per cent. 

 

What I can tell you is that in the past we were unsuccessful with 

solicited proposals for a four-season complex to be built at that 

particular park. After advertising twice, we eventually accepted 

an unsolicited proposal. The proponent lessee, at that time, was 

a Pat Donovan. 

 

As I recall, Mr. Donovan and one other partner had some 

difficulty once they got started with their financing. They came 

back to the department, and this is the bit where I want to get 

the details accurate for you. I’ll give you a thumb-nail sketch, 

but I want to get the details on this one and get it to you. They 

came back and had added two or, perhaps, three new partners to 

the venture who were putting in an infusion of capital, and they 

were going to carry on and finish the contract as it had 

originally been announced back in Yorkton some two years 

ago. 

 

The dates were as I read in question period to you; I think I just 

gave you the dates then. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, without getting into the 

. . . all of the specifics, can the minister confirm that the 

contracts with respect to these two companies was signed in 

early April of this year? 

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1379 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, if I can 

just . . . I’ve got some briefing notes that I had stuck away in a 

desk here. I’d like to just quote from some of those. 

 

The construction of rental accommodation at Duck Mountain 

provincial park was publicly tendered unsuccessfully on two 

occasions - February of 1984 and November of 1984. 

Subsequently, an unsolicited proposal was received from Duck 

Mountain Lodge Inc. - principals are Pat Donovan, Jerry 

Nelson, Don Johnson, and Jim Twigg - February ‘86. April 8, 

1986, proposal accepted by the department. April 30, 1986, 

agreements approved by order in council. April 1986 to 

December 1986, Duck Mountain Lodge Inc. made several 

unsuccessful attempts to finalize its financing and construction 

security requirements. 

 

As I recall, they had some trouble coming up with the 

construction security because the department insisted on a very 

high security, in cash, up front, before any construction could 

take place. December 1986, Duck Mountain Lodge Inc. 

requested permission to restructure their corporation. The 

request included the deletion of J. Nelson, D. Johnson, and J. 

Twigg, and the addition of Darryl and Vaughn Binkley and 

John Dutchyshyn as shareholders. Pat Donovan remained. 

 

The department accepted the proposed restructure, and revised 

development and lease agreements were re-submitted. Those 

were approved by cabinet February 24, 1987. Duck Mountain 

Lodge Inc. is currently constructing, as we know, a 22-unit 

lodge complex, including dining room, store, swimming pool. 

The complex is expected to be completed late this summer. 

Information as I gave you in question period. My information is 

it is now 92 per cent complete. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank the minister for that information, 

Mr. Chairman. First of all, might I ask the minister, will he 

table that document that he read from with this House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, this is a document 

prepared by me for my use in discussions in question period and 

at other moments. It’s personal. It’s my own document, and it’s 

not for tabling. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I appear to you for a 

ruling on this. It’s my understanding that if a minister of the 

Crown makes reference to a document in the House, that he is 

obliged to table that document with this House. And I appear to 

you for a ruling on this. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to draw the attention of the hon. 

member to Beauchesne’s, number 327 where a member would 

have to table a document if it was “a despatch or other state 

paper.” And then I would also like to refer him to number 390, 

numbers (n) and (o): 

 

(n) Papers that are private or confidential and not of a 

public or official character. 

(o) Internal departmental memoranda. 

 

are documents that do not have to be tabled. 

And on that basis I rule that the minister is not required to table 

that document. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, if I might just further 

question on that. And as a new member I appreciate the 

comments that you’ve made. 

 

I can appreciate the fact that interdepartmental memoranda and 

papers would not be tabled with this House, but in this 

particular instance the minister read from this document, and I 

wonder, given the fact that he read from the document that he 

did introduce material from that document into this debate, 

would he not be obliged to provide that document to us? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — In response to the member from Victoria, 

Regina Victoria, I did indicate that papers that are of a private 

or a confidential nature are not required to be tabled, and the 

minister did make that comment. 

 

And a further comment that I might make is that if we are going 

to start asking for all of these documents that are being read 

from or looked at, two things could happen. We could have 

every piece of paper being tabled; and secondly, perhaps no 

documents would be brought in at all, if this was the fear of the 

minister that they were going to be required to table everything. 

So my original ruling stands, and that is the end of this 

particular ruling as far as I’m concerned. So would you please 

continue on with your line of questioning. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will, but 

again as a new member I’m learning the rules here as I go 

along. And if I just might put a further query to you. 

 

You mention that the document will not be made available 

because it’s a private document. The minister referred to it as 

private, yet he read from that document and introduced the 

material into this House. So I wonder how can it be a private 

document if he reads from it and introduces the material in that 

document into the debates and proceedings. And I wonder, 

therefore, if in fact even though the minister might feel that it’s 

a private document, whether in fact it is a private 

document - inasmuch as he did read from it and introduce 

material from that into the record - and wonder therefore, again, 

if given that, that the document should not be tabled with this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to just remind the hon. member that 

my ruling was based on the fact that I perceive that document to 

be more of a personal briefing note nature. And on that basis I 

have ruled that you . . . do not need to be tabled, and that is the 

end of this matter. So please continue. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I won’t 

pursue that. I’m not a person to go up blind alleys. 

 

The minister indicated, as one point, that these . . . that you had 

put out proposal calls. Later you indicated that these 

opportunities, for both the management of the rental units and 

the new resort, that these opportunities were tendered. Can you 

clarify for us just what happened  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1380 

 

here? Was it a proposal call, or was this a matter of public 

tender? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Originally, Mr. Chairman, it was a 

proposal call which, in essence, is a public tender. We put out 

that . . . it was advertised in the newspapers and say: is anybody 

out there interested in putting up this particular facility? In 

essence that is a public tender. Initially there were no responses. 

We tried twice, unsuccessfully. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chairman, for me there’s a 

difference between a proposal call and tenders. Seems to me if 

you’re asking for proposals on what some corporation might do, 

vis-a-vis the park, you’re not obliged to take, necessarily, the 

best offer that comes forward. You’re in a position to take 

whatever offer you feel meets your particular requirements and 

doesn’t necessarily have to be the best offer. Whereas a 

tender - I think things are clear as to what’s being asked for, and 

you’re obliged because of . . . it’s a tender to take the best 

product. 

 

I just want to ask you, Mr. Minister . . . you say that this 

agreement was signed in April, or these agreements with these 

two companies were signed in April, yet, it seems to me that 

from . . . I gather from your answers that the discussions with 

this particular company, Duck Mountain Lodge Inc., and 

Madge Lake Cabins Inc., had carried on for some period of time 

before that - for a year at least before that - either with the 

specifically constituted company or its precursors or 

predecessors. Am I correct in that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — If I may clarify a point, Mr. Chairman, 

first whether it’s a proposal or a tender. It’s always stipulated: 

lowest or any tender not necessarily accepted. So we’re not 

bound to it. 

 

And as one further point for the hon. member: in terms of 

allowing private initiatives within parks, we have very 

stringent, non-negotiable rules which have to be adhered to. 

And in some cases proponents will come in with an idea or 

proposal that really we can’t accept, for one reason or 

another - because it won’t fit in with the aesthetics of the park, 

for example, or we don’t believe it would fit what the public 

would require in a park. 

 

So, although financially someone could come in with a good 

proposal, finance alone or pure economics is not the only 

determining factor in awarding anybody a contract to go ahead 

with their proposal. So I just wanted to point that out, that that’s 

the way it’s being handled. 

 

Now the second part: you’re referring to dates and the events 

leading up. There had be some discussions with the original 

proponents - I had never met them - with departmental officials, 

I believe for, oh, a period of about a year prior to any decision 

being made. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, forgive my questions about 

tendering and proposal calls. This is a sore point with the 

Saskatchewan public. We’ve seen a great deal of abuse - misuse 

of the tendering process. I’m very familiar with the tendering 

process by virtue of some years in city council, where you put 

out . . . you specify what it is that  

you want, and you invite people to submit tenders to you. And 

you give it to the person with the lowest price, provided that 

they meet the requirements that you set down initially. 

 

But what we see with this government is something else again, 

where there seems to be less reliance on that accepted process 

and a greater one on proposal calls. I think back to the very 

early days of your administration, when a contract was given to 

. . . I think it’s Brown’s auction mart, to sell off Highways 

equipment. It wasn’t the lowest, and these people had no 

previous experience at all in selling any equipment, or heavy 

equipment of that nature. And it’s still a wonder that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers got 10 cents on the dollar for all that 

equipment. 

 

Mr. Minister, I find it very mysterious, very mysterious that 

within days, within days of Darryl Binkley becoming a director 

of these two companies, that Darryl Binkley, who was a 

political appointment by your government - ran for the PC 

nomination in MacKenzie riding, federal MacKenzie - that that 

same Darryl Binkley, that within days of him becoming a 

director of these two companies, an agreement was signed. I 

find that very mysterious. Even though negotiations had 

dragged on for a year, the contract wasn’t signed until Darryl 

Binkley became a member of that board. 

 

And I ask you, sir: are you trying to tell people that it was just a 

simple matter of financial capital, that this wasn’t a matter of 

political capital? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It wasn’t just a matter of days; it was 

two full months. That’s the first thing I should point out. 

 

The second thing I’d like to point out was, this was the only 

proposal we received. There were no others. 

 

And the third point that has to be made for the hon. member, as 

I’m sure he is aware - and I hate dragging Mr. Donovan’s name 

across the floor of the legislature, but it has come up and the 

question begs to be answered. Mr. Donovan could not fulfil the 

financial requirements that were imposed on him by the 

government to complete the project. Mr. Donovan, of his own 

volition, and the other partners or the other people involved, 

came back with the names Darryl Binkley and Vaughn Binkley. 

The department then looked at the restructured company; 

looked at their financing; the financing was in place. The 

Binkleys are successful business people. They have operated 

similar businesses in the past, and department had confidence 

that they could, in fact, complete the project as originally 

conceived. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I would submit to you that 

the public has become extremely suspicious of this long string 

of unfortunate coincidences - whether it’s a former cabinet 

minister from The Battlefords, or whether it’s a well-known PC 

hack in Duck Mountain provincial park - that the public has 

become extremely suspicious of these coincidences. 

 

We’re beginning to wonder, sir, given all these coincidences, 

whether you’re adding the supernatural  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1381 

 

to your department as a responsibility. I wonder if the 

documents that you’ve alluded to . . . that all the documents 

related to these contracts can be made public and can be tabled 

with this House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been advised by 

officials and other experts on the proceedings within this 

Assembly that such documents are normally not tabled. 

Certainly the contracts are not. Tendered documents at the time 

of opening are public, and anybody present can peruse them to 

their heart’s content. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you’re talking about 

contracts which have been signed with private companies but, 

on the other hand, have been signed by the people of 

Saskatchewan through you and your departmental officials. 

And I ask you: does it not seem right to you that any 

negotiations we might get into that lead to a contract, which 

involve the public’s interest, should not be tabled with this 

House? Or is there, again, a confidentiality clause that prohibits 

you from tabling this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not aware of any 

confidentiality clause. I’m aware of precedents within the 

House, however, and I made sure to check on that. I don’t 

intend to be the one to set precedent for future decisions. It has 

been tradition in the past, whether it be your administration in 

power, before that the Liberal administration, or whomever, that 

those documents were never put forward on the Table here. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I just want to get it 

clarified again that Madge Lake Cabins Inc., which has the 

same directors as Duck Mountain Lodge Inc., that Madge Lake 

Cabins Inc. has been given a contract to administer the publicly 

owned rental units at Duck Mountain provincial park. Am I 

right on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — In part, the hon. member is correct. 

They’ve been given a lease to operate on this. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, Duck Mountain 

Lodge Inc. has been given a contract to build what other 

accommodations, units, among other things, in Duck Mountain 

provincial park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Duck Mountain Lodge Inc., Mr. 

Chairman, is a company constructing the 20-unit lodge 

complex - dining room, store, swimming pool; Madge Lake 

Cabins Inc. is a corporate name of a company who are leasing 

and administering the rental accommodations at the cabins. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I think what you have 

here then is a clear case of conflict. 

 

I can well imagine what Duck Mountain Lodge Inc., who have 

their own units in the park, if anyone comes to that park looking 

for rental accommodation, that they will be accommodated first 

in those units that have been developed by the private interest. 

 

And I would submit to you, sir, that the rental units that are 

owned by the province of Saskatchewan, but which this 

company also administers, will become overflow, and that we 

will not realize the same kind of revenue as  

we once did from those rental units, and that what you’ve done 

by signing an agreement with what is, in effect, one company to 

build their own units and to manage our units, that is, the units 

that belong to the public, that you’re creating a conflict of 

interest here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, forgive 

me. We’re at odds on the issue, obviously. I don’t agree with 

you. 

 

The existing rental accommodations: a five-year lease with a 

five-year renewal, and lease fees are 7.5 per cent of gross. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, again, you can’t 

have a company on the one hand and you give them a contract 

. . . or sign a contract with them and allow them to build their 

own rental accommodation; then you give them a contract to 

administer the rental units that are owned by the province of 

Saskatchewan. It seems to me that anybody coming to that park, 

I have no doubt - I have no doubt what the company is going to 

do. They’re going to try and fill their own units first. They’re 

going to try and make sure that their profit margin is up before 

they concern themselves about the publicly owned rental units. 

You are not getting a good deal, Mr. Minister. 

 

I would suggest to you that if this is not the case, as you submit, 

that you table any and all documents with this House so that the 

public can be clear that there’s no conflict of interest. 

 

Frankly, Mr. Minister, I think the public is getting fed up. 

They’ve seen no end of political supports of your party and 

former cabinet ministers being rewarded with any and all 

contracts that come along, seemingly. We had the case of 

Gordon Dirks, Tim Embury, Paul Schoenhals, Paul 

Rousseau - all former cabinet ministers - being rewarded with 

cushy jobs or cushy contracts. We see Keith Parker, a former 

MLA, being appointed to a cushy job at the liquor control 

commission. The Premier’s own brother-in-law, a cushy job. 

And I think there’s a perception here that to do business in this 

province, the prerequisite is that you have to have a PC party 

membership. 

 

(1130) 

 

And I would submit to you, sir, that that is unfair - that if you’re 

truly open for business, that you’ll take business from all 

quarters; that you won’t restrict it to supporters of your own 

party. This is just not a question of unfairness; this is also a 

question of fiscal management. How can you manage the 

province well in the interest of the people of this province if 

you insist in making sure that the contracts that are let out are 

given to PC supporters? There is no certainty here that these 

people will do the best job for the people of this province, that 

they will at all times have the interests of the people of this 

province in mind. 

 

So therefore, sire, I would suggest to you that if you say there is 

no conflict of interest in signing these contracts between . . . 

with Madge Lake Cabins and with Duck Mountain Lodge, that 

you table those documents so that the public can be sure that 

there is no conflict in this matter. 

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1382 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we’re in a very 

wide-ranging kind of discussion at the moment. First of all, I 

would like to point out that the accommodation that did exist 

originally at Madge Lake had been deemed, not by the 

department but by the public, to be inadequate. There was no 

winter food service, as an example. 

 

The accommodations, well there weren’t enough of them, and 

some of them were very poor quality. The condominiums were 

in nice shape, winterized, very pleasant accommodation. But 

the other cabins were not. And some of them were non-modern. 

What we have now is a private firm who said they are going to 

build a four-year . . . a four-season resort with winter food 

accommodation and a swimming pool and something that the 

public would like, given that there’s excellent skiing out there 

in the winter, and of course good golfing in the summer. 

 

So that’s the first thing. They made improvements to this. Now 

from there, the hon. member has gone on to imply somehow 

that if you don’t have a PC membership, you don’t do business 

in this province. That’s absolute nonsense - absolute nonsense. 

And what is really ironic is this comes from a member himself 

who, after he lost running for the NDP in Manitoba, surfaced 

with an NDP government job in Saskatchewan. Now it’s not 

just a question of the pot calling the kettle black here. I don’t 

like to get into these kind of silly exchanges. But I mean their 

caucus is absolutely replete with people who were the objects of 

patronage when those people were in government. 

 

You’ve got the member from Saskatoon Nutana who was paid 

over $2,000 for the Office of the Rentalsman - again, an agent 

of government - after she’d lost a nomination some place. Well 

we don’t get up and make a big fuss and say, the member for 

Nutana is somehow in a conflict of interest situation. But one of 

the members from Moose Jaw, who’d been receiving 

honorariums from the Department of Education, some time 

after - he also lost a nomination. 

 

Now where do we serve the public of Saskatchewan if we stand 

here, back and forwards, throwing allegations like this at each 

other? I accept what they did in the past. I accept it. I don’t 

necessarily like it, but I’m not going to get into a shouting 

match about it. 

 

What I can say - and I can stand here and look anybody over 

there in the eye - I can stand here and say that the contract that 

was awarded originally on this project was done completely 

above-board, with no favour and no consideration given to the 

political, religious, ethnic affiliation of anybody who was 

involved. 

 

When Mr. Donovan ran into financial problems, he was the one 

who came forward with an alternative business man to add to 

his group who was financially secure, who could make the 

project fly. And that’s the bottom line on the matter. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I’m gong to pick up where I 

left off yesterday. I have a few more questions on the 

privatization of the public campsites. 

And the first information that I would like from you, Mr. 

Minister, is the camp ground on Besnard Lake. I wonder if you 

could indicate who has taken over the campsite there. I know 

who’s taken it over, but could you indicate the agreement that 

was signed with individual on the Besnard Lake campsite? 

 

And then I will be following up with the one at Little Amyot 

Lake, as yesterday I didn’t get all the answers that I wanted 

there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, what I 

have been advised is, Besnard Lake camp ground, it’s been run 

by Red’s Camps Ltd. from La Ronge, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, could you indicate who the owners of Red’s Camps 

are, and the agreement that has been signed - the terms of the 

agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, Besnard Lake lost 

$34,000 last year. And that was the operating loss of the camp 

ground. Red’s Camps Ltd. will be operating it - it’s a 

one-season lease that they have. We asked for a minimum 

tender of $100. The successful tender bid was $112. I don’t 

have the principals’ names listed in front of me. I believe it’s 

Ronald and Evelyn MacKay from la Ronge - MacKay or 

MacKie. I’m sorry, I’m not sure, MacKay. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, it’s quite interesting. We just heard the conversation 

between yourself and a colleague over here regarding 

Conservative memberships and pork-barrelling, and I see here 

that Red’s Camps Inc. from La Ronge, owned and operated by 

Ronald and Evelyn MacKay who have leased a campsite. I 

didn’t ask how much money it lost, as we know there are 

certain campsites in this province that lose money. But they are 

there for the public and to serve the public. 

 

But to suggest that there was a tender put out asking for $100 

tender, Mr. Chairman, I have never seen tenders offered like 

this. But they got the campsite for $112. I think when you talk 

about pork-barrelling and Conservative memberships one will 

just check that, one, Ron MacKay and Evelyn MacKay both sit 

on the executive of the Conservative - the Conservative 

executive in the constituency of Cumberland. 

 

This is how you’re operating. But I think it’s a shame that a 

group like that could take over such a beautiful campsite and 

one that is well used in Besnard Lake for a $112 tender. This 

just doesn’t make any sense. And most certainly we know 

where it went to. 

 

I want to ask another question, and I would like the same 

answers on the Little Amyot Camp Ground. I asked that 

yesterday prior to adjournment. I wonder, Mr. Minister, could 

you indicate . . . I know you said they had a five-year 

agreement, but could you indicate if there are any conditions 

attached to the five-year agreement, such as the fees that they’re 

going to charge, and will they keep that campsite open on a 

24-hour basis? 

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1383 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m having a little 

trouble reading my writing. Little Amyot Lake: Germaine, 

Olivier, Lavoie, and Nicole, Marie Lavoie, lease period June 1, 

1987, to May 31, 1992, $460 a year. The lessee is responsible 

for all his own expenses, maintenance, repairs, replacement to 

buildings, structure, facilities, equipment - anything that has to 

be done, they have to do. They have to supply everything 

themselves. We don’t have control over what they will charge, 

is what you asked. They will have to charge as they see fit. I 

would remind you it lost $34,482 in the last operating year. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, you indicate that they are getting the Little Amyot 

Lake for $460 a year. And you also indicate that there’s no 

conditions on that agreement. Could you indicate if the $460 

per year was a tender price, or was that something that was 

worked out amongst the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m sorry. Could I get that one again, 

Fred? 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I wonder if the minister could indicate if 

the agreement that was worked out with Little Amyot Lake was 

an agreement that was tendered. The $460 a year to lease that 

campsite, was that a tender price or was that a price that was 

worked amongst your department officials? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, that is a 

commercial rate set under the resource land regulations. As the 

adjacent operator, they were approached and asked would they 

be willing or interested in that campsite under the current land 

regulations? And that is precisely the same arrangement that 

was made with Ted Ohlsen from Deschambault Lake. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, and Mr. Minister, you 

indicate that they were approached. You have the campsite at 

Besnard Lake, which is a good-sized campsite, for $112 a year. 

The Lavoies are paying $460 a year for a five-year contract. I 

just wonder what the discrepancy is there. 

 

But I’m going to close off on this subject and make a few 

remarks. And as I said before, we take a look at the Besnard 

campsite which was leased for $112 . . . And I want to take a 

look at the resort of the chief electoral officer, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, to make my argument here and to indicate to you, 

Mr. Minister, who is getting these campsites and how they’re 

being privatized. 

 

You indicate yourself that the campsite at Little Amyot Lake 

. . . And I want to tell you that that is a campsite that is used 

fully from spring till fall by many, many people in northern 

Saskatchewan, the rest of the province, and Alberta and across 

Canada. And you could go in there on any day you wanted, and 

there was campers and individuals in there from the community 

of Beauval, going out and barbecuing, and they used that at no 

cost. 

 

This was a service provided by the taxpayers of the province. 

You have now turned it over to a private entrepreneur, an 

individual who, I might add, once again,  

is the president of the Conservative association in the 

constituency of Athabasca, and was very influential as a 

campaign manager, and the whole family, in the last provincial 

election. Those are the type of individuals that are getting the 

private campsites in this province. And they’re not tendering it 

out. You’re not tendering. 

 

You just offered the Lavoies the package. For $460 a year they 

get a beautiful campsite, completely set up with all the capital 

that has been put in there over the years, and has been used by 

thousands of people across this country. All of a sudden they’re 

going to come in there in the middle of the night, and that camp 

ground is going to have a sign - it has a sign there already - that 

you have to go and report to this individual who, as I indicated, 

was the president of the Athabasca Conservative association. 

 

(1145) 

 

They have control. You put no conditions on that lease. They 

can charge whatever they want, and that’s what they’re doing. 

 

And the service, I say to you, Mr. Minister, is not there. And 

this is not the way we should be operating. And I ask you, Mr. 

Minister, to stop privatizing the public campsites that we have 

in this province because this just cannot continue. The public at 

large just cannot afford the increases that your department is 

charging. 

 

Individual rates to go into campsites have been increased from 

5 to $12 - a $7 increase just to camp overnight. Your 

department is charging individuals to tie their boats up at docks, 

at marinas, and this is just not fair. And I ask you to review that 

policy, Mr. Minister. 

 

I now want to . . . There will be other questions that my 

colleagues will be asking on the privatization of our campsites, 

but I now want to turn to the nurseries that we have. And my 

first question to you, Mr. Minister, is: could you indicate how 

many trees were planted last year in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and how many trees that you plan to plant this 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Could I just refer, Mr. Chairman, for 

one moment to a comment the hon. member made about we’re 

now charging for boat docks? That’s not new, hon. member. 

That’s in the regulations, and has been there for some long time. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

you’re indicating that the increases that you’re charging for 

park fees this year is in the regulations, that by regulation they 

automatically go up from $7 . . . from $5 to $12; that you 

charge a $6 fee for parking a boat in a marina - you’re saying 

that that’s under regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, two things I’d like to 

point out. In the first place there have been some allegations 

that Ron and Evelyn MacKay were somehow given preferential 

treatment on a bid that they put in of $112 for Besnard Lake. 

Mr. Chairman, they were the only bid that was received; there 

were no other bids, so there was no preferential treatment. 

 

Now the hon. member and I have sparred around a little  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1384 

 

bit on this. I feel rather sorry for the MacKays, or 

MacKies - I’m not sure of the pronunciation - that their name 

should be dragged into the legislature. Because 

inevitably - inevitably - there are slurs against their name now 

that they, because of political affiliation, because they have the 

wisdom to belong to the Progressive Conservative Party, 

received preferential treatment from this government. And it 

obviously and patently is not the case. 

 

I’m sure the hon. member did not realize they were the only bid 

when he posed those questions, because I know him to be a man 

of sincerity. And he would not have made that kind of - I won’t 

say allegation - he wouldn’t have made that kind of suggestion 

had he known they were the only bid. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want to 

make this very clear, Mr. Minister. You did not indicate that 

there was any bid. You talked about the offer that you gave the 

Lavoies at Little Amyot Lake. You said they were offered the 

campsite. I’m assuming that there was . . . You offer one group 

a campsite and you put the other one out on tender. And you 

also indicated that the tender you called for was for $100, and 

they bid 112. 

 

Now that seems kind of odd, when you have a campsite, that 

the capital that has been put into that campsite would run into, 

probably over the years, well over a million dollars, and they 

can rent that for $112. 

 

And I don’t go back on my word. I say that you are catering to 

and contributing to the pork-barrelling of members of the 

Conservative Party. I don’t take that back at all. They bid; they 

bid $112. Somehow you indicate that the tender called for was 

for $100. You can read Hansard, Mr. Chairman. You go back 

in Hansard and you’ll see where you indicated in this House 

that the tender you asked for was for $100, and they bid 112. 

 

But just imagine, Mr. Chairman, an individual group taking 

over a public campsite the size of Besnard Lake for $112 a 

year - $112 a year. I can imagine, Mr. Chairman, that the wood 

alone that was put up on those campsites within Besnard Lake 

would run well into the 4 to $5,000 alone. And they put in a 

tender for $112. That, to me, is pork-barrelling. 

 

And I say this, and I make it quite clear, Mr. Chairman, that the 

individuals who bid $112 are active members of the 

Conservative executive in the constituency of Cumberland, and 

I don’t take that back at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — The other questions I asked you, Mr. 

Minister - you didn’t answer my question - was regarding 

regulations. Did you increase the fees from $5 to $12 through 

regulations? And is it through regulations that you are charging 

$6 to dock a boat at a marina? Is that through regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, let’s get back and clarify 

something. Besnard was tendered. And it said, minimum bid, 

$100 - not bit $100. How could you possibly be so assinine as 

to think you put a tender out  

and say, give us $100. How could you? It’s a minimum bid 

$100. 

 

One bid was received, and the minimum bid was exceeded by 

$12. They bid 112. And you have a funny definition of 

pork-barrelling if you think someone, taking over a campsite, 

lost $34,000 a year, is getting Conservative pork-barrelling. Of 

course that might be from your past experience when you 

people were in office - maybe that was the kind of thing you 

did. There’s no pork-barrelling here. 

 

And you owe the MacKays an apology because they were the 

only bid. You said they got a tender awarded to them on the 

basis of political affiliation, and you are clearly, completely, 

100 per cent wrong. You owe the MacKays an apology. 

 

And the Little Amyot Lake is an entirely different situation, 

because it comes under a different set of regulations, because 

it’s adjacent to an existing campsite. So two different things. 

 

Clearly you weren’t listening. You weren’t paying attention at 

all. Clearly you had your mind, unfortunately, down in the 

political gutter, which I really find repulsive. I’m ashamed of 

you for having made those kinds of slurs and allegations, that 

you would get down there a level that we associate with some 

of your other members; I’m really surprised at that. 

 

On the issue of boat docks. Let me quote 1981 Saskatchewan 

Gazette - The Provincial Lands Act in here: 

 

And the boat dock rates were set then for 1981, ‘82, ‘83, ‘84, 

and ‘85. 

 

And they escalated each year. And what happens is, they come 

up for review periodically, and they haven’t been approved yet 

for increase. And boat mooring, seasonal, in parks, not across 

northern Saskatchewan per se, but in parks, did change. That 

was a difference. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s not me that’s 

assinine, Mr. Minister, I think it’s you that’s assinine. And I still 

say that I don’t see any difference. You say you put out a tender 

minimum of $100. I’m surprised that they didn’t bid $100.01. 

They knew they were going to get it. They knew they were 

going to get it because of their political affiliation. 

 

Mr. Minister, you talk about the regulations and increasing the 

boat docking fees from - well there was no docking fees - to $6 

overnight. That decision would be made by your department 

officials, and it’s not your regulations that they have to increase 

this. Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, all fee increases are 

through order in council by cabinet. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t get that answer, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I was informing the hon. member that 

fee increases of that nature are through order in  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1385 

 

council in cabinet, whether it be park fees or anything ancillary 

or associated therewith to the parks. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

then you’re indicating that it’s the cabinet and the Conservative 

government who has put the tremendous increase in fees. You 

go out to Rowan’s Ravine and Last Mountain Lake, and 

individuals who did not pay to dock their boats overnight are 

now paying $6 just to moor their boat in a marina, and I believe 

it’s probably a public . . . it’s been privatized also. 

 

And camping fees at that same park have increased from $5 to 

$12, an increase of $7. And, Mr. Minister, it’s your cabinet 

decision to put these types of increases upon the public of 

Saskatchewan. And one just has to go out to Rowan’s Ravine, 

and you’ll find out that due to the high cost of the . . . high 

increase that you have placed upon the tourist this year, the 

campsites are used very sparingly. Going back to the Victoria 

Day, there was less than 50 per cent of the stalls that were used. 

So that’s what’s happening. You are charging these exorbitant 

fees to the public of Saskatchewan, and they just can’t afford it 

in these tough times. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, instead of 

sitting down with your cabinet colleagues and increasing these 

fees, you should be rolling some of them back, not increasing 

them. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I now want to . . . and you may have the answer 

now. Could you indicate to me the question that I did ask you 

was: how many trees were planted last year in the province, and 

how many trees do you plan to plant this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, just prior to answering 

that question, I’d like to touch on Rowan’s Ravine because the 

hon. member mentioned it. There was no marina there before. 

We just built one, a brand new one, and allowed a private 

individual to operate it and run it. And that’s why there’s a fee 

there now. Sure, there wouldn’t be a fee there before. There was 

no marina there before. It’s that simple. 

 

Now we’ll tell you about tree planting. Let’s get into that one. 

In 1986, total trees planted would be 8.32 million. That was 

below our projection for the year. Some contractors ran into 

difficulty in the spring contracts. They could not complete the 

contracts. Some walked away from them. They had, in some 

cases I believe, underbid with some difficult terrain to work on, 

and they didn’t complete. Some contractors did not plant up to 

departmental standards, and it was unacceptable. Otherwise it 

would have been higher. 

 

We did put out a fall tree planting contract to try to make up 

some of the shortfall. This year we expect to plant about six 

million trees so far, and we may be doing some work with the 

Minister of Social Services’ department. We have some projects 

in the mill between his department and the federal government. 

We’d like to do some tree planting with some federal money 

and some on-the-job training for some of his recipients and 

client groups. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

once again we go back to a situation where we  

are going backwards in the forest industry. First of all, you give 

away the forest to Weyerhaeuser Canada for not one cent down. 

He got eight million acres of our prime forest land. Last year 

you planted eight million trees; this year you’re only going to 

plant six million trees. And I say to you, Mr. Minister: is our 

forest not more important now than they were before? When we 

left government we were planting in the neighbourhood of 12 

million trees. And the hon. member from Meadow Lake got up 

and said, well we’re going to do a lot better; we’ll be planting in 

the neighbourhood of 14 million trees. We’re going to move 

that up. 

 

What you have done now - and I don’t think t here’s any less 

timber being taken out of this province; we’re still clear cutting 

in the province - and yet you’re planting less trees. Not only are 

you planting less trees but you’re laying off individuals and 

closing down nurseries and jobs that go with them. You’ve now 

closed down the satellite nurseries at Chitek Lake and at 

McDowell, and along with that went seasonal jobs that 

individuals have held for many years. And they need those jobs. 

They worked in the summer so that they could get enough 

stamps to draw unemployment in the winter, but you have taken 

that away. And also you have taken away the reforestation that 

this province really needs. 

 

(1200) 

 

And I say, Mr. Minister, that that’s not fair to the people of 

Saskatchewan. You take, and you take the assets we had, the 

eight million acres of prime forest land; you give that to an 

American firm. It’s our responsibility to replant the forests, and 

what do we do? We plant . . . we’re going backwards. We’re 

not only replanting less trees, we’re also planting less trees, and 

we’re closing down nurseries when we should be expanding the 

nurseries in this province and planting more trees. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question. Could 

you indicate how many inspectors you have in the field to 

inspect the nurseries to make sure that the trees that are planted 

are planted properly, and that they are growing. And also I 

would like to know what the rate is of success. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I’ll deal 

with your preamble latterly. First, I’d like to deal with your very 

specific questions that you asked, and they’re very fair 

questions. 

 

You asked how many people per project. Normally, there would 

be three people per project, supervising and checking that 

things were being done according to our standards. The success 

rate the department demands is 75 per cent - we like a 75 per 

cent success rate. And this year I’m pleased to say that, in fact, 

the success rate is in excess of 75 per cent. 

 

Now in response hon. member to some of the things you said 

earlier about the decline in tree planting and how it’s been 

going down steadily. I point out that between 1980 and ‘81, you 

planted 29 per cent fewer trees in ‘81 than you did in 1980. So 

you went down. And then I went and I took some statistics and 

I took some numbers, and I took the last four years of your 

administration and I found that  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1386 

 

you planted 39 million trees. I took the first four years of our 

administration, added them up, and we planted 45 million trees. 

 

Now how can these people sit there and say we plant fewer 

trees than they do when we’ve planted 6 million more. Well, I’ll 

give you the answer, because I know my colleagues over here 

want the answer. As usual, your research staff didn’t get any 

further than the Star-Phoenix. 

 

And what did they find in the Star-Phoenix? They found a story 

with an interview with an individual, on the inside page, leaning 

up against a tree - and I won’t describe him because you know 

who he is. And I’ll name him. His name is Hector Shiell. Hector 

Shiell, who happens to live in my constituency - Hector Shiell. 

And Hector Shiell says since these people got into office - the 

last five years - fewer and fewer and fewer trees. Now why 

would Hector Shiell make such a political comment? Well, 

surprise, surprise! Hector Shiell happens to live on the same 

commune as the individual I defeated in the 1986 general 

election. 

 

You remember him. You remember that guy. Some of you 

came up to his nomination . . . The Leader of the Opposition 

came up to his nomination. He came up to see old Chris. You 

remember Chris? He cut his pony-tail off for the nomination. 

Yes? And you came up to his farm. You know where his farm 

is, out on the highway that runs from Spiritwood past Medstead. 

And I’ve got a photograph here of the sign to his farm. It’s a 

beautiful sign. It’s got a big rainbow on it. It’s going something 

about apiaries on it. 

 

But I’ll tell you something . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I 

can’t name the farm because it would be unparliamentary and it 

would not be accepted to put in the record what this individual 

has on his sign for his farm. And that   

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Order. Would the 

member please put the exhibit down since exhibits are not 

allowed in the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’ll send it over to the hon. member if 

he’d like to look at it. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I get 

down to some more questions here, I want to say to you, Mr. 

Chairman, and to this House, that we have just witnessed a 

minister . . . He talks about mud slinging. Let me tell you, he 

has just taken . . . And I don’t know who Hector Shiell is, but he 

has brought that individual into this House and he has “drug” 

him right across here, and he drug him through the mud. And if 

you want to talk about mud slinging, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Chairman, that minister has just taken the former candidate . . . 

He has just taken Mr. Shiell, and I don’t think anybody in this 

building knows who Mr. Shiell is - drug him through the mud. 

He’s taken him - the last candidate who run against him - and 

he’s put him into the mud barrel. And I see when you talk about 

mud slinging, you can’t get any more mud slinging than is 

coming from that minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Thompson: — And you talk about your five-year plans, 

and you go back on your figures. And I want to say, if you want 

to take your figures and your five-year plan, that’s six million 

trees a year, in the next five years you’re only going to plant 30 

million trees the way you’re going. 

 

When you came into government, we had just finished building 

the satellite station so we could increase the tree planting in this 

province and the capabilities to go out and plant. And you most 

certainly can’t take credit for that. But what you can take credit 

for, Mr. Minister, is closing down the satellite nurseries that we 

built so that we could reforestate this province and keep the 

trees growing for generations to come. But you have decided to 

take the other approach - close it down, take individuals and 

throw pictures around in the legislature, take individuals and 

drag them through the mid. That’s not the way we operate. But 

that’s the way you’re operating. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, was: how many inspectors do 

you have? I didn’t ask, supervisors per crew; I asked how many 

inspectors do you have that go out and inspect and make sure 

what the success rate is when you plant those trees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Sixteen to eighteen. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, are you saying that these are 

provincial inspectors, inspectors from the Department of Parks 

and Recreation who go out and make sure that the trees are 

planted properly and determine what the success rate is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Hon. member, these are technicians 

from the forestry branch of the department. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Okay, thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman. I now want to turn to a request that has come to your 

department for the spraying of approximately two acres of land, 

or a small plot in the Candle Lake area. 

 

Could you indicate, Mr. Minister, who asked for permission to 

spray and what type of spray are they requesting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, just prior to answering 

that question - I was remiss in letting something go when the 

hon. member was talking about our reforestation plan and what 

our intentions are for the future. By way of background, the 

forest industry being a high-tech industry and on the leading 

edge of technology, and the member well knows this from his 

own area, there’s been many changes over the years. And one 

of the problems the research scientists in forestry have been 

grabbling with is: what kind of forest are we going to be 

looking at 50, 70, and 90 years from now? Because as we know, 

it takes 70 to 90 years to grow a commercial forest. With the 

changes, there is a move away from softwood to hardwood. 

And we’re increasingly seeing this. And if we can believe, then, 

what the experts and the forest industry are telling us, that in 

fact the future of wood, not just in this province but in this 

country, is in fibre and will not necessarily be in our traditional 

softwood lumber industry, although that should continue and 

should be viable. 

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1387 

 

So what we’ve been grappling with the last couple of years is 

trying to project what kind of a forest are we going to require 

for our future generations. The indications we’re getting now 

are that we have to do more experiments with hardwood, and 

poplar should not be the only species. So we’re trying to project 

future use against today’s planting. 

 

And I can tell you that the cabinet committed not to 30 million 

trees, hon. member, but I have a commitment from cabinet three 

months ago that we are committing to 50 million trees as our 

reforestation program. That’s of a softwood variety. From 

hardwood, we’re looking at regeneration of poplar which can 

occur naturally, especially in burnt over areas. We have a 50 to 

60 per cent success rate of regeneration anyway. But we’re 

looking at doing some planting in that area. So I thought I 

should mention that to you just now. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are you 

going to answer my question on the chemicals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member’s last question, the Canadian Forestry Service 

submitted a request of a 2.27 hectare experimental proposal to 

the department for approval. They want to apply a herbicide 

called Pronone. I believe it’s IOG. The application is under 

review, and all that’s happened so far, I am advised, is that my 

officials are talking to officials from the Department of the 

Environment, and no final decision has been taken. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

the request came from who? I didn’t get where the request came 

from to do the experimental spraying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, it came from the 

Canadian Forestry Service. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, as you’re aware, I have 

been opposed to the spraying of our forest to kill any trees, and 

my colleagues also over here are opposed to that. I’ve indicated 

to you in the House before that if there was going to be any 

thinning out of any trees or any forest, that it should be done by 

hand. And not only would it be safe, but it would create much 

needed jobs, especially in the summer for our young people 

who are out of school and looking for extra money so that they 

can go back to school in the fall or go back to universities. 

 

And I indicated before, and very strongly, that if you are going 

to take a look at spraying of our forests, then this is something 

that we have to put a stop to. As you know, if you go in and 

spray, and even if it’s a test area and it proves successful, 

they’re going to want to take on more forest and spray it. But 

there’s no way that we should be going into a forest and 

spraying to get rid of aspen or poplar. Because if you have a 

spray that’s strong enough to kill aspen and poplar, then it’s 

going to kill all the other shrubbery that’s in there. It’s also 

going to kill the berries. And when the berries are dead, and 

animals eat the berries, it’s just going to have a spin-off effect 

where it can poison the whole system. 

 

And I say that this is something that has to . . . we have to put a 

stop to that right away. There’s just too many  

chemicals in our system today. And to add more, especially into 

our forest where it’s so vulnerable . . . You talk about a forest 

regenerating itself in Saskatchewan, it taking 70 to 90 years, 

and we want to go out there and start killing off aspen. You say 

we’re turning over   we’re starting to take a look at hardwood, 

and mainly poplar. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to take a serious look at that and not 

approve any spraying in Saskatchewan. And if they want to thin 

out that there small piece of land near Candle Lake, then I ask 

you to hire students for the summer or individuals who are 

unemployed. 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as we’re all 

aware, this is a very touchy subject, and I have responded in 

question period in the pat to the former member from 

Cumberland, I believe, it was, on this issue. 

 

Since that time some two years ago, when I was asked a 

question in question period, and I’d said that I didn’t believe 

any spraying should take place until such time as we were 

absolutely satisfied there would be no danger to things such as 

berries or to other particular shrubs, and certainly to animals in 

the forest, there has been a very comprehensive herbicide task 

force report which has been tabled. And I believe the members 

opposite, certainly the ones who requested it, do have copies. I 

believe I sent the hon. member from Athabasca a copy at one 

point. 

 

And all of the collected data, and all of the knowledge that has 

been available, comes up with no adverse effects at all. Now 

that doesn’t make me rest easy, thinking about it. I happen to 

have serious concerns about spraying, whether it be for food or 

forest or for anything else. And I think most of us share those 

concerns. 

 

Now I’m not sure that the hon. member would have the 

complete support of his caucus on this particular issue of 

spraying. And you may recall, I quoted the former member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on the use of sprays in the past. I could 

quote the member from Quill Lakes, page 3738 of Hansard, 

November 27, 1985, who said, and I’ll quote: 

 

Well I’ll tell you in Saskatchewan News here, back on 

April 21, 1979, and this is when Mr. Nollet was the 

Minister of Agriculture, and when that problem was 

apparent, a million-dollar war was launched against the 

hoppers. In storage there you will see hundreds and 

hundreds of cans of chemicals to address the 

problem - ready to go. And this year the program the 

Minister of Agriculture introduced was a disgrace in 

assistance to the farmers. I want to close, Mr. Speaker, in 

saying how very disappointed I am in this debate today 

that we did not have some of the front-bench members of 

the government who would stand up and address with us 

here today the crisis in agriculture. 

 

The member was referring to chemicals being stored up, 

supplied by the government, to use in a war against  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1388 

 

grasshoppers, which as we all recall was prevalent at that time. 

 

I’m not criticizing the hon. member for Quill Lakes. I’m just 

saying that somehow we have to achieve some kind of 

consistency here. I’m saying it’s okay to take the very same 

spray and take it and spray it on food. But you can’t take that 

same spray and spray on trees, particularly on trees under 

completely controlled conditions, where there will be no people 

there, where specific precautions will be taken. 

 

Now as I said, Mr. Chairman, it does worry me, and it does 

concern me. I’ve always had concerns about chemicals and 

about sprays. But in the face of the scientific evidence, I’m 

somewhat reluctant to say that I could not support the proposal 

to spray a two-acre test site to see what happens. 

 

And another thing, when you spray the trees, it’s once in the 

lifetime of a forest. If you’re going to do manual thinning, it’s 

an ongoing, ongoing continuous basis. And it may very 

well - and I think the member from Regina Rosemont is making 

this point - it would be very labour-intensive. It is also very 

costly. But perhaps it’s an option that should be explored with 

the companies. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

we’re discussing here today, and at the present time, the 

spraying of our forests in northern Saskatchewan. It’s got 

nothing to do with grasshoppers, and I don’t know why you 

would want to bring that in here. 

 

But we’re dealing in a forest that’s very fragile. We’re not 

dealing with the type of land that we’re dealing with in the 

South, where they have to compete - they have to make sure 

that the grasshoppers don’t compete with the crop. Up North, if 

you spray those trees and you spray them once, then you kill the 

competition. And you can talk to anybody that knows anything 

about forestry, and trees have to have competition. It doesn’t 

matter if you spray them once or 100 times - once is going to do 

it. And you are going to destroy the competition and, as a result, 

you end up with a stunted tree. And that’s a fact of life. 

 

And you can go to Candle Lake and you can talk to individuals 

who have been in the forestry business for many, many years, 

and they’ll tell you that. If you put spray in there that’s strong 

enough to kill the poplar or the aspen, then you’re most 

certainly going to kill the rest of the competition and you’re 

going to end up with one species, and you’re going to end up 

with a bunch of runted trees. And you can go into the fragile 

area of northern Saskatchewan where you have one type of tree 

in a sandy area but no competition, and you’ll see that they 

roots will become bar and they become stunted. You have a big 

trunk and no tree to it. And that is what’s going to happen up 

here if you’re going to go in there and spray and kill the 

competition, because forest and trees have to have competition. 

That’s what the other trees are in there for. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that regardless of what you 

believe in, I say that you should not allow spraying to take place 

in the forests in Saskatchewan. Our forests are so  

vulnerable. We live in climatic conditions in this province that 

are far different than the climatic conditions in Alberta and 

farther west and out in the East coast, and you know that 

yourself. You indicated that it takes 70 to 90 years for a tree to 

mature, so we are dealing with a different situation in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, and in all fairness to the citizens of 

this province, don’t allow any spraying of our fragile forest 

because you are taking a chance of destroying it, and once that’s 

done, it takes, as you indicated, 90 years for it to recover. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I should point out to the hon. member, 

Mr. Chairman, that spraying is but one tool - but one tool in 

forest management. There are others, and I have by no means 

discounted them. 

 

But I would like to say that perhaps taking an experimental 

two-acre site could be worthwhile and take a look at it. They are 

registered sprays. They are degradeable within a very short 

time; therefore, the competition to which the hon. member 

alludes should not suffer. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As I indicated, I 

would ask you to take a serious look at any spraying 

commitment that you make to the Canadian Forestry 

Association because as I indicated in my arguments, I think 

Saskatchewan is far different than any of the other provinces 

that we live in. 

 

I now want to turn, Mr. Minister, to another subject, and that is 

fire suppression, and sort of an update on what is happening this 

year. Could you . . . I know you have the new water bombers in 

the fleet right now. Could you indicate if that is the only two 

new water bombers that Saskatchewan is going to get, or are we 

going to be adding more to that fleet. And what do we have 

now for fighting fires in the province? What type of a fleet do 

we have now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can give a detail 

on this to the hon. member. The fleet that we have currently 

consists of six Trackers, three Cansos, three Barons, two 

CL-215’s, the new ones; and we’ve got two more CL-215’s 

which are due later this year, probably in November. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. The 

CL-215’s, the new water bombers that I believe . . . they do not 

belong to the province of Saskatchewan. Is that right? Do they 

belong to the Canadian Forestry Association? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I just 

wanted to be completely clear on this. We have a one-for-one 

purchase arrangement with the federal government. We buy one 

and they give us one for a dollar, and it becomes ours. So the 

arrangement we’ve made is we purchase two and they’re giving 

us two. And that’s the arrangement. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, are you indicating then 

that the provincial government, Parks and Recreation, are the 

sole owners of the new two aircrafts  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1389 

 

and not the Canadian Forestry Association? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, that would be the 

property of the property management Crown. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I want to ask this question, Mr. Minister. I 

see that they carry the Canadian emblem on the aircrafts, which 

would indicate to me - and the name on the aircraft is not the 

Saskatchewan government’s name - I may be wrong in that. But 

I believe that they have a Canadian emblem and a Canadian 

name of the aircraft. Is that not right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, on all cost-shared items 

the federal government do like to get some recognition. And on 

these two particular machines, built by Canadair, they do have a 

Canadian emblem. I find no difficulty with that. Maybe we 

should put a Saskatchewan flag on alongside, too. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. No, I have no 

difficulty with that at all. I just assumed that, with the Canadian 

emblem on them, that they were the property   they were still 

the property of the federal government. But I have no problem 

with that at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We do share them. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Right. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate - I know this has 

been a very bad season to start off with, with fires in northern 

Saskatchewan - could you indicate today, if you have those 

figures with you, how much has been spent on fighting fires to 

date? And if you could indicate   could you break that down in 

how much we have spent on labour, and how much has been 

spent on aircraft in fighting the fires. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. 

member, yes. As we all know, this has been a very bad year, a 

very severe year for forest fires. A combination of factors, very 

dry early in the year, and a number of lightning strikes, and 

certainly a bad year. 

 

To date, as of yesterday, there’ve been 663 forest fires. We can 

contrast that with, to date, last year, 349; fires burning at the 

moment, 26. So, as you’ve indicated, the member from 

Athabasca, this has been a tough year. 

 

In terms of the costs, I can give you a ballpark figure of $11 

million to date spent on fire-fighting and fire suppression. To 

break that down would be very difficult. A ballpark figure 

would be five million in fire-fighting expenses, wages, food, 

and sustenance, and six million on equipment. We won’t have 

the final figures, because we’re in the middle of the season right 

now, until the end of the season. What I’ve asked the officials 

to do is to see if they can pull together something, say, for the 

end of July so we know what it’s cost us to that point and see if 

we can get breakdowns. 

 

(1230) 

 

Sometimes the bills are slow in coming in. We buy groceries 

from various stores around the province, and  

sometimes those bills comes in quite late. So it won’t be 

particularly accurate. But I think, for your purposes, it will give 

you an idea of what the costs are, if that’s acceptable to you. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s 

acceptable to me if you provide me with the information in 

writing whenever you can get that information. 

 

I want to close off the fire suppression by saying that the figures 

that you gave me for the money spent up to date is $11 million. 

And five million of that has gone into labour and food, to fight, 

the equipment, and six million for aircraft. 

 

And I want to say that this has been a contentious issue in years 

past and mainly the fires were fought with aircraft and they’re 

just . . . the local people were not being used to fight the fires. 

 

This year I got no complaints from my constituents because 

most of them have been out fighting the fires, and of course in a 

depressed area they appreciate these type of jobs. I know it’s 

not a good job to have, but it’s important, and it’s important that 

you utilize the fire-fighters that we have in northern 

Saskatchewan because they are experienced fire-fighters. And I 

think that it’s a lot better to fight a fire with experience, and 

fight it the way it should be fought, after the sun goes down and 

before the sun comes up in the morning. 

 

And that is being carried out now. And I appreciate that and I 

just urge you to continue to ask your officials to continue 

fighting fires in that manner because I think it’s important that 

we utilize the experienced forest fire-fighters that we have in 

northern Saskatchewan. And I’m very pleased. I know we go 

back a few years, and that figure would be about one million for 

labour and then million for aircraft. And I see that has changed 

around, and I appreciate that. 

 

I also have watched the new water bombers operating and 

watched other water bombers coming in from other parts of 

Canada when we have the serious fires up there, and they most 

certainly are doing their job properly, too. It’s just too bad that 

we had to have such a serious outbreak this year. It’s not only a 

high cost to the treasury for the year, but it’s something that 

scars the province and sets it back for generations to come. 

 

I now want to turn, Mr. Minister, to the big game surveys that 

are carried out in the province. And I wonder if you could 

indicate to me how many big game surveys was carried out last 

year, and could you indicate what the populations are? And I 

refer specifically, Mr. Minister, to the moose, the deer, and the 

elk, and both the woodland caribou and the barren-land caribou. 

Could you indicate if there was any surveys done on those 

particular groups, and could you indicate if there’s an 

abundance of those species in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, fairly rounded figures 

for the hon. member: moose population of approximately 

50,000; white-tailed deer, 250,000; elk, 8,000; woodland 

caribou - we’ve just started the surveys on those but it would 

appear that they’re down  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1390 

 

from last year, so we’re going to be closing the season on them. 

It looks like 1,000 - tops. And again, barren-ground 

caribou- we’re working in conjunction with the Northwest 

Territories to establish a figure there. We’re not really certain of 

that number yet either, because surveys are ongoing. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You indicate that 

there’s . . . the surveys show you that there’s 50,000 moose 

population in the province and 250,000 deer. I wonder, could 

you indicate if that moose population is levelling out, or is it 

going down, or what is the 50,000 figure mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the moose population 

has been going up. The deer population has been stable, and elk 

is a stable population. The one that probably causes the most 

concern is woodland caribou because it has been going down. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I wonder, Mr. Minister if your officials 

could indicate to you if there is any reason why the woodland 

caribou herd would be going down so drastically, because we 

did have large herds of woodland caribou. And I notice, when I 

fly around in northern Saskatchewan, very seldom do I seem 

them any more. And I wonder if the officials could indicate, is 

there any specific reason why the woodland caribou would be 

decreasing the way it is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that they’ve 

been declining since the 1950s as access to the North became 

easier - more roads and easier to get in, more people were 

getting in, more hunting, hunting pressure, and herds have been 

going down. And that’s why we’re closing the season on them 

now. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, do you consider the 

woodland caribou to be more vulnerable than the moose? I just 

wonder because I know the range of the caribou is mainly in the 

muskeg areas. But I’m just wondering why the moose 

population would be increasing so much and the woodland 

caribou would be declining so fast - especially so fast that 

you’ve decided to close the season on them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, one of the problems 

with the caribou is they travel in herds, and it’s much easier for 

groups of hunters to take large numbers and take them easily. 

And the decision on the season was not unilateral. It was made 

in conjunction with the wildlife advisory committee of the 

Northern (Saskatchewan) Outfitters Association. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s right. 

They do run in herds, and you’ll see herds . . . you used to see 

herds when they were plentiful, right out on the lakes in 

February. 

 

I’m glad to see the moose population coming up. We’ve had 

some good winters, and I notice for the first time trappers and 

fishermen are telling me they’re seeing moose with three calves 

this year, and that’s quite unusual. It would indicate that the 

feed has been good, and a good winter, and another thing it 

indicates that . . . and trappers are telling me this too, that the 

wolf  

population has declined along with the moose population. And 

the moose population is starting to recover and recover very 

well, especially when you see a cow with three calves. You 

don’t see that too often. 

 

I now want to turn to the black bear, Mr. Minister, and I know 

that the black bear . . . the hunting in the province of black and 

brown bear is becoming very popular, and we do have a lot of 

hunters that come in from Sweden and many other foreign 

countries to hunt bear up in northern Saskatchewan, especially 

up in the Green lake and the Beauval area in my constituency. 

And it’s just fantastic how it’s growing. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if your department is going to put 

any controls on the issuing of licence to outfitters who are 

coming in and setting up their portable tree stands from out of 

the province. As I’ve been told, the way it’s operating right 

now, individuals from Alberta can come in, get an outfitter’s 

licence, bring in their portable tree stands, go any place they 

want for a small fee, bring in their tourists, and then they leave. 

They bring in their gas. They bring in their groceries. They 

bring in everything and then they just move out. 

 

We have local individuals in Saskatchewan who are trying to 

take advantage of this situation, and most certainly they can’t 

go across the border to Alberta. And I would ask you, Mr. 

Minister, if you would confirm if that’s in here and set up and 

then just, you know, bring the portable stands in and then move 

out, and if you would consider putting some controls on this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we are getting strong 

representation of the nature suggested by the hon. member to 

discontinue the practice of allowing people from other 

provinces in to set up and do precisely what he indicated has 

happened. We’ve had a series of consultations with the 

association, and there is a discussion paper that has been 

circulated - I don’t know; are you familiar with the discussion 

paper? Could one of my officials undertake to make sure you 

get a copy of it so you know what we’ve been discussing. 

 

On the subject of the black bear . . . black bear-brown bear 

intermingled species in Saskatchewan, we do have a very 

healthy bear population. It’s been estimated at a minimum of 

40,000 in the last couple of years, and does seem to be growing. 

There have been a few problems experienced with bears, just in 

the last week, just south of the hon. member’s own area around 

Meadow Lake, Loon Lake, perhaps around Green Lake as well. 

We’ve been having some problems with them. I think that’s 

probably in part, due to forest fires in the North, and the bears 

are being forced to come out of the forest and move farther 

south. 

 

We had a similar problem in 1977 where a number of bears 

were found burned in forest around my own area, and I 

remember in the fall people bird hunting were carrying one slug 

in the shotgun, as well as shells, in case they surprised a bear in 

the bush, because they really had become a very serious 

problem. But the bear population has been growing in recent 

years. It is very healthy, and I think it’s something that could be 

put to our good use in  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1391 

 

the North with our northern outfitters. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s right, it 

has become very popular, and we do have an abundance of 

bears in the province. When you see the type of clientele that is 

coming over here . . . Actually they’re coming from many 

European countries, and many of the individuals that are 

coming are from Sweden. And they bring their own camera 

crews, they bring their own cooks, and then they . . . It’s 

becoming a fairly big business. 

 

I have some operators in the Green Lake and Beauval area who 

are - and the Keeley Lake area, where there was 80 bears taken 

out alone, just in Keeley Lake, last yea r- who want some 

protection, the Saskatchewan outfitters who want some 

protection. 

 

(1245) 

 

You take an Alberta operator who can come in here and get a 

licence for $100, set up, really contributes nothing to the 

province, and can set up right in the same area that we have 

individuals who are starting up. And I speak specifically of that 

Green Lake, Keeley, Beauval area where individuals are just 

starting up. 

 

But lo and behold, they go out and here the baits and everything 

has been set up by an operator from Alberta who comes in for a 

$100 fee. And our Saskatchewan operators cannot go into 

Alberta and do the same thing. 

 

So I would ask you, Mr. Minister, and your officials, to check 

this out very closely and see if it’s something that can be 

stopped and that we can, you know, give encouragement to our 

Saskatchewan operators rather than allowing the Alberta ones 

to come in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the points the 

member made are well taken. And I can agree in principle with 

what he’s advocating, and it’s something that certainly the 

department will be looking at. We want to make sure that we 

protect our viable industry in the North for our Northern 

(Saskatchewan) Outfitters Association. It will play an important 

part, an increasingly important part in our efforts towards 

economic diversification and the encouragement of tourism 

within the province. 

 

Certainly fishing and wildlife generates some $350 million 

worth of economic activity within this province, and we don’t 

want anything to happen that would in any way diminish that 

return. So the member’s points are well taken, and we certainly 

take his advice on it. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Now I 

want to turn to another survey, and that is the survey that has 

been taking place regarding the black duck or the cormorants. 

 

You indicated that there was a survey being done in 1985. I 

want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that the black duck population 

is increasing drastically in northern Saskatchewan. And one of 

the arguments that was used before was that they fed mainly on 

suckers, which was referred to as “rough fish”. 

But I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, if that is the case, 

suckers are no longer considered rough fish in northern 

Saskatchewan. It has become a commercial fish, and more and 

more the demand for the rough fish is coming through. And you 

see our fishermen supplying the corporation with hundreds of 

thousands of tonnes, now, of suckers. 

 

So if that is the case, then I would ask you . . . And, Mr. 

Minister, I want to turn over to you a study, or some 

information that I have got for your own information. I would 

ask you to take a serious look at how we are going to control 

the black duck population. And you can talk to old 

individuals - fishermen who have been around for many, many 

years in northern Saskatchewan - and they indicate that they 

have never, ever seen the black duck population the way it is 

today. 

 

And I, myself, being a commercial fisherman, and seeing the 

tremendous population of the black duck . . . You go out on the 

lakes and you’ll see thousands of them in a flock, and dead fish 

just floating up all over. And the pelicans and the seagulls, who 

will go right in amongst the black duck, because they feed on 

the fish that the black duck has either got too much and had to 

get rid of them, or they have wounded them and the fish pops 

up and the seagulls and the pelicans feed on them. 

 

And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, to ask your officials to go 

out and discuss with the commercial fishing industry, sit down 

with the commercial fishermen and the tourists - the tourists 

also should be involved in this because the cormorants are now 

depleting stocks that the tourist operators rely on and the 

commercial fishermen rely on. And I would ask that you take a 

serious look at the population of our cormorants - ask the 

officials, the conservation officers, to go out and meet with the 

tourist association, with the commercial fishermen, and 

somehow work out a plan to cut down on the cormorants. 

 

As you will see in the information I passed over to you - and 

this information was compiled by a commercial fisherman and 

in conjunction with commercial fishermen and tourist 

operators - and they feel that the best way to control the black 

duck is to go to the nesting grounds and take a certain amount 

of eggs away every spring. In that way you would eliminate the 

population by just taking so many eggs out of their nests. And I 

think you would not run into any problems with any interest 

groups by doing it with this method. And you will see that the 

information that I passed on to you, Mr. Minister, indicates that 

that is the route that should be taken. 

 

Not only do the black ducks destroy the fish populations, but 

they destroy prime nesting areas for our blue herons. And blue 

herons come back to the same islands every year. And all of a 

sudden the trees that they use are gone because of the black 

ducks who congregate on these islands. And there’s many 

aspects that one has to look at. And I would urge you and your 

department officials to take a serious look at controlling the 

cormorants in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, the 

comments of the member are well taken. As I believe he knows, 

we do sponsor a graduate student, University of  

  



 

July 24, 1987 

1392 

 

Saskatchewan, who’s doing a study in this whole area. Her 

thesis is expected this fall. her thesis is going to be used as a 

basis . . . it will be a scientific report, in the form of a scientific 

report, that we will use in discussions with the groups to whom 

the hon. member has already referred - certainly tourists, 

outfitters, and commercial fishermen. 

 

The incidence of cormorants eating other than rough fish has 

increased. I believe the percentage they are now taking of game 

fish is in the order of 5 per cent. And as the hon. member and 

those who are familiar with the North knows, a 5 per cent 

tolerance is too much. In terms of . . . I could take the instance 

of Lac La Ronge where the tolerance of trout was set at 254,000 

pounds. And we already know of 253,000 that are being 

harvested. We know from angling and commercial fishing, 250 

. . . If we know of 253, we can be sure there’s a lot more than 

that coming out of the lake. 

 

And that is not an uncommon happenstance across the North. 

We know that, in some instances, some lakes are being 

overfished. And when you have a population such as described 

by the hon. member - which is absolutely true, it has grown in 

recent years tremendously - accounting for 5 per cent of the 

game fish, we really can’t tolerate that situation. 

 

However . . . And I could point out that as evidence of the 

growth in the population of cormorants in recent years   I’m 

finding them in my own constituency of Turtleford, and I’m a 

long ways south from where the hon. member lives. And I’ve 

seen quite a number of them on the lakes in my area when I’ve 

been travelling through the constituency. 

 

So they have been breeding quite prolifically and spreading. 

They also are not content, as the hon. member pointed out, to 

settle around one island on one lake. They will spread out and 

do considerable damage to other bird populations. The one 

caveat we have to face . . . and this is something that we’re 

going to have to approach in a semi-delicate form because 

we’re going to have to discuss it with the Canadian Wildlife 

Service and some other groups. 

 

In other areas the cormorant is considered a rare and 

endangered species. Now I know in Saskatchewan that would 

bring a smile to many faces of northern residents, who wouldn’t 

believe that they could be rare and endangered. But by the same 

token we see many pelicans flying around in certain areas of 

Saskatchewan, and it’s difficult to believe that they’ve only 

recently been removed from that designation. 

 

So we do have to take that into consideration when we are 

dealing with the results of the report, at which time we also 

intend to consult with the northern groups to whom you have 

already referred, that it is regarded as a rare and endangered 

species in other parts of the world. 

 

Now I don’t know if there would be any market in us saying we 

can move eggs to other areas. I think it might be well worth 

exploring. As you and I are both aware there are a number of 

federal agencies, whether it be the Canadian Wildlife Service, 

to Habitat Canada, to  

international groups, who may be interested in some kind of 

proposal. We are over-populated with something that’s rare and 

endangered in other parts of the world. Perhaps we could be 

getting together on this, exporting them, so that they do have 

them in another country, and they can survive there if they are 

compatible with climate. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 

 


