













































September 28, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 28, 1987 

 

 

2901 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. First of 

all, I would like to thank the member for Riversdale for 

allowing me to interrupt the flow of questioning that he started 

this afternoon. I have a scheduling difficulty later on this 

evening and the member was kind enough to allow me to 

proceed for a few moments at this hour, and I’m grateful for his 

courtesy in allowing me to do that. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have three of four areas that I would like to 

examine with you this evening, and if I could, I would like to 

start on the matter of tax reform and the discussion that is 

presently going on at the federal level with a series of 

committee hearings being held across the country and so forth, 

apparently aiming for some implementation of some tax reform 

measures as early as January 1. And the one that I am 

particularly concerned with has to do with agricultural in 

Saskatchewan, and of course that bears very heavily upon our 

economic development in this province. 

 

The proposal has been made that, at least in some respects, the 

system of accounting for farmers should be, according to tax 

reform, switched from the present cash system of accounting to 

a modified form of accrual accounting for farmers. I understand 

that at the hearings of the parliamentary committee in Regina 

recently that virtually all of the major farm organizations in 

Saskatchewan expressed their profound reservations about the 

proposed change, in particular, the Western Canadian Wheat 

Growers Association and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

indicated that they would not want to see that particular aspect 

of tax reform proceed. It is an important economic development 

issue in Saskatchewan. It could have profound implications in 

the long term for many farmers in our province. 

 

And I wonder if you could tell me whether the Government of 

Saskatchewan supports the position taken by the Western 

Canadian Wheat Growers Association and the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool in opposing this modified accrual form of income 

tax accounting for farmers. And if the Saskatchewan 

government does support the farm organizations in this respect, 

could the minister indicate what plans the Saskatchewan 

government would have to lobby directly with the federal 

government to try to have that particular aspect of the tax 

reform package substantially amended to the satisfaction of 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I believe — and I could stand to be 

corrected here — that the Minister of Finance appeared before I 

think it was the Blenkarn Finance Committee of the House of 

Commons on various issues that relates to agriculture. One was 

the shift from what was normally  

referred to as the cost accounting system to accrual accounting 

system that was brought in, I guess, following the Carter 

commission whenever it was, back some time ago. 

 

Farmers were exempted at that time. We made a representation 

both at the Blenkarn meeting, I think as I understand, but we’ve 

also made government to government representations that the 

shift to accrual accounting, difficult at any time, is not 

something that is terribly, terribly wise at this time. And we 

strongly recommended against moving in an accrual system of 

accounting — leave well enough alone for the farmer. Given 

the present state of farm markets, etc., to have to take that wheat 

inventory into income, quite frankly, I think, is stupid. I could 

put other words on it, but that one probably explains it the best. 

 

As I understand, the proposal also questioned the whole concept 

of the block averaging for farmers, and our comment on that 

was equally the same — leave it alone. Why would you change 

block averaging when farmers are now likely not making any 

money, in which case they can get some back if they contribute 

over a period of time? 

 

There was a series of other ones that I just don’t recall for 

memory. I think there was some concern with regard to whether 

or not any value-added tax or some form of value-added tax or 

consumption tax, if used, would be applied to farmers, and they 

would then become tax collectors which, I think, is equally 

stupid. 

 

So the three that have come to my mind, I would class them as 

wrong-headed. One had the sense that it was still the same 

bureaucrats that were in Finance 10 and 15 and 20 years ago in 

Ottawa, still trying to drum up their same old programs. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I appreciate the strength of the words that the 

minister has used in describing some of the most recent tax 

reform proposals, and I trust that’s indicative of a continuing 

lobbying effort on the part of the Saskatchewan government to 

head off some of the aspects of tax reform that could be adverse 

to the farming community in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I wonder if the minister would make the brief presented by 

the Finance minister generally available to the House — I 

presume that is a public document — and it would be helpful, I 

think, to have that officially on the record in terms of the 

position taken by the Saskatchewan government. 

 

I’d like to move to another area quickly, Mr. Minister, having to 

do with the status of our various trade offices around the world. 

Saskatchewan, as I understand it, maintains a number of offices 

in other countries in respect of trade matters, and I wonder if I 

could ask the minister first of all, with respect to the office 

located in London, known as Saskatchewan House in London 

— I understand located on Pall Mall — could the minister 

indicate the status of that location at the present time, and are 

any plans in the works that would affect the status of that 

particular office in London. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2902 

 

I raise the question because there have been certain suggestions, 

at least in the category of rumour at this stage, that in fact the 

present Saskatchewan House office in London may be in the 

process of being closed and that our representative in London 

might indeed be operating out of his home as opposed to an 

official office there. Could the minister just bring us up to date 

on the exact status of that office in London and any changes 

that might be in the mill with respect to it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — On your first question, the Minister of 

Finance advises that he appeared privately with the committee 

as those chose to operate that way, as often they do, with 

provincial ministers, and he had met with them privately for 

about an hour and a half. He did raise the concerns that you 

have raised through, as our government has in the past. 

 

With regard to the Saskatchewan House, or the agent-general 

office in London, that office does not fall under the budget of 

ED&T (Economic Development and Trade), so we spend no 

money with regards to that office. The money is expended 

through Executive Council or intergovernmental affairs, I 

believe, so it doesn’t come out of this particular budget. So I 

would not be . . . We’re not that familiar with exactly what is 

happening there. I believe the lease went up on the building in 

Pall Mall, though, and of course the government owns the flat 

that’s over there and has for a number of years — 15, 20 years, 

I believe. So that would be better directed towards the Premier 

when his estimates come forward. 

 

The offices that we do have as a government would be in 

London, which is the agent-general office. There is an office in 

Vienna but that is under Agdevco (agricultural development 

corporation), which is under the responsibility of the Deputy 

Premier. Primarily that office, just in a broad sense, is used 

primarily for access into the eastern European market, and most 

of the work there is related to into the Soviet Union, into 

various Eastern Bloc countries, plus some of the south part of 

Europe. The government has offices in Hong Kong, and we had 

an office in Minot and that has been shut down. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, do I take it that while the 

Vienna office is specifically under Agdevco and, therefore, the 

responsibility of the Deputy Premier, that the others that you’ve 

referred to — London, Hong Kong, and the former office in 

Minot — would they all come under the jurisdiction of the 

Premier, or which one of these fall within the jurisdiction of 

Economic Development and Trade? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Minot and Hong Kong. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

With respect to Minot, you indicated that it had closed. Do I 

take it that there are, then, no Saskatchewan offices in the 

United States with the closure of the Minot office? And if that 

is correct, do you have plans to reopen an American location? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, the decision taken on Minot — it 

was closed down through this budget cycle, and it had  

primarily been involved in servicing the small-line 

manufacturers of farm equipment into that North Dakota, South 

Dakota market, into the Minnesota market, but primarily the 

North Dakota market. We felt that perhaps that could be 

adequately handled from Saskatchewan because of its 

proximity. 

 

Clearly we are looking in the next budget cycle to probably 

picking one or two or three offices into the United States, given 

the fact that United States has . . . about half of all exports out 

of province go into the United States, given the fact that most 

provinces tended to be into what we call the international 

market excluding the United States, but their offices tend to be 

in the international market not in the United States market. 

 

Now, because potash is one of our big markets there — and 

clearly the potash industry is very tied into that, uranium as well 

— we have a trade officer in New York that serves the East 

Coast. We have been discussing with the federal government so 

that we wouldn’t have to put our own office and the costs of our 

own office, perhaps to locate a trade officer from our province 

in either a consul or it would be a federal office anyway, in 

perhaps, Minneapolis, which would be more appropriate to this 

region, and then perhaps on the West Coast. Those decisions 

have not been taken other than on the East Coast, there’s a trade 

office on the East Coast, in New York city responsible to our 

department. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, is the office in New York 

operated exclusively by the Government of Saskatchewan and 

therefore is not a part of a federal consular office? I would like 

a little bit of clarification on that, whether it stands on its own 

as a provincial office or as an offshoot of a Canadian federal 

government office in New York city. And I wonder if the 

minister could indicate the location of that office in New York 

and roughly the cost involved in maintaining that office in New 

York city. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — A couple of things. I’ll get that 

information for you. You have to bear in mind that we’re just in 

the process of . . . We’ve had the trade officer working out of 

his house on his own for a while. We’re just in the process of 

confirming that, and that’s why I don’t have the final figures as 

to what it costs, but I certainly will undertake to get that 

information and give it to you. 

 

A number of provinces have located trade officers in the East 

Coast in New York city for a couple of reasons. Number one, 

they are not involved with the federal government either by 

trade or in a political realm, number one. Number two, 

provinces are discouraged from being in Washington. So if you 

have somebody in New York, you have a better view of the lie 

of the land in Washington because of its proximity to 

Washington. So it can serve two-fold purposes, both as a trade 

office and as an intelligence gathering as to what’s happening in 

Washington. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the information I 

asked in connection with the New York  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2903 

 

office, I wonder if I could ask you to expand the detail that you 

could provide at a later stage with respect to all of the trade 

offices outside of Canada operated under the auspices of your 

department. I wonder if you could give us the detailed 

breakdown of exactly where they are and how much they cost 

to maintain. 

 

I wonder if you could also indicate in your statement a basic 

cost-benefit analysis of those offices. They have been 

functioning for some period of time, at least some of them have 

been, and I think it would be useful to the House to know 

exactly what we’re paying to maintain those offices and what 

the government can identify as benefits flowing back to 

Saskatchewan as a result of those offices being maintained 

outside of Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I will undertake to provide you the 

information of the two offices that we fund out of this 

department — one is the New York trade officer and the other 

is the office in Hong Kong. 

 

How you assess an office in Hong Kong becomes somewhat 

difficult in this sense, that Hong Kong was chosen as . . . and 

other provinces have chosen Hong Kong as well. Number one, 

it gives us access into the PRC (Pacific Rim countries) where 

you don’t have perhaps a trade officer in the People’s Republic 

of China. So it can be accessed from Hong Kong. It can also 

deal in Japan plus into that Asia-Pacific region. If you put it into 

Japan only, then there’s some little more diplomatic difficulties 

with regard to the PRC. So our main focus over there, I think it 

would be fair to say, is to protect the very valuable trade into 

the PRC, number one. 

 

Number two, to look for the approach towards trade with the 

other Asia-Pacific region; and three, to look for entrepreneurial 

immigration out of that region, as there is a lot of people in 

Asia-Pacific interested in immigrating to North American and 

immigrating with a fair degree of capital that they’d be prepared 

to invest in this particular country. 

 

So how you assess that, I suppose we, at the end of the day, 

come back at the end of the year and say, what have we — what 

have you done; show me your logs, that type of thing, and then 

assess (a) do you need the office; and (b) is the guy that’s there 

the right guy. 

 

I think it’s probably fair to say that most provinces believe that 

you have to have a presence in Asia-Pacific. The problem is 

you can’t afford to have one in Japan and one in Hong Kong 

and maybe one in China and one some place else. Alberta, 

perhaps, is a leading province with trade offices. Manitoba and 

Saskatchewan both have one in Hong Kong. Manitoba just 

recently opened one in Amsterdam, I believe, in that European 

region. 

 

Each looks at it, I think, if you talk to some of the exporters 

from within the province, and they speak fairly highly of the 

Hong Kong office. That’s a difficult one to gauge. I think all I 

could say is this: is that the times have changed significantly to 

where the province, and certainly companies within the 

province, are now travelling the world and probably could use 

some assistance in travelling the world dealing with these 

particular countries. 

So I think that foreign offices are a fact of life, quite frankly. I 

would hope that perhaps we could maybe work together, 

perhaps closer with some of the other provinces — Alberta, 

Saskatchewan, Manitoba, B.C. — type of thing, to work a deal 

so we have some economies of scale. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I thank the minister for his answer, and I’ll 

look forward to the information that he has agreed to file with 

the House with respect to our trade offices. 

 

Mr. Minister, there’s just one final area that I wish to raise with 

you this evening, and that has to do with a critical item from the 

point of view of the Saskatchewan economy and Saskatchewan 

trade, and that is the grain trade in the world, which we all 

know is under severe distress at the present time, and our 

farmers are feeling the painful consequences of that. 

 

Last December in the brief sitting of this House before 

Christmas, I raised an idea with the Premier on a couple of 

occasions which had to do with the pursuit of the Government 

of Canada, with the encouragement of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, of an International Grains Agreement as an 

alternative to some of the insanity that is presently going along 

in world grain markets today. At that time in his answer, if I 

recall it correctly, the Premier indicated that Saskatchewan was 

more interested in pursuing the overall, bilateral, free trade 

discussion with the United States and that he did not see a lot of 

merit in pursuing the specific idea of an International Grains 

Agreement. 

 

Since, Mr. Minister, the world and the grain trade has 

toughened a lot since last December — things have grown 

progressively worse rather than better — and because the free 

trade initiative now seems to be at least potentially in some 

considerable difficulty, I would like to raise my suggestion 

again with the government about an International Grains 

Agreement which, of course, the Government of Canada would 

have to pursue, but I believe the Government of Saskatchewan 

should be one of its most vigorous advocates. 

 

What I am basically suggesting is an exercise, a very concerted 

exercise, in exporter co-operation involving Canada, the United 

States, Australia, and probably Argentina — at least those four 

major world grain exporting countries. Between the four of us 

— I use the “us” in relation to those countries — I think it can 

be said, with considerable accuracy, that we account for perhaps 

65 per cent, or even better, of the world’s grain trade. That’s a 

very substantial portion of the market, and with that portion of 

the market, one might have some reasonable expectation that 

exporter co-operation could, in fact, achieve something useful. 

 

It would seem to me that an agreement among those four 

countries would have to include four elements. One would be 

some understanding about market shares. 

 

The second element would be clearly an understanding about 

price and probably a price range rather than a single price — 

but a price range none the less that would be substantially better 

than the price that our farmers are  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2904 

 

being forced to accept today. 

 

The third element would be some understanding about levels of 

production and inventory in the various countries participating 

in the agreement. 

 

And the fourth element would be some kind of strategy 

vis-à-vis the European common market countries and how these 

four grain exporting countries outside of the common market 

would deal with what is obviously sometimes vicious practices 

on the part of the EEC (European Economic Community) in 

dealing with the grain trade. 

 

The idea, Mr. Minister, has been debated in world grain circles 

for many years. Sometimes an initiative has been undertaken; 

sometimes it has succeeded. It seems to me in our present 

circumstances, the idea is at least worth pursuing on the part of 

the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of 

Canada, and it seems to me that in this particular case of grain, 

we have a rather compelling argument that we can advance to 

the United States which they may be more interested in than 

they apparently seem to be in relation to the overall free trade 

talks. 

 

And the one specific argument that we could advance in relation 

to grain that would be attractive, I think, from the American 

point of view is that if we were able to put together an effective 

exercise in exporter co-operation with the various elements that 

I’ve mentioned here, it would have the basic bottom line 

advantage from the American point of view of saving them 

some billions of dollars a year in agricultural subsidies that they 

would no longer have to pay because their farmers, along with 

our farmers, would be getting a far better return out of world 

grain markets as opposed to coming out of the treasuries of 

respective subsidizing countries. 

 

Mr. Minister, the situation, as you know, in grain is critically 

painful. Many of our farmers are in desperate circumstances. 

With the change in circumstances, unfortunately for the worse 

now compared to nine or ten months ago when I first asked the 

Premier the question, I wonder if you could indicate if the 

opinion of the Government of Saskatchewan has changed at all 

on this idea of this particular initiative. And if it has, and I hope 

it has, could the minister indicate what planning, if any, is going 

forward on the part of the Saskatchewan government to try to 

get the ball rolling on this particular initiative which it could be, 

if it succeeds, tremendously advantageous to our farmers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well let me try to get at that in a couple 

of ways. Number one, the concept is not new, it’s been tried 

before, and I think it would be fair to say it didn’t work before. 

And I think if you really look seriously at the problem in 

agriculture and the grain agricultural problem world-wide 

today, the problem is not can a cartel fix it as much as the 

problem is subsidies and how do you get at subsidies. 

 

Now we have advanced the theory of world wheat agreement, a 

variety of things, grains only agreement, fast track grains only 

agreement at the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and 

Trade). I think the consensus of certainly the Sask Wheat Pool, 

the United Grain Growers,  

the western wheat growers, is that GATT is the proper forum to 

really try to get at the question you’re dealing with. 

 

Perhaps that wasn’t so in the past because in the past I think we 

dealt mostly with tariffs and reductions of tariffs at the GATT, 

at the last two rounds prior to the Uruguay round that’s on now. 

The Uruguay round that’s on now would bring grains under 

GATT — that’s the proposal — and therefore you deal with the 

question of subsidies. I think that we have to come to grips with 

that. 

 

That view is also strongly held by Sylvia Ostry from the fed 

who is one of their leading economists with regard to the grain 

question, and clearly I think have come to grips now or come to 

realize that, in fact, agriculture is probably the most important 

trading dimension that the world has to deal with. That’s 

something coming from somebody from central Canada that 

sometimes we heap scorn on. 

 

I can say that we have been actively involved with the Cairns’ 

Group — Cairns’ Group being formed in Australia about a year 

ago, consisting of all agriculture-producing countries with the 

exception of . . . or major agriculture-producing countries with 

the exception of the United States, the EEC (European 

Economic Community), and the Japanese. There doesn’t appear 

to be a great deal of movement by the Americans, who seem to 

be locked in war with the Europeans, for a way out other than to 

the strongest belongings of this Boyle’s theory. And of course 

the Japanese are the most protectionist country in the world as it 

comes to agriculture, as you are full-well aware. 

 

So I think the Cairns’ Group really has a . . . Certainly from the 

Argentinas, the Brazils, Canada, Australia, that type of thing — 

or maybe that’s not going to solve the problem — collectively, 

they become a fairly significant player in the world market in 

terms of total volume. But I think, what they have to . . . that 

they are of the view as well . . . Each of those countries are of 

the view as well that GATT is the answer. 

 

This round, it being almost exclusively dealing with grains, can 

you get an agreement on it, and if so, will it take for ever in a 

day to get it? And that really becomes the question. My guess is 

that the solution under GATT is going to take some time if it’s 

going to be successful. And I can sympathize with the views of 

the hon. member that a lot of farmers might not have five years 

or ten years waiting for GATT to come to some kind of resolve. 

Without the Americans into this so-called cartel, I don’t think it 

can work. 

 

The other thing is the Europeans now are producing far more 

grain than perhaps they did 10 and 15 years ago. And, of 

course, every other country is producing more grain, so that 

we’re down almost now to the point where the Soviet Union is 

the only really large grain market left in the world. And many 

fear that if Gorbachev gets his way with the Soviet bureaucracy, 

that that might turn around, too, in 10 years. And so by the time 

GATT gets to its resolve, the Soviet market might not even be 

there. 

 

So the problem is clearly very, very significant. It  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2905 

 

preoccupies the time certainly, of our Premier, I know that. Can 

we get an agreement? The problem is that I would see at this 

point in time the Americans, the Europeans, and the Japanese 

are prepared because of their size, I think, to play hard ball and 

let the chips fall out yet for awhile. And I think that’s probably 

as close to reality as you see in the world’s grain market. 

 

It’s in terrible disarray. Without being fixed, it could bring on 

significant world-wide economic problems. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Well I agree with the minister’s assessment 

that the risks here are enormous, and unfortunately, it’s the rural 

economy of Saskatchewan that could have the heaviest penalty 

to pay if the situation is allowed to get worse. I appreciate the 

initiatives that have been taken in respect of GATT. My 

concern, as the minister has just stated, is that the GATT 

process is ponderously slow, and I wonder how many of our 

farmers might be around to benefit from an eventual GATT 

agreement in five or ten years. 

 

And I would simply like to leave this point by asking the 

minister, and through him the government, not to rule out the 

idea of a specific International Grains Agreement negotiated 

between Canada, the United States, Australia, and Argentina, 

perhaps on a parallel track with what may be happening at the 

GATT. It’s an idea from which I have heard, from certain 

comments, emanating from the United States Congress, is an 

idea that perhaps is growing a little bit in favour in the 

Congress. And I would hope that the minister wouldn’t simply 

rule it out as something that it’s not worth trying to do, because 

I feel very strongly that it’s an initiative that we should at least 

make an attempt at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I make the following observation: 

Canada will be presenting to GATT its position as it relates to 

agriculture subsidies at the end of October of this year. And 

each of the United States and the EEC will be presenting their 

position as it relates to GATT in the grains question, or the 

wider question, but specifically will deal with grains by the end 

of this year. So that assuming that we could get some 

movement in GATT early, perhaps it would be appropriate 

rather than maybe talking about a grains only agreement, to 

argue for a fast tracking on grains which we have pushed the 

federal government to deal with at the GATT table in Geneva. 

 

So one would maybe hope — given the American signal from 

the President whether he can deliver on it or not, by saying I’ll 

eliminate all American subsidies — there could be some 

movement given the fact that the European Economic 

Community is running into the similar budgetary problems with 

regard to the agricultural subsidies. So perhaps our position 

being advanced at Geneva, the other positions being advanced 

at Geneva, whether or not there is a chance for success, earlier 

rather than later, on grains and whether we could see a 

fast-tracking at GATT on the grains question. 

 

So I think it would be probably proper and most of the advice 

we have from the various grain groups, various economists and 

other government people fairly  

experienced in this, is that this is probably the right course to 

pursue at this point in time, at least to the end of this year. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I’m wondering 

if the minister could provide me with an accounting of Aid to 

Trade program grants under $2,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Okay. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Could that be within a week or so? Is that 

reasonable? Thank you very much. 

 

How about providing an accounting of the world business 

show-case — the companies that were present at the world 

business show-case at Expo ‘86, along with the grants given in 

conjunction with that or the costs incurred, depending on 

circumstances? Is that also possible to receive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We can get you the people that were 

there. There was not very many grants to that type of thing: it 

tended to be the other way around. So what we will do is 

undertake to get you the people that appeared there. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — That would be good, along with, you know, 

with any costs incurred in conjunction with the program. I’d 

appreciate that very much. Could the minister tell me, just 

briefly, which firms were represented at the Canadian high 

technology show in Ottawa last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Are you asking on that question — do I 

know of who all was there from Saskatchewan from high tech? 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We’ll try to find that out. A lot of them 

would be more appropriate and we could consult with the 

Science and Technology department and find out as well. I 

mean they might know some that we didn’t know. Bear in mind 

that they tend to be more specific into that field and us perhaps 

a little more general in that field. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — The only reason I ask is that I know that in 

your annual report it’s mentioned: “For the first time the 

province’s high-tech industry was represented at the Canadian 

high technology show in Ottawa.” And I presume that your 

department then facilitated or enabled that rather than Science 

and Technology. So if you could provide that information too, 

I’d be appreciative. 

 

Can the minister tell me if a Mr. Ian Angell was employed by 

the department within the last year or two? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — He worked in my office. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Can you tell me what his position was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — He was a ministerial assistant. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — At what level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Level? What do you mean level? 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2906 

 

Mr. Koenker: — What level of ministerial assistant was he? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ll find that out for you. I don’t know. 

He was probably mid-range, whatever that means, and I’ll find 

that out and get it for you. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — What qualifications did he have for the 

position of ministerial assistant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well he’s the ministerial assistant. He 

had graduated from College of Commerce, University of 

Saskatchewan, I believe, came to work and worked in several 

departments and moved up into the Department of Economic 

Development and Trade. He worked in my office. 

 

From a political point of view, as you realize, any ministerial 

assistants tend to be political in every government. And he was, 

well, from a family of NDP. He had saw the light when he got 

into university, and he switched over and became a 

Conservative. So from that point of view, because he deals with 

political events on a daily basis working in the minister’s office, 

he was obviously somebody I thought was quite, quite good and 

quite capable. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — And when did his employment cease with 

your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think about June 10, June 10 of this 

year. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Could the minister tell us what Mr. Angell is 

doing now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — He is attending university. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Can the minister tell us where he’s attending 

university? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — University of Singapore. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Is his attendance at the University of 

Singapore in any way funded by the provincial government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You mean, has he got a contract with 

the government, or do we pay him a salary? The answer is no. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Is he receiving any funds from the provincial 

government to enable his studies in Singapore? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No. He resigned. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — So he’s receiving absolutely no funding from 

the provincial government whatsoever for his course of studies 

in Singapore? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Correct. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just a 

few brief questions of the minister. 

Mr. Minister, I know that the government has a trade office in 

Hong Kong. There’s a trade office in Vienna, and there’s trade 

office in London. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The government doesn’t have a trade 

office in Vienna. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, you used to, or somewhere in that 

vicinity of the world there is a trade office. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister: is there also a trade 

office anywhere in the United States, and more specifically, is 

there a trade office or some kind of an office that operates on 

behalf of this government in New York city? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the hon. member, the member 

from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg just went through that series of 

questions for 15 minutes, so read Hansard. I indicated to you 

that there was a trade officer in New York city, and we are 

about to set up an office in New York city. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m sorry if I didn’t quite get all of the 

answers. The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg did not 

spend a great deal of time on this. What is the nature of this 

office, and what is its purpose intended to be, and what do you 

anticipate will be the cost of this operation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Can I have that question again, Ed? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — What is the nature of this office, what is 

it intended to do, and how much is its cost going to be to the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I had the same question from the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and I undertook to 

provide that information as we’re in start-up time. We haven’t 

got the cost fully identified, but we will have this for you. 

 

As far as working for Economic Development and Trade, he is 

trying to help in the marketing of product in the United States 

and the East Coast. 

 

I’m going to give you an example of the Sweeprite machines 

manufactured in the city of Regina for cleaning streets. The city 

of Regina don’t buy them. I guess maybe they’re built in 

Saskatchewan, but he was successful in selling a number of 

those to the city of New York and has a couple of other 

contracts. He is also dealing with some of the smaller food 

processors in helping to market processed food into that East 

Coast market. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, is it true that you intend to 

open this office on October 5 or 6? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That decision hasn’t been taken yet. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — When do you intend to make that 

decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Soon. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure since you have 

made a commitment to have a trade office which you can 

describe quite adequately — you know what its  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2907 

 

intention is and what its purpose is — why aren’t you able to 

inform the House when you intend to open this office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Because the decision has not been taken 

yet. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, is it true that this trade 

office is to be located in the Rockefeller Centre which is 

probably one of the most expensive locations for space in the 

city of New York? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The office space, etc., is done by the 

property management people, and we simply get a bill from 

them. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Come on, Mr. Minister, what are you 

trying to hide here? I fully know that its space is provided by 

the property management people. Are you telling me that your 

officials who are seated with you are not able to tell you where 

this space will be located when they’re in the process of lining 

up personnel? They know exactly, and so do you, what the 

purpose of the office will be, and you’re not prepared to tell this 

House where the office will be located. You’re telling me that 

your department is not informed about the location of the 

office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You indicated that it was the most 

expensive office space. I don’t know whether it’s the most 

expensive office space in New York; I don’t even know how it 

compares to something else. I simply indicate that we have a 

trade officer in New York city. It is our view that we should 

pursue that into an office, and we contact the appropriate people 

in property management to arrange the appropriate space, and 

that’s exactly what they’re doing. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, when you want to 

communicate with your trade officer and when your officials 

want to communicate with your trade officer, where will you be 

writing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ve done mostly telephone. I wouldn’t 

know where to write to him. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Chairman, this is about as 

arrogant as any minister of the Crown could possibly be. Don’t 

say to the people of Saskatchewan, who are going to have to 

pay for another expensive trade office so that you could plug in 

some other relative or friend of someone in your government, 

that you don’t know where the office is located, Mr. Minister. If 

your officials phone your agent there, surely they must know 

where he is located. Now will you tell this House where this 

trade office is going to be located in New York city? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The address is: 630 — 5th Avenue. He 

was operating prior to looking at the new space . . . he was 

operating out of a back . . . He’s been operating and still is 

operating out of a back room of Gerber and Company. The 

particular trade officer is a guy by the name of Michael Cohen. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mickey, for short. 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, it’s not Mickey. From 1961 to 1977 

he worked for Gerber and Company in New York, dealing with 

selling oils, ores to the U.S., food products and steel to Africa; 

1970 to ’75 he was with Gerber and Company, London, 

England, managing director of soft goods and foods from the 

U.S., Far East, Middle East, Africa into Europe; ’75 and ’76 

Gerber and Company, director of sales, world-wide in steel, 

automobiles, farm equipment, and textiles; from ’76 to ’78, 

Gerber Far East in Kowloon, Hong Kong, president of import 

export sales, world-wide; 1978 to ’84, Tradepower (UK) Ltd. of 

London, England, managing director, controlling overall 

operations of sales of hardware and soft goods to importers and 

manufacturers and wholesale of merchandise imports in the Far 

East; 1984 to ’86, E & B Giftware Inc., Mount Vernon, New 

York, vice-president of sales, wholesale giftware catalogue. He 

has a B.A. in French literature, in history and languages from 

the U.K. He is fluent in French, German, Cantonese, and 

Japanese. 

 

I think as far as being a friend of anybody in the government, I 

would doubt that virtually anybody in the government has ever 

met the guy. He is a professional dealer in international 

marketing, and we thought that would be of value to us. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m sure that his B.A. in English is going 

to help him a great deal in the marketing, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, you have confirmed that the individual that you are 

speaking of is one Michael Cohen. That’s clear. Can I ask you, 

then, how long has this individual been in the employ of the 

government in this job? Is it one month, 12 months, 18 months? 

What’s the period of time in which you have had this secret 

employee in the city of New York, unannounced to the public 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — He’s been working for the government 

since 1986 as a trade officer working out of a back room in 

New York city. And to say that he has been a secret thing, you 

might talk to Sweeprite in Regina who’ve been dealing with 

him for the last eight or nine months, assisting, selling their 

street sweepers that they have trouble selling to the city of 

Regina for some strange reason. Yet the city of New York, and 

I think recently the city of Philadelphia, through the efforts of 

Michael Cohen, have been able to make those sales. 

 

He also has been fairly instrumental in introducing wild rice 

from northern Saskatchewan into the East Coast markets in the 

United States, which as you know, is a very large market. And 

the people in northern Saskatchewan have a tough time finding 

access to those kind of markets. 

 

So I think the hon. member to say that somehow this is a 

phantom guy and some political friends of ours, I think would 

be a very, very unfortunate thing to say. The guy has worked in 

international trade for 20 years. He brings that experience to the 

market. And while the hon. member might suggest that the 

English language is not a good education, I think some would 

take exception with that. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister may 

play on the words all he wants, but he’s the one who  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2908 

 

said that this gentleman was one of the people working in the 

back room. We didn’t say that. 

 

I want to ask the minister: since this person has been in 

employee of the government for those many months, how many 

staff does this individual employ in the city of New York for 

which we pay and knew nothing about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — He works by himself. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I see. Well, Mr. Minister, can you 

confirm that this individual working by himself has been getting 

paid something in the area of $10,000 a month — and I don’t 

know whether that’s all salary or some other payments, but is 

that the kind of figure that we’re looking at here? — this 

individual that no one seemed to know about except maybe one 

or two cabinet ministers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — He makes $6,250 a month. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, is that his salary and then 

is there expenses on top of that, or is that the full amount of 

remuneration which this individual receives a month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That’s his salary and he gets the S-4 that 

he would submit like any other government employee does. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to return 

if I can to a discussion on free trade. We were asking some 

questions and getting some answers before the break for the 

dinner hour. 

 

At the break at 5 o’clock, Mr. Chairman, I had asked the 

question about provincial government input, or the lack thereof, 

into the negotiations from the Canadian side. I don’t wish to put 

words into the minister’s mouth, but the essence of his reply 

was that the provincial governments were pleased with the 

communication of information, and then they were also worried 

that if there was a demand to have 10 provinces sitting beside 

the federal government — making 11 governments on the 

Canadian side — that there might be some sort of a demand on 

the American side. Heaven knows why we’d want to be worried 

about who they would like sitting on their side of the fence — 

it’s up to them — but apparently some concern that the 

Americans would have all of their states sitting beside the 

federal government. 

 

Of course the hon. minister knows full well, as well as anybody 

does in this House, that the one major difference between the 

Canadian and the American systems being the congressional 

system and the power of Congress to be truly a representative of 

the regions and the fact that Congress itself does approve any of 

the treaties of the United States, and that’s not the case in the 

Canadian context. In the Canadian context our Senate is 

virtually next to useless, as everybody agrees, and therefore 

regional input is dependent upon the effectiveness of the 

provincial voices. 

 

That being the case, the lack of a provincial voice with respect 

to the entire hearings is a matter of, I think, grave concern for 

Canadians. In fact, the very example that the minister gave 

about the possibility of central Canadian  

benefits being negotiated to the detriment of the outer regions 

of Canada, I think, are a strong argument for direct provincial 

representation at that bargaining table when Mr. Reisman sat 

down, or might again sit down, with the American counterparts 

to negotiate this deal. 

 

But be that as it may, Mr. Chairman, I guess what I’m really 

trying to get at is the larger picture with respect to these free 

trade negotiations, which is a picture that emerges in my mind 

of one which really has limited provincial input. It’s a picture of 

virtually no consultation or input from the public at large. The 

public itself knows very little about the objectives, knows very 

little about the progress of the free trade talks. It’s extremely 

difficult to get any hard answers out of question period or in 

hurried press conferences from the key actors on the Canadian 

side. 

 

Much of the systems to guarantee that the lesser-strengthened 

regions of the country are, in fact, protected in their concerns of 

free trade are very much unclear and not yet finalized. I say this 

is a relevant consideration, particularly now that there’s some 

last minute, deathbed attempt, I guess, to try to get them 

resurrected, that is to say the talks. 

 

The question of the ratification process, I think, Mr. Chairman, 

is extremely important. For example, not only is there no 

provincial input into the negotiations directly, there seems to be, 

and I’ll ask the minister this question, no agreed upon 

mechanism for ratification if an agreement should be adopted. 

We know it happens on the American side; the American side, 

eventually it will go to Congress for acceptance or rejection. 

But we don’t know what happens on the Canadian side. 

 

We know that under constitutional law if a part of an 

international agreement in Canada should impinge on provincial 

jurisdiction, then it looks as though the province must have 

some say in ratifying it, but that’s not totally clear. And we 

don’t know what would happen, for example, if a free trade deal 

had been negotiated which would, to use the minister’s “worse 

case” scenario, benefit another part of Canada to the detriment, 

say, of this part of Canada, western Canada, or Saskatchewan. 

What would be the ratification process? 

 

And I guess my question specifically, therefore, to the minister 

is as follows: would he be kind enough to explain to me clearly 

what it is that the process for ratification is that has been agreed 

to amongst the first ministers in the eventuality of a 

successfully negotiated free trade arrangement between Canada 

and the United States? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member raised perhaps three 

questions with regard to input. I think it’s not . . . it would not 

be fair to say, as the hon. member would tend to lay out, that 

somehow we just meet with Reisman and Reisman gives us a 

report. We also advanced to Ambassador Reisman the particular 

concerns that we would have. 

 

In our case it’s the uranium embargo, for example, would be 

something that we would raise and say: how do we overcome 

that particular problem — or the anti-dumping  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2909 

 

in potash or various agricultural components, that type of thing. 

And so I think it would not be fair to say that provinces, and 

certainly our province, have not made and had input into 

Ambassador Reisman’s negotiating forum. 

 

With regard to consultation, clearly our province consulted on 

the wider principle of trade arrangement with United States, and 

I think we’re the only province to do that. Most provinces have, 

as I understand, undertaken to . . . if a deal comes down on the 

4th or 5th of October, then it takes a period of three months, as I 

understand, for the ratification process to go through Congress; 

and Congress at that point in time can say yea or nay to the 

agreement negotiated primarily by the administration people. 

 

Here is Canada most provinces are of the view that should there 

be a deal, then a similar public consultation process would take 

place as well in various provinces. That’s certainly something 

that we would entertain in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

With regard to the ratification formula. Now that was resolved 

by the first ministers and resolved — you might say resolved — 

I think for the most part, it preoccupied their discussions early 

on in the game, if you like. But they tend to be of the view that 

rather than going to a seven out of ten and 50 per cent rule, that 

they would go by consensus that any agreement that was struck 

by the Canadians would have to be acceptable to all regions of 

the country — the western region, Ontario, Quebec, and the 

Maritime region — and through consensus. And without 

consensus from each of the regions, the deal would not be 

acceptable. 

 

(2000) 

 

Any all-encompassing deal, comprehensive trade deal, 

obviously would involve some jurisdiction, or jurisdiction 

related to the provinces. And the federal government know full 

well that without the support of the provinces on those major 

issues like that — on questions of procurement if that became 

the case — then clearly they wouldn’t have the wherewithal to 

impose that upon the provinces. 

 

So that’s why the consensus forum was developed by the 

premiers. And I think a consensus forum in this country, if we 

can govern by consensus at the federal-provincial level, that is 

all well and good. So that is the decision taken by the ten 

premiers, and I think, as I understand, all ten premiers have 

accepted that we proceed down that road. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I view this question of 

ratification to be a very important matter in this whole free trade 

discussion, because it is clear that any deal which may be 

negotiated which turns out to be detrimental, say to western 

Canadians or to Saskatchewan, without the safeguard of a 

ratification mechanism to make sure that those regions with 

lesser political and economic clout, without a safeguard to make 

sure that they are heard is indeed very potentially unhappy and 

dangerous. 

 

The example that I use, which the minister denies — and  

I’m glad to hear his denials although I still remain sceptical — 

is the question of agriculture. Take for example, the Canadian 

Wheat Board. It as a trade-off the auto pact is protected because 

of the strong political will in eastern and central Canada to do 

the same, and the Americans should give in on that, but they 

demanded and attained a quid pro quo or a trade-off — let’s use 

this as an example; whether it’s realistic or not is a matter of 

debate — something which would lessen if not the Canadian 

Wheat Board, say would lessen the supply management policies 

of dairy farming or the price setting of the milk control board 

under dairy farming — something which is peculiar to Canada. 

 

How would Saskatchewan people, how would western 

Canadian people be able to say yes or no to that kind of an 

arrangement? The consensus model that the minister talks about 

is by the very nature of the word just that — it’s consensus. Is 

the minister saying that there is an agreed-to formula when we 

talk about consensus which would permit what, one province 

out of the western region? Is it a western region of three by the 

way, and British Columbia is the Pacific region, as it always 

wants itself to be, a fifth region? 

 

What specific formula is required when we talk about 

consensus? Seven out of ten may not be the exact formula, but 

at least we know that there’s a threshold point upon which 

approval or rejection of the agreement would have to stand or 

fall. Consensus is certainly a very generalized notion — unless 

the minister can clarify this for me — one which in effect 

involves some goodwill as amongst the first ministers, but 

precious little guarantee. 

 

And so I want to ask you specifically, when you talked about 

consensus as between and amongst the regions, let’s take the 

western Canadian region specifically. Will you tell me what 

embraces the western Canadian region, what four provinces, or 

three provinces, or other combination thereof? And in specific 

terms, when is the consensus not met with respect to the 

western Canadian region? Let’s use my example, the question 

of the Canadian Wheat Board being sacrificed in the talks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me respond to the hon. member in a 

couple of ways. First of all he raises, as he has raised in 

question period, the question of the Canadian Wheat Board. 

Now the Canadian Wheat Board really doesn’t sell wheat into 

the United States. The Canadian Wheat Board is used as a 

marketing arm to sell wheat to the rest of the world. 

 

Now he has raised that point on several occasions. The wheat 

board is a poor example because that’s really nothing to do with 

bilateral trade negotiations or bilateral relations between 

Canada and the United States. And as a result the Canadian 

Wheat Board has never been subject to negotiations at the free 

trade negotiations or the bilateral negotiations because their job 

is to deal in the international markets. We don’t sell wheat to 

the United States; we compete against the United States for the 

selling of wheat to various other markets. So that’s nothing to 

do with it. 

 

With regard to dairy, I think it would be not fair to say that 

dairy is peculiar to western Canada or to the prairie  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2910 

 

region. Every province of this country has a dairy industry — 

some smaller, some larger — but for the most part the dairy 

industry supplies milk to a given province. That is not different 

than exists in United States. The dairy industry in United States 

is more heavily subsidized than it is in Canada. In fact, one 

would argue that their subsidies are greater than ours as it 

relates to the dairy industry. And so the whole question of dairy 

has been something that all sides have skirted around because 

all sides basically run their dairy industry much the same as we 

do. So I don’t think that those two examples are probably very 

good examples. 

 

Now consensus, I suppose, means consensus as opposed to 

taking a head count. The alternative to a consensus is do we 

have seven out of then? And are we standing in any better stead 

with a seven out of ten, for a 50 per cent rule? Or do you 

advocate unanimity on it? And those are the alternatives to it. 

The premiers, in their judgement, have decided that — and 

that’s premiers from all political parties, from four different 

political parties — have decided that they can live with this 

particular process that in order for it to be acceptable, it has to 

be positively received by the majority of the people in each 

region. And I suspect from that point of view, the premiers are 

able to determine what that is. 

 

Clearly, if the deal was struck, as the hon. member would 

suggest, that it was only for the betterment of the auto industry 

and traded off some agriculture or some potash or some 

uranium interest of western Canada, I think you would see four 

premiers standing up in western Canada and saying, nay to the 

whole deal. Clearly that will be the case. Consensus is 

consensus. While it’s perhaps not as definitive as the 

constitutional lawyer would like to see it, the premiers have 

decided, in their wisdom and in their judgement, that this is an 

acceptable way to deal with this particular question. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to tell the hon. 

member opposite from my point of view, it’s certainly not the 

way that, with the greatest of respect, that I’d proceed. I just 

don’t think when you start talking about fundamental trading 

relationships — the prospect of which might very well be, if not 

in the short run certainly medium term to long run, a 

fundamental realignment of relationships between two great 

countries, Canada and the United States, ranging from social to 

cultural programs to let alone economic trading patterns — that 

that kind of an amorphous, ill-defined concept of consensus of 

something that I would want to stand for in terms of protecting 

Saskatchewan’s interests — far from it. 

 

I think it’s the duty of the Premier and, if I may say so, yourself, 

the government, to take the position that Saskatchewan interests 

are going to be protected, not in the sense of stating that they’re 

going to be protected — we all want to say that, and I suppose 

we all believe that it will be — but I mean in sense of legal 

power to back the protection and the methods of protecting and 

securing Saskatchewan’s interests. It’s not good enough if 

Saskatchewan is the odd person out if the majority in the 

region, British Columbia, Alberta — and you didn’t answer 

whether British Columbia is in the region or not, but let’s 

assume for the moment that it is — British Columbia, Alberta, 

and Manitoba should agree and  

Saskatchewan is out to something which clearly is contrary to 

our interest. The idea that the old boy’s club, the premier’s 

network, would get together and somehow negotiate a situation 

which wouldn’t alienate one of the other members of the old 

boy’s club, quite frankly, I think, might work in some 

circumstances, constitutional or other matters, but I wouldn’t 

take a chance on it when it comes to the life and death issues as 

I see them with respect to free trade and with respect to the 

relationships that exist between Canada and the United States. 

 

I want to move to another area if I can, and this is the area 

which troubles me equally as much, perhaps even more, than 

the question of process, ratification. There is no ratification 

process, I would argue, in place other than the consensus model, 

which is essentially no process. And that’s this area, Mr. 

Minister. Where has it been made out by your government — I 

can’t question the Government of Canada here — but by your 

government that the economic advantages of free trade clearly 

outweigh the status quo or outweigh some other variation 

thereof? 

 

I don’t think I’ve seen — and I definitely here stand to be 

corrected, and if I do I’d like to have a copy of this — I don’t 

think I’ve seen any internal Government of Saskatchewan 

study. I’ve seen lots of briefs with varying opinions, some for, 

some against, about the economic benefits and detriments of 

free trade, during the Wakabayashi hearings — got those 

coming out of my ears. But I don’t think I’ve seen, apart from 

expressions of opinion and some studies, the kinds of 

documentation which identifies the economic winners and the 

economic losers and how those economic winners and losers 

pertain to the province of Saskatchewan, what the job 

situation’s all about, what the future 10 years from now is going 

to look like in the Saskatchewan context, or for that matter, the 

Canadian context. 

 

And so I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, what studies does the 

Government of Saskatchewan have that you’ve conducted, 

which you can share with us publicly, which will demonstrate 

to the people of our province and to me and to the opposition 

that there is an economic, more or less proven economic 

advantage, if the current initiative should be successfully 

completed? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With leave of the 

Assembly I would like to introduce some guests in the 

Speaker’s gallery. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and all members of 

the Legislative Assembly. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery and 

on the main floor, we have members of the 81st Regina Cub 

Pack. These people are ages 7-9, with the exception of a 

number of leaders that I’d like to introduce to you. 

 

Armand Audette is the Akela, or for those of us who are not 

Cubs, Akela means old wolf. Joining Mr. Audette is Henry 

Sobchyshyn, Kenn Sunley, Don Ruel, Serena Tong, Dave 

Reddekop, Bob McCutcheon and the gentleman on the main 

floor is Joel. Please join me in  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2911 

 

welcoming this 81st Regina Cub Pack to the Legislature, and 

I’ll be joining them for drinks shortly in the member’s lounge, 

and I look forward to doing that and answering any questions 

they may have at that time about what’s going on here. So 

please join me in welcoming the Cubs. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me deal with two . . . I take the hon. 

members has been a strong advocate of the seven out of ten and 

50 per cent rule — seven out of ten provinces, 50 per cent rule, 

with regard to constitutional changes, constitutional 

amendment. And while he didn’t say specifically, I took from 

his comments that that’s the type of formula that he would like 

to have, which in law would, in effect, render us helpless in the 

event of a deal that we did not like. In this particular situation, if 

we don’t like the deal, we walk away from the table and we so 

indicate and carry on accordingly. So I think the seven and ten 

rule, I would argue as perhaps less stringent — or more 

stringent on a province like Saskatchewan than is consensus. 

 

(2015) 

 

Let me go to the other question with regard to the economic 

pros and cons of a trade deal. As you go through a process of 

negations, the target is always a moving target, and so you 

determine what is going to be the economic benefit, or lack 

thereof, or positives and negatives, given a given deal that has 

not yet been determined or negotiated. I think once — or if 

there is an agreement arrived at between the two countries — 

then it will be a more meaningful . . . and one could argue your 

assumptions are better taken given that you know the 

parameters of what the deal is going to be. Is it going to deal 

with agriculture or is it not going to deal with agriculture? And 

if it deals with agriculture, how much of agriculture is it going 

to deal with? Questions like that. And so there is a — to get a 

defined work — certainly that’s something that we work on on 

a constant ongoing basis with economists in government, but 

that is something that we are internal to government, and as you 

appreciate internal workings of government, those are kept 

confidential under after the fact. 

 

With regard to the overall economics of bilateral trade 

negotiations, I think if you look at reports coming out of the 

Economic Council of Canada, the C.D. Howe, the Canadian 

West Foundation, to name two or three, and you can accept 

those or not accept those as being quality work or quality 

people in those particular institutions. I think if you look at 

some of the work of Paul Wonnacott or people like that, you 

can take the view that collectively if the deal is done the right 

way, and the deal is fair, then it’s a benefit to both sides and 

certainly a benefit to our country. 

I think if you look at a trade agreement with the United States, 

you have to look at the trading numbers between Canada and 

the United States. Canada for good or ill, because of logic or 

not, we trade 77 per cent of everything that we export to the 

United States market — 77 per cent. In the case of 

Saskatchewan that number is only 50 per cent, so we only rely 

half upon the U.S. market where the rest of Canada is 77 per 

cent. In the case of Ontario, it is 90 per cent. Ninety per cent of 

everything Ontario exports goes to United States. Now that is a 

terrific amount of trade; that’s the largest amount of trade 

between two countries in the world. 

 

The problem now is as follows: Canada has to date this year, I 

think, a surplus in merchandise trade with United States of in 

excess of $10 billion. Last year, I think, it was in the $10 billion 

for the year, but two years ago, three years, ago, it was 25 

billion to Canadian’s advantage. 

 

Now clearly what you see in United States today is the 

American Congress, in particular, but I think the American 

people are saying: we no longer want to have trade imbalance 

like we have now. Their trade imbalance is almost $200 billion, 

and I think that you and I, if we were in United States or if we 

were Canadians and had that kind of imbalance, we’d probably 

start to be asking questions as well. And as a result of this 

imbalance, the Americans are starting to take protectionist 

moves on a daily basis. 

 

Now if we look at it from Saskatchewan’s point of view, what 

do we export primarily to the United States? Number one, we 

export oil — 60 per cent of all the oil produced in 

Saskatchewan goes to the United States and that’s our biggest 

export. And that has been the case for some period of time. 

Now that is hopefully going to be changed a bit as we get the 

heavy oil upgrader in Regina on stream because now we can 

process that oil here in Saskatchewan and not have to export 

into the United States. 

 

Americans are a very large market for our potash; the 

Americans are a very large market for our uranium; the 

Americans are a very large market for our pulp and paper and 

any softwood lumber that we would have; and the Americans 

can be, are now, but can be a much greater market for our red 

meat industry. And if anybody is familiar with what’s going on 

in agriculture with the instability in grain prices and grain 

markets throughout the world, there is a need to go into, 

significantly go into, the area of red meat. So we would look for 

access to the U.S. market for those types of commodities. 

 

If we are going to be shut out of those markets, then it becomes 

very difficult for us to say: who will pick up the 50 per cent of 

our exports that the United States takes today in uranium? 

Because as you know Canada, and Saskatchewan in particular, 

sells to many of the world markets or uranium at as low a price 

as you can find. Who is going to buy the excess potash if the 

Americans were to shut us out of that? Who is going to buy the 

oil that’s produced in the Kindersley fields and the 

Lloydminster fields if we were to say or the Americans are to 

move on a 201 against Canadian oil and make that . . . trying in 

other ways to make that almost permanent? 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2912 

 

And if the Americans are going to shut our market down for red 

meat, where are we going to take that red meat to compete? 

Because of transportation costs to take red meat to Japan, which 

is very, very protectionist, you can’t go in there. You would 

have to have, I won’t say . . . To get into the European 

Economic Community with red meat, it’s almost impossible. 

And so the market of United States, the economy of Canada has 

built upon that market, and to have access to that market 

becomes very, very important, certainly in the short term. 

Perhaps in the long term, we can diversity away from it, but that 

diversifying away from that U.S. market as Canadians is going 

to take us some time. 

 

So if American protectionism is allowed to continue and 

allowed to even get uglier than it is now, we are going to find 

ourselves with a lot of product that we cannot sell. My view of 

the best example is this: the largest of the three largest items 

that we sell to the United States are automobiles, automobile 

parts and trucks — the three largest items. If the Americans 

don’t buy our automobiles, I wonder who will, because I doubt 

that we can sell our automobiles into Europe, or into Japan, or 

into Korea, or into Australia, or any place else in the world. 

And as a result, if the Americans were to close that down, 

they’ve in effect closed us down as Canadians. 

 

Now should we have got ourselves into that over-reliant 

position on the U.S. market? I guess historians can argue that. 

The reality is we’re there. How do we preserve that market 

now? And that’s what the economists are looking at and that’s 

why the economists say that we have to have a trade 

arrangement that guarantees us access to the U.S. market at 

least for a foreseeable period of time. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose all of life is 

fraught with ironies, some humorous, and some bitter, and some 

a little bit humorous and bitter. I listen to the minister talking 

just most latterly in his remarks about the situation that 

Canadians find themselves in with so much trade — 77 per 

cent, I think, was his figure — of Canada going to the United 

States and then raising the, I would say, rather alarmist 

concerns about what the United States is likely to do in the 

further period of this so-called protectionist mood, something 

which, by the way, the United States has done sporadically and 

spasmodically from time to time throughout our entire history 

and will do so again. 

 

The irony that I refer to, of course, is the old Progressive 

Conservative Party of the old great prime minister, the chief, 

John Diefenbaker. In 1956, I was a very young boy, a student 

yet in high school, and I remember — you’ll remember this, 

Mr. Chairman — the great leader, Mr. Diefenbaker, 

campaigning on one of his planks, which was to divert 15 per 

cent of trade from Canada to the United States to Canada over 

to Great Britain. And some of us thought that was a great act of 

nationalism. We quite didn’t figure out how it was that. We’d 

be more nationalistic changing our dependency from the United 

States to the United Kingdom, but we felt that that was 

probably a pretty good way to go. 

 

And here one of the ironies is that in 1987 these people who are 

the heirs to the legacy of the great Mr. Diefenbaker now argue 

that 90 per cent dependency has  

got to be locked in to be absolutely guaranteed, and the way to 

do that is through a free trade deal. And they also argue 

somehow logically that by doing so, our future will be secure, 

although we’ll place all of — in the proverbial statement of that 

old cliché, but its’ true none the less — all our eggs in one 

basket. 

 

To me it is, in any event, strangely ironic that the history of this 

great Conservative Party has gone through these twists and 

turns to the point now where these people opposite and their 

counterparts federally are continentalists — locked-in 

continentalists — and of course free market zealots to such a 

point that even Mr. Diefenbaker in his day never way, for the 

very good reason of the threat to Canadian independence and 

the Canadian institutions that any such arrangement of free 

trade might entail. 

 

Perhaps the hon. minister doesn’t share the same sense of 

history or interpretation of the irony that I do, but I certainly do 

see that as an ironic situation and one fraught with a lot of 

dangers for our country. 

 

But I do want to make one point about this question of studies, 

Mr. Chairman, and that is somehow we as Canadians have 

gotten off on the beginning of these free trade negotiations 

assuming — at least some Canadians have; we haven’t on this 

side — that free trade will mean this kind of economic security 

of access to markets, which by the way I don’t believe for one 

moment, pursuant to our earlier discussion about the 

dispute-resolving mechanism which will not be able to cover 

off all the variations and access will not be guaranteed. 

 

Somehow we’ve gotten off to assume that it’s going to be 

economically efficient. Somehow we’ve gotten off in the belief 

that there’ll be more jobs, and we’ve done it without any kind 

of authoritative or definitive studies, apart from the ones that 

he’s mentioned, some of which I know — the Canada-West one 

I happen to know because I served on the Canada-West board 

of directors for a couple of years before begin re-elected in 

1986 — apart from reference to a couple of those studies, 

nothing else which is definitive or the question of who the 

economic winners and losers are going to be. 

 

There is an assumption which for the life of me I don’t know 

how it got started and I don’t know how it’s gotten its own life. 

It’s propagated very ably by the Premier and very ably by the 

Minister of Economic Development that free trade equals some 

form of prosperity without any kind of economic studies. 

 

I have a small little point that I wish to make in terms of the 

small legislature here in Saskatchewan on the issue of studies. 

Mr. Chairman, way back in this session, somewhere in and 

around July 8, 1987, I asked in question period whether or not 

the government would provide for me copies of studies 

pertaining to the question of what the economic benefits are 

going to be of the question of free trade. And the Premier 

answered on July 8, at page 1024, the following: 

 

I’ll also say, Mr. Speaker, we have no end of studies that 

are available, and the hon. member  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2913 

 

can, if he wants, I’ll send them to him. 

 

Then he said: 

 

We have, and our negotiators have now, a stack of 

research . . . And all those that we have, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ll turn over to the opposition. 

 

I want to repeat these words. 

 

We have, and our negotiators have now, a stack of 

research . . . And all those that we have, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ll turn over to the opposition. 

 

So in pursuance of that commitment, Mr. Chairman, what I got 

was two or three boxes of every brief that the Wakabayashi 

commission received and a couple of others that they perhaps 

didn’t receive — all public documentation — but not what the 

Premier undertook to submit to me and to the members of the 

legislature. 

 

So I write again on or about September 16, and I say, look, Mr. 

Premier, I thank you for all these studies, but I’d like these 

expected detailed cost-benefit studies pertaining to free trade. 

 

On September 23 the Premier’s office writes, very nicely: 

 

Dear Mr. Romanow: I’m writing on behalf of Premier 

Grant Devine to acknowledge your recent letter. Your 

correspondence will be brought promptly to the Premier’s 

attention. Yours sincerely. 

 

Dated September 23, and here we are, Mr. Chairman, from July 

8 to August to September to now approaching October 8 — 

three months — and the free trade negotiations are either in 

their critical moment of acceptance or in their critical moment 

of death. 

 

We have got the minister again articulating his view, and I 

welcome it very much, as to how we are going to prosper 

economically. He tells me we have internal studies, but I, of 

course, can’t get those because those are for internal 

consumption, notwithstanding what the Premier says. Not one 

detailed cost-benefit analysis which can back up the statements 

and the assumptions that free trade, in fact, is going to mean 

more jobs for Canadian people — let’s forget about Canadian 

people — for Saskatchewan people. In fact, the minister himself 

has undergone a number of metamorphoses, if I may describe it 

that way, as to what the benefits or the detriments of free trade 

are gong to be. 

 

(2030) 

 

I have an article — there are many from this minister, and I 

don’t condemn him in this regard. He is a minister who likes to 

talk out his ideas publicly, and I think that’s a good thing, if I 

may say so, Mr. Minister. Sometimes it will land you into 

political difficulty, but I think it’s a good thing. He does a lot of 

that. 

 

And I have one article, one of many, dated August 28, 1985. 

And this was to an address that the minister was making to the 

International Association for Students of  

Economics and Commerce. I think they wanted to chat about 

how the budget making process takes place in Saskatchewan. I 

don’t know whether the member was the Minister of Finance at 

that time or not, but he chose to not talk on the budget making 

process of Saskatchewan. If I may be permitted to say 

parenthetically, Mr. Chairman, that was a very wise move on 

the part of the minister. 

 

He instead decided to give a speech on free trade, and he says 

the following in the free trade speech: 

 

Andrew said free trade with the United States is really of 

less importance to Saskatchewan because its major 

commodities either already enjoy free access (get those 

words) or are sold off the continent. In fact, he said 

Saskatchewan’s growing markets for export tend to be in 

the Pacific Rim. 

 

That is as late or as early as two years ago — 1985 to 1987. 

Now the minister may very well get up and say there has been a 

big change in the United States Congress, and I would grant 

him that there has been a change all right. But the truth of the 

matter is that fully 90 per cent of Canada’s products to the 

United States go now tariff free, or with 5 per cent or less of the 

tariffs; that’s the truth of the matter. The truth of the matter is 

that since 1980 I think there have only been, if my memory 

serves me correctly, 13 countervail kinds of actions of the kind 

that we’re seeing in potash, five of which were ultimately fixed 

and determined against Canadian interest, two of which were 

negotiated out, and the others just simply fell by the wayside 

since 1980. 

 

The fact is that noted American economists and experts of 

North American trade argue that the Canadian position on free 

trade is flawed for two reasons. The first reason is that the 

Canadians don’t understand the nature of the American 

congressional system — with the greatest of respect, the line of 

questioning that I pursued of the minister this afternoon. 

 

And the second argument they advance is: because those 

proponents of free trade in Canada are alarmists. The studies 

say in today’s Globe and Mail, in fact, I have a copy of The 

Globe and Mail, I don’t say it with last word, but I think that 

it’s a study which it is not the last word, but the studies which 

are reported in The Globe and Mail, I think, are very much 

worthy of examination by the minister. Dealing with United 

States trade experts, here’s the headline: “Canada misreading 

U.S. on trade, observers say” — the American interest. 

 

The say the second reason is because they’re alarmists of the 

countervail duties since 1918, there were 13, five of which 

ended up being mitigated from the original action, the potash 

one will be mitigated, I hope. I suspect it will be, 

notwithstanding the potash Bill, regardless of free trade. 

Thirteen will be mitigated because we are alarmists. And here’s 

the minister, and this sounds like I’m making a political speech, 

I’m trying hard not to, but I think the minister is falling into that 

second trap of sounding the Chicken Little, the sky is falling, 

argument about free trade. 

 

The very thing that these American analysts in today’s  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2914 

 

Globe and Mail caution us and say is the very reason why our 

talks have gone off the rails. The sky is not going to fall down, 

the United States has been protectionist, the United States will 

be protectionist; the Canadian economy dealing with United 

States has survived protectionism in the United States; it will 

likely survive protectionism in the United States. It’s not a 

question of it falling to the end of the earths, and the most 

important this about this, Mr. Chairman, that I submit to you, 

sir, and to the other members of the committee is the absence of 

any kind of solid, documented, economic proof which can be 

tabled to rebut my proposition. 

 

In a sense I am also guilty of what I accused the minister of 

making a rhetorical speech, mainly because I don’t have those 

studies, all that I can do is review the public documentations 

and others that are around from John Hopkins University and 

other Canadian institutions. But studies which this government 

presumably has to show that the alarmist theory is wrong, that it 

is a serious crisis. Now I don’t think the minister should hide 

behind the argument that these are internal studies. If the 

evidence is so blindingly clear that Saskatchewan is going to be 

hurt, contrary to his view in 1985, if the evidence is so 

blindingly clear that we’re going to lose our jobs and our 

economic efficiency, and his own internal study shows that 

presumably being the catalyst for the initiative that the 

government has undertaken, what could be the harm in tabling 

those studies? What could be the harm in tabling the definitive 

in the words of the five conditions of the free trade deal — the 

definitive word as to the impact of Saskatchewan and free 

trade? What would be so harmful to prove the economic case? 

 

I can only conclude, Mr. Chairman, that I haven’t received the 

studies for one very good reason — not because they’re used 

for internal documentation, because there are no studies which 

prove conclusively that there is an economic benefit to Canada 

or to Saskatchewan for free trade. I can only conclude that this 

Premier and this minister, if they had that evidence, would 

dearly love to table it and to show the people of Saskatchewan 

and Canada overwhelmingly, blindingly, convincing truth of the 

economic winners of free trade, but they’re not doing that. And 

they’re not doing that because they don’t have it. I’m not saying 

there’s not a legitimate argument to advocate for free trade if 

you’re a continentalist, if you’re not in the John Diefenbaker 

school of politics in the view of Canada. If you are some form 

of modern-day, latter-day resurrected Liberal who heretofore 

have been the continentalists in our system, if you are not the 

Conservatives who are really Liberals, that’s good enough if 

you have that ideology. 

 

But please, Mr. Chairman, what I am saying to the minister 

opposite, please, and I say this with very much genuine 

conviction and commitment, why is it that you will not table or 

cannot table those kinds of economic studies which will either 

sustain or rebut the proposition which I think Canadians — 

some Canadians — have fallen into: the myth which it has 

taken upon itself now, propagated perhaps by the journalists, 

that free trade equals prosperity. Where is the evidence? That’s 

what I want to see from the minister? Where is the evidence? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member has raised several 

points, and let me try to deal with them in order. 

 

He makes the observation that John Diefenbaker tried to divert 

15 per cent additional trade in the U.K. Let’s look at the number 

that I just gave to the hon. member in my last response. Ontario 

relies on the U.S. for 90 per cent of its trade, Canada for 77 per 

cent, but Saskatchewan for 50 per cent. And I indicated and our 

government has indicated, that we would not want to have a 

higher reliance than 50 per cent on the U.S. market. 

 

We believe that the U.S. market at 50 per cent, the rest of the 

world at 50 per cent, would be a proper balance. And I’m sure if 

John Diefenbaker was alive today, he would be standing on our 

side with regard to that question. The problem is not 

Saskatchewan with regard to that, and clearly we rely on the 

international market more than the Canadian average by a long 

way; the problem is: the Canadian economy does rely upon that 

U.S. market and particularly the Ontario economy. 

 

Now, the hon. member as a student of history might further 

observe that following John Diefenbaker came Lester Pearson. 

Lester Pearson moved towards more reliance upon the U.S. 

trade. But his friend, the past prime minister, Trudeau, who he 

had so much to do with and had so many kind words and 

entered into many alliances with, was the guy that said: we’re 

going to go to the third option — new foreign policy — the 

third option. And what did he do? He was the guy who said: we 

have to trade now with the European Economic Community 

now that it’s been formed, and we are going to move away from 

United States, move into the European Economic Community, 

and try to get a balance not unlike what Saskatchewan has, 

50-50. 

 

And what was the success of Pierre Trudeau, your friend? And 

you should not use Mr. Diefenbaker in vain from people on this 

side of the House. What was the results, what was the results of 

your friend, Mr. Trudeau? Mr. Trudeau, during his long reign in 

office, in effect reduced the amount of trade — not reduced, but 

during his reign the amount of trade with the European 

Economic Community actually went down. At the same time, 

the trade with United States increased and increased 

significantly. So the architect of the imbalance, if you like, was 

Pierre Trudeau. 

 

I think our balance is 50-50. That’s a balance that many 

countries that we would call as successful trading countries, 

countries like Japan, try to get a 50-50 balance and that’s 

exactly where we are today. 

 

The hon. member also likes to down play that don’t be alarmist, 

don’t be concerned with what’s happening in the United States. 

Well I say to the member opposite: it’s fine to say don’t be 

alarmist, but look what we face. We face a potential 201 action 

on oil and gas. As he knows, we face an anti-dumping problem 

in potash. We have been totally banned from sales of uranium 

into the United States. Our forests and lumber has had a CVD 

(countervailing duties); our agriculture and livestock has had a 

CVD. There’s threatening sounds that there could  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2915 

 

be a CVD against our oilseeds. There’s a threatening sound 

there could be a CVD against processed meat. There’s sounds 

that there could be a threatening CVD against oil-seed crushers 

and actions against steel. And if you read the same Globe and 

Mail this morning, there is great concern by pulp and paper 

producers that they could face a CVD action by the Americans. 

 

If the hon. member took the time to read the omnibus trade Bill 

presently winding its way through Congress, which most 

analysts in the United States say will be adopted by Congress in 

some form, and probably will be ratified by the President 

because he does not have the strength to veto that particular 

trade bill because it would be sent back with a two-thirds 

majority. 

 

The Americans have pending today 670 trade bills before 

Congress — 670 — and for the hon. member to somehow say 

that it’s no different than it was last year, I think, is unfair or 

unwise or ill-informed because the American protectionism is 

growing. 

 

And surely I know the hon. member does read many journals, 

not just the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix or the Toronto Globe and 

Mail, reading many journals, whether it’s The Economist, 

Foreign Affairs, very credible magazines and publications. I 

think the world is concerned, and I think rightly concerned 

about the wrong-headedness of the Americans, that somehow 

they can solve a $200 billion annual fiscal deficit and a $200 

billion trade deficit by simply saying everybody else is not fair 

and we are. 

 

The mentality sweeping the United States today is very 

reminiscent of the same mentality of 1929, and very similar to 

the mentality at the turn of the century in Great Britain as the 

great British Empire started to wane in its strength and power 

throughout the world. 

 

If we’re to look at the Americans and try to analyze it by the 

experts down there: the Americans felt that they somehow were 

the power of the world militarily and economically. Militarily I 

think that came to an end with their failure at the Vietnam War, 

that no longer could they simply tell the world what was going 

to happen. And now Japan is starting to rival the United States 

as an economic power of the world and, collectively, the 

European Economic Community is starting to rival the United 

States. And that’s what is bothering the United States, no 

different than it bothered the British Empire so many years ago. 

 

Now, with regards to the hon. member saying that somehow 90 

per cent of the trade between Canada and the United States is 

tariff free — but the member now conveniently shifts from 

tariff free to his concern about non-tariff barriers. This 

afternoon he dealt in great length with some very credible 

questions on non-tariff barriers and he knows full well that 

non-tariff barriers do not fit into that category. 

 

If we look at Saskatchewan and go through the lists of those 

that are now subject to trade actions or pending trade actions of 

what we trade with United States, it’s far more than simply an 

insignificant passing whim. I think the member opposite should 

come to the realization of  

that. And for him somehow to say, we should not be alarmists; 

we should not be running around saying the sky is falling, the 

sky is falling. Clearly if there is no trade deal, then we have to 

face up to that as a province and as a nation, and find other 

options and other places that can buy our product or be more 

sophisticated as it relates to how politics or trade in United 

States takes place. 

 

But I don’t think its fair for him to somehow stand up and say, 

you should not be an alarmist, because who is the alarmist if he 

stands up and says the Americans are going to make us take 

medicare away, that’s not been us. And he knows full well 

that’s not the case in the trade negotiations; or somehow it says 

that the wheat board is going to have to go and that’s not the 

case in trade negotiations with the Americans, and he knows 

full well about that. 

 

(2045) 

 

The next dimension with access to the U.S. market is if you 

look at diversifying your economy here. When you look at how 

you diversify your economy, clearly the U.S. market spells a 

big dimension to who that market might be. The problem that 

happens in United States today, without a sense of security of 

access, is that there’s instability, and do people then want to 

invest in Canada or would they take their dollars and invest it in 

United States. That is a real question for economic 

diversification. 

 

Let me close by talking about the . . . Two more points. One, 

when the hon. member read his question in the House that he 

had asked the Premier in question period, he never read the 

Premier’s full statement. Let me read what that statement was. 

The Premier says: 

 

We have, and our negotiators have now, a stack of 

research . . . (That’s where he ended) . . . And all of those 

we have, Mr. Speaker, we’ll turn over to you. 

 

But what he didn’t read was the full text which went as follows: 

 

We have, and our negotiators have now, a stack of 

research from universities, from universities, from the 

academic community, (and) from businesses. And all of 

those that we have, Mr. Speaker, we’ll turn over to the 

opposition. 

 

And all the stuff that we had from the universities and from 

business we turned over to him. What he’s asking us for is 

internal documents that we use and people that work for us use. 

He knows full well that that is not provided as one that has been 

through negotiations on the constitution. 

 

I used to ask exactly the same question; didn’t make much 

sense to ask it because why would he provide his negotiating 

ploys as they dealt through the constitutional debate. He didn’t 

provide that and well he shouldn’t have provided it. And the 

same applies here. 

 

Let me say one further thing which is a part of this debate that 

too often does not get reported in the media and, I think, 

deserves reporting, is the way tariffs work in this  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2916 

 

country today. Every man, woman, and child in this province 

pays $1,200 in support of tariffs in this country, restricting entry 

of products into this country — $1,200. That’s the consumer 

cost in this country to protect industry that’s primarily in central 

Canada. And that dimension of the debate on open trading 

throughout the world never gets taken. 

 

Unfortunately today what we see is the people that are driving 

trade and driving protectionism are the producers and not the 

consumers, and it’s always been the consumer throughout 

history that ultimately brought the world to its sanity again. And 

I would think in this debate we should think about that as well. 

The world operates in an open trading market far better than it 

does in protectionism. 

 

I would commend the hon. member perhaps one of the better 

speeches that I have heard on the reason for free trade by the 

Hon. Bob Hawke, who is the Prime Minister of Australia, a 

socialist, and a very informed guy. And he as eloquent as 

anyone I’ve ever heard said or spoke on the question of open 

trading to the world, and Australia not unlike Canada is very 

reliant on international markets for its well-being and its 

economy. And what Bob Hawke said and perhaps in the far 

more eloquent way than I can — he’s a great debater and a 

great speaker — that when products cease to cross borders, 

armies do. And he attributed the last war in a large part and the 

First World War in a large part, to the fact of this 

narrow-minded “put the blinkers on and let’s not trade with 

each other” mentality. 

 

And that’s what is concerning many people in the world today, 

and not simply politicians and alarmists, many informed, 

informed people — that the American trading actions now, the 

American mentality now, is not only problematic for our 

country, it’s problematic for the world trading order. And I 

think the world should come to a legitimate debate on open 

trade throughout the world, and that’s what our Premier 

supports and that’s what our Prime Minister supports and, I 

believe, that’s what most Canadian and Australians and those 

type of people support as well. Without it we’re going the 

wrong direction, and without it we’re heading straight towards 

disaster. 

 

Now can we get a bilateral agreement with the United States? 

One would hope, one that’s acceptable and fair. Can we then 

look for a trading arrangement with Japan? One would hope so. 

Or with the European Economic Community? One would hope 

so. And move in that way through agreement, through 

understanding — that is the only way the world will function 

properly. Without it, it is the survival of the fittest. And as we 

see and as our farmers see today the survival of the fittest is the 

U.S. farmer or the EEC farmer, it’s not the Canadian farmer. 

 

And we all know there’s not enough money in the country to 

support our farmers like they do in Europe or they do in United 

States, but the farmer pays the price for that bone-headed 

economics which is protectionism and subsidies that we see 

now so evident in the agriculture question between Europe and 

the United States. 

 

I think the hon. member honestly believes in open trade  

and free trade throughout the world. I can’t believe of a member 

coming from this province that doesn’t support that. One might 

argue: should you cross the T or dot the I or deal with it this 

way or that way; but I think at the end of the day, we rely upon 

trade in this province and in this country, but in this province, 

we do. And we all must find ways by which to better equip 

ourselves and better deal with that trade. 

 

And so, I think sometimes we sit here and argue back and forth 

because of our political stripe, when at the end of the day we all 

support how we must move towards better trade in the world 

and how we secure that better trade in the world, whether it’s a 

Soviet wheat market or the United States potash market or the 

Japanese uranium market. That is our task, it seems to me, is to 

ensure that market so there is stability in the work-force and 

there’s stability in everything else in our province and in our 

economy. Without that stability, you have instability and you 

know what happens in instability in any economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with the greatest of 

respect to the minister, I think he’s misplaced the argument, his 

argument, if I may be so bold as to suggest how his argument 

should go. No one here is against the need to have trade and 

more trade and open up more trade — you’re right on that. 

That’s not my proposition. But I think some can be legitimately 

against an argument which, in effect, handcuffs Canada to the 

United States for trade. 

 

The corner-stone of your economic development strategy, since 

so high a percentage on the Canadian side — 50 per cent 

Saskatchewan, 90 per cent or 77 per cent — the corner-stone of 

your strategy has been partly, if not mainly, this idea of open 

access to the United States, notwithstanding the fact that there’s 

lots of evidence around that we don’t need it in a Saskatchewan 

context, lots of evidence to do that. And not only that, in spite 

of the argument which I think ultimately comes up to rebut that 

and that is, that all that you do is you lock yourself in with one 

of the other great blocs — trading blocs of the world, the United 

States — but you do little to lessen the protectionists’ forces 

which come, not necessarily from Canada — in a minor way 

they might — but come as a result of a combination of 

European and other factors that the United States is facing that 

has nothing to do with little old Saskatchewan, including the 

debt, the smokestack industries and the fact that it’s the largest 

debtor nation in the world and the fact that the third-world debt 

has crippled its banking system and goodness knows what else 

goes on to it, that compels the United States. 

 

And what you want to do, what you want to do is you want to 

handcuff us with them irrevocably; you do it on the argument 

that it means access. That’s what we’re going to do; we’re 

going to be handcuffed to them. Now, we get not only Detroit 

television and Detroit culture and Detroit attitudes, now we’re 

going to be tied in, not the old Diefenbaker vision — I don’t 

malign him, I say this in a sense, in a kind of a noble sense — a 

Diefenbaker vision of being able to balance off the United 

States and the U.K. and other interests of the world. Not so now 

with Mr. Mulroney: Mr. Mulroney has got some sort of an  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2917 

 

argument which handcuffs us. But again, I suppose we’ll agree 

to disagree on that. The fact that in my judgement, you have a 

blinkered — not you, well you personally, but your 

government; I don’t mean to argue in a personal basis — your 

government has a blinkered approach of this United 

States-Canada free trade thing. 

 

The thing that I think, Mr. Chairman, which is most damning is 

the fact that there is no clear-cut study here which bases the 

case for the government with respect to the economic winners 

and losers of this free-trade gambit. And negotiations in secret, 

trade-offs in secret, studies either in secret or non-existent, well 

I just don’t think that’s good enough, with the greatest of 

respect to the minister and to the Premier. 

 

I think that the Saskatchewan farmer has a right to know how 

free trade’s going to help him or her. I think the dairy farmer’s 

got a right to know. I think the egg and the feather industries 

have got a right to now. I think they should know that the 

government itself has concluded are likely to be the difficulties 

economically. I’m not asking for negotiating stances. I’m not 

asking for papers with respect for trade-offs. I’m asking that 

there ought to be those kinds of studies to tell the people of our 

province from farm to worker to business exactly who wins and 

who loses. 

 

Now if they’re doing their job, they’ve got those kinds of 

studies. If they want to make the case out as they’re making it 

out to me today in political debate, which is what this 

Chamber’s about, good enough, but it’s not the whole story. 

The way to make out that case is to make those documents open 

and tabled for this legislature and for the people of this province 

to see. 

 

I don’t think they’ve got them, Mr. Chairman. I honestly don’t 

think they’ve got them, because if they did, they would destroy 

our arguments and they would be able to advance their cause 

and assist their brethren in Ottawa, Mr. Mulroney, in that 

situation. 

 

And there, Mr. Chairman, because I believe this failure to 

produce these studies is so critical as an underpinning to the 

whole arguments, the rational and political arguments which 

have flown from this discussion tonight and today, and 

therefore case in doubt the entire process, I can only do but one 

thing. And I move, seconded by my colleague, the member 

from Regina Centre, that given the gravity of this talks, my 

motion goes like this: 

 

That the amount to be voted in item 1 be reduced to $1 

because the government has refused to table its own 

studies and analyses of the impact of free trade on 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I will move this, Mr. Chairman, and in so doing, conclude by 

saying that the failure of the government to do this, the failure 

of the government to prove the case is in fact, in my judgement, 

speaking louder than any of the statements that I might be able 

to make, or anybody on this side might be able to make, that 

what this Premier and what this minister and what this 

government has launched us on, in concert with their colleagues 

in Ottawa, is a dangerous, dangerous gambit both economically, 

socially, and culturally, which could speak to the  

independence of our great country and our great province. I so 

move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The amendment is in order. Moved by the 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale and seconded by the member 

for Regina Centre. Will the members take it as read. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Just a minute. I’d like to speak on it. I 

hope the hon. member from Riversdale understands what this 

motion means and the members opposite understand what this 

motion means. 

 

What this would mean is if we were to accept the hon. members 

motion, that we would have to terminate all administrative staff 

at the department. Now how does that deal with the . . . how 

does that (a) deal with assisting in the economic development 

and trade initiatives of the province? What is the benefit of 

simply terminating all of the employees sitting around us? 

That’s what he’s asking us to do. That’s what he’s asking us to 

do. 

 

Now we have sat here and listened to the hon. member from 

Riversdale and many of his colleagues saying: why did you 

terminate this particular person? The member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland there is the most constant. And now his colleague is 

saying . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, University. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Or University — that’s what it is — 

University. Now the member from Riversdale is saying, well, 

let’s move a motion here; let’s move an amendment here that 

would basically say, let’s terminate all these people. That’s 

exactly what he’s saying. And how does that benefit his cause? 

 

I thought the hon. member was doing well in the debate today. 

He raised some very credible questions, quite frankly. But now 

to come down and say that we should terminate all these 

people, and he should look at them in the eye and tell them that, 

because they’ve got kids at home and they’ve got wives at 

home, and that’s the basis of what he is saying to these people: 

let’s vote these guys out; let’s terminate them. 

 

So you people all over here will stand and say: terminate these 

people, terminate these people; put them out on the street; put 

them out of a job. That’s exactly what this motion is going to 

be, and I would advocate even members . . . I would advocate 

members opposite, even, not to support this particular motion, 

or I don’t think that’s a proper way and I think that somewhat 

belittles, I think, the nature of the debate that we have in this 

particular legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated to the hon. member, we’ve sent him 

documents that deep, as I understand, that deep to peruse 

through, and I wonder if the hon. member has red them all. He 

said he read them all, finished last week. There were 4 to 5,000 

folios there that he had to read. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2918 

 

As he knows, there’s many articles written on this, many, many 

studies, and he would have us . . . And what he’s really asking 

us for is for our internal studies to government. He served in 

government for 11 years and he was subject to many internal 

studies and he understands the parliamentary system and the 

cabinet system of government very, very well. Surely in his 

heart of hearts he does not expect the government — any 

government — to take internal documents and make them 

available to the members opposite. Certainly even any . . . even 

the most open of all information, freedom of information 

legislation exempts that particular and those types of documents 

from being made public, made access to the public. The hon. 

member know that as well. 

 

Let me close from the questions he asked this round with regard 

to the access to the U.S. market. The U.S. market is an 

important market to our country and it’s an important market to 

our province — half of what we export goes to the United 

States. Now should we rely upon that, and he would sort of 

have us believe that we should not rely upon that U.S. market 

and that we should go take our product and sell it some place 

else. Well I can assure the hon. member, we and governments 

before us have sought international markets for potash, and we 

sell a lot of potash in the international market. We have perhaps 

80 per cent of the market in most of the Pacific Rim countries in 

potash. We sell much uranium into the international market, but 

you’re restricted as to which countries you can sell it to. 

Perhaps we could sell more there and if you want us to, instead 

of selling it to United States, perhaps the hon. member from 

Saskatoon University would have us sell it to some other 

countries. I wonder how the hon. member would support that. 

 

Red meat industry. I can tell the hon. member, go talk to the 

Cattlemen’s Association. Go talk to the Cattlemen’s 

Association of the province of Saskatchewan and ask him 

whether or not the U.S. market for red meat is an important 

market to go to. You go ask those persons, go ask that person. 

 

Now I talked about the dairy industry before. The dairy industry 

in Saskatchewan is run no different than the dairy industry in 

every other province. And for the most part, it’s run no different 

than it is in the United States and every other state. That’s the 

reality of it. There is supply management in Canada in the dairy 

industry, and there is supply management in United States in 

the dairy industry. That’s a fact; that’s a reality. And my guess 

is you’re going to see no movement on that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — So why are we talking about agriculture 

and free trade? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You were the one that raised the 

question on this. You talk about access to the red meat into 

United States; that is very, very important. 

 

The member opposite makes no mention of the red meat 

industry which, next to the grain industry, is the largest number 

of farmers. And he should ask the cattle producers in this 

province what they think about access to the U.S. market and 

whether they should sell to the  

United States or try to sell to Argentina or Australia or Japan or 

EEC. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me close by saying this. I caution the members 

opposite, if they want to maintain their credibility, do they 

maintain their credibility by moving this amendment and voting 

on this amendment, the net effect of which is to fire every 

person sitting behind me. 

 

(2128) 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 20 

 

Prebble Brockelbank 

Shillington Romanow 

Tchorzewski Thompson 

Rolfes Mitchell 

Simard Solomon 

Kowalsky Atkinson 

Anguish Goulet 

Hagel Lautermilch 

Trew Smart 

Van Mulligen Koenker 

 

Nays — 26 

 

Devine Duncan 

McLeod Andrew 

Berntson Lane 

Smith Swan 

Muirhead Maxwell 

Schmidt Hodgins 

Gerich Hardy 

Klein Pickering 

Martin Toth 

Johnson McLaren 

Hopfner Martens 

Baker Gardner 

Kopelchuk Britton  

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 

guess what I’d like to ask the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade now in the light of the developments 

with respect to the free trade negotiations and in view of the fact 

that this government, this Premier, and he himself have put so 

much faith — not so much faith — so much of a corner-stone of 

their policy of economic development is tied to this free trade 

initiative. What does the government have by way of an 

alternative plan if on October 5 there is no successful deal? 

What happens then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier 

to the hon. member, Saskatchewan trades and relies a lot on 

trade, but we trade half with the Americans and half with the 

rest of the world. 

 

Now will there be a trade deal or will there not be a trade deal? 

I guess that is still up in the air. And that’s still a question, I 

think an important question, to all Canadians. We would like to 

think that somehow there could be a  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2919 

 

trade deal. It looks very difficult at this point in time. 

 

How will we proceed? This province has relied upon trade, and 

we will have a much more difficult time if what we see in 

Washington continues, if the various trade measures that are 

rumoured or threatened against us. I think it is a difficult time. 

Clearly we would have to determine how we are going to fight 

any U.S. protectionism. When it hit us hard in potash, this 

government responded, our Premier responded, and we dealt 

with that question. 

 

We will go around the world to see whether or not we can find 

other markets by which we can trade. We seek to diversify our 

economy, not simply to buy out existing businesses or existing 

mines or something else. We seem to want to build. Our 

Premier has made a great deal of though on how we build our 

economy not simply by what is already here. 

 

The NDP stand against, four-square against, number one, 

trading. They stand four-square against building; they stand 

four-square against the Americans. Or if we go out into the 

world to look for markets in the Asian-Pacific region, in Japan 

or in China, or we go to Europe or we go to South America, go 

any place in the world, the first to call out is the members 

opposite; well don’t do that — stay home, stay home and 

somehow the world will come to you. 

 

Well the reality is that’s not the way it works, and that is no 

longer can we rely simply on Saskatchewan sitting here and 

letting somebody else come to us to buy what we have to sell. 

We must go out into the world; we must have trade offices out 

in the world; we must be more knowledgeable at what’s going 

on in United States; and we must diversify our economy so 

we’re no longer just hewers of woods and haulers of water 

where we rely upon the ups and downs of the world trade. 

 

That is why we build upgraders in the city of Regina; that’s 

why we build paper projects in Prince Albert; that’s why we 

build recreation vehicles plants in North Battleford, or thread 

fast in Swift Current, or new projects in the city of Regina; 

that’s why we have Marubeni-Hitachi in Saskatoon to build 

products that we otherwise would buy from the rest of the 

world. 

 

We have a strategy to deal with the economy of this province, 

even though it’s on troubled times with commodities. We build. 

We build manufacturing fivefold since we came to government 

— fivefold increased in expenditures in the field of 

manufacturing. 

 

We travel the world to look for other markets. We travel into 

the United States to look for other markets. Our Premier deals 

with the Americans in a hard-fisted way, and that’s the way we 

should do it. And we build . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

member opposite asks what we do. I’ll tell the member opposite 

what we don’t do: we don’t simply look around for the first 

candidate that we can buy and nationalize. That’s you idea of 

building; that’s not our idea. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it must be, certainly 

even to the members opposite, a tiresome speech. I must 

commend the Premier, however, that he has trained his 

ministers fairly well. They at least try to follow the same script. 

They don’t do it with the same verve or the same enthusiasm s 

the Premier does. 

 

But I tell you, Mr. Minister, and I tell the Premier opposite and 

the government opposite, that clearly one of your major 

initiatives here has fallen flat on its face. You have a situation 

here where the credibility of this provincial government and of 

this Premier is such now, on this free trade initiative, given 

where we’re at, that surely by any yardstick one has got to say 

that it’s a failure. 

 

It may be that from now until October 5 something in the last 

moment is salvaged. It if is, Mr. Chairman, Canadians ought to 

look very carefully at what exactly it is that they salvage. If 

there is a deal at the last moment, Mr. Chairman, what we have 

to examine carefully is what Canadian institutions are gong to 

be victimized by a political party in office in Ottawa and in 

Regina which is determined for its own political purpose to get 

any kind of a deal, regardless of what it means to Saskatchewan 

and to Canada if there is a last-minute deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — We’ve come a long way, Mr. Chairman, 

from the days when the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan says in an address to the Canadian Agricultural 

Marketing Association, quote: 

 

The best thing for somebody like me is to stay close to that 

Washington politician, keep giving him and hug and say: 

look it, we’re really on the same side. 

 

That was the policy. The headline says that the Premier stresses 

a personal touch when dealing with the United States. Well I 

guess the United States really has spurned this moment of 

affection by our Premier and by the Prime Minister of Canada 

because here we have now the United States turning its back on 

the Canadian initiative, and little wonder, Mr. chairman, that 

should be the case. 

 

How in the world did we get this free-trade initiative started? 

One day, Mr. Mulroney, the Prime Minister, and the President 

of the United States get together on a stage in Quebec City. 

They sing, “When Irish eyes are smiling,” and the next thing we 

know the next day there’s a free-trade initiative announced by 

the Prime minister of Canada. No mandate at all to negotiate 

free trade. They didn’t get elected federally in 1984 on that 

argument whatsoever. 

 

Not only is there no mandate, there are no objectives defined as 

to what Canadians would like to achieve from free trade. Not 

only that, there is no discussion which is open to the public, 

nothing of any consequence at all; everything is negotiated in 

secret. There is no provincial input. 

 

The Premier is reduced, Mr. Chairman, reduced to the spectacle 

of going to Ottawa once every three months for three hours and, 

in effect, getting a briefing from the  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2920 

 

Prime Minister as to what happens and probably what is the 

most crucial set of negotiations in the history of Canada — a 

three-hour briefing. We have no input at the bargaining table; 

we have no input at any of the trade-offs which may be taking 

place. We don’t have a ratification process, Mr. Chairman, none 

whatsoever. 

 

The net result of all of this is a fiasco which is badly bungled by 

a set of governments in Ottawa and in Regina which surely, Mr. 

Chairman, must go down in history as one of the most 

incompetent set of governments that Canadians will ever have 

seen anywhere, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And now it’s the 11th hour. Now we say, as 

in question period, the examination of the Premier took place. 

We’re not involved in negotiations; we’re involved in 

discussions. In the 11th hour we’re now asked to put our faith in 

people like Ms. Carney, put our faith in the Prime Minister of 

this country — ten days or less left to go, and they’re going to 

negotiate a deal which is in the best interest of Canada. 

 

So we are led to believe, Mr. Chairman, without any of the 

objectives having been defined or any of the process for doing 

it, without any of the consequences to our culture and to our 

social programs. 

 

The minister says that the social programs argument is an old 

bogyman. I say to the hon. member opposite, not so. If there 

ever should be a free trade deal negotiated, the essence of which 

is this concept of a level playing field, I guarantee to the 

minister opposite that some of his big business cronies and 

others will be the very first to come a few years after a 

negotiated free trade deal to his government and to the 

government of Ottawa saying that they can’t afford the tax level 

to support medicare and hospitalization and unemployment 

insurance in order to match the competition with the United 

States. And they’ll be pressuring the Governments of Canada 

and Saskatchewan to do away with our social programs. I 

guarantee you, that will be the next step. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I also guarantee you that not only will 

it be the next step, but that our Premier and that our Prime 

Minister will be willing handmaidens in that process. 

 

The minister opposite talks about building Saskatchewan. 

What’s their record of building Saskatchewan? They have 

destroyed everything that they have touched, Mr. Chairman, as 

a part of this policy. As a part of their pursuit, their undying 

quest for something which is a continentalist free market, free 

enterprise locking, as I say, a handcuffing of Canada to the 

United States, the result is a debt of $3.4 billion, a Crown 

corporation system which is in disarray and destroyed, a private 

enterprise sector which is demoralized and has lost its private 

initiative. 

 

I say if that’s the kind of building, to the minister opposite, the 

people of Saskatchewan are fed up with it, they want no more 

of it, and they want to be rid of you people for  

advocating that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Chairman, the gentlemen 

opposite, and the government opposite, including the women 

members of the government opposite, like to portray themselves 

as being on the positive cutting edge of things. They like to 

think that free trade is something new. 

 

Well you know, some people in this House would know — I’m 

not so sure that the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 

would know — that this is nothing new. There was a free trade 

deal negotiated back in the 1850’s by the British, not by the 

Canadians, with the United States. There was a free trade deal 

negotiated in the 1880’s — the hon. member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster is red faced, as he’s been told by his front 

benchers to hush up a bit now. He may not know that, but I tell 

the hon. member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, in the 1880’s a 

free trade deal — nothing new. 

 

In 1911, the government of the day, the Liberal government, 

negotiated a free trade deal. They went to the government, to 

the people of Canada, thinking that they’d win an election, and 

we know what the result was in 1911 — they got washed out. 

 

In the 1930’s there were limited free trade deals negotiated. In 

1940 Mackenzie King had a free trade deal negotiated. In fact, 

when he looked at the 1911 election results and he saw what the 

public opinion polls were telling them in the 1940’s, he pulled 

out of those free trade negotiating deals. And he warned the 

Liberal Party that if ever they should take up the idea of free 

trade he would come back and he would campaign against 

them. I guess now we know what it means to be the ghost of 

Mackenzie King and what that means. 

 

And these people opposite would have you believe that this is 

something brand-new. This is nothing brand-new, Mr. 

Chairman. This is the old clarion call of the old line parties, the 

old bankrupt policies of the old line parties who have nothing 

new. It’s been around since the 1850’s. It’s the tired old 

shibboleths of the tired men and women, who are the advocates 

of a broken down system, who have no solutions and no guts 

and no ability to get a Saskatchewan going again the way it 

should. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Free trade, Mr. Chairman, free trade as it’s 

advocated here is the clarion call of men and women of little 

vision and no faith in Saskatchewan or Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Free trade is the clarion call of those who 

would simply lock us in, as I’ve said, to the United States and 

would turn over Canada and Saskatchewan lock, stock, and 

barrel to the Weyerhaeusers and all the friends of the Premier 

and the government opposite. 

 

Free trade is the crux of a policy which says to the little  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2921 

 

corner entrepreneur that we don’t have any faith in you. Free 

trade says to the people of Saskatchewan and to the farmers and 

to every small-business man and every worker that we have 

given up the very history of what has made Saskatchewan 

prosperous up until these people took over government, and that 

is a system of co-operation using private enterprise and a 

co-operative sector, and on occasion the public sector, because 

anything that we have gotten in this province we have gotten 

here working hard together and not thanks to the United States 

— not thanks to the United States. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And so they put all their eggs in one basket, 

these people opposite — everything. Not only have they 

managed to bungle that, they’ve bungled everything that 

they’ve handled. They’ve turned over a balanced budget, and 

they’ve managed to reduce that now to a $3.4 billion deficit. 

They’ve got a Crown corporation deficit of $10 billion. This is 

a tired, old government that has no solutions except the old 

shibboleths of free trade. I say it’s time for them to quit. I say 

it’s time for them to be defeated in this operation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And worse yet, Mr. Chairman, worse yet, 

they’re going to put at risk everybody in the province of 

Saskatchewan and Canada in what is obviously a last minute, 

eleventh hour, last ditch stand. 

 

They won’t table the documents that I’ve asked to be produced. 

They don’t have any documents. They won’t do that. They 

won’t send their officials or their ministers to sit beside Mr. 

Reisman. They are prepared to sit down once very three hours 

in a smoky hotel room in Ottawa and get the briefing from the 

Prime Minister. 

 

(2145) 

 

They won’t fight for Saskatchewan to have a ratification 

process, not just in law, but in politics and reality, which would 

give us a say to say no to a ratification process on free trade if it 

worked against our advantage. They won’t do that. 

 

They are satisfied with something called a consensus, Mr. 

Chairman. They’re going to talk it over with their fellow 

premiers in Canada. They don’t know the ground rules; they 

don’t have the power; they don’t have the political clout, and 

more damning of them, Mr. Chairman, they don’t have the will 

to stand up and to fight for Saskatchewan to make sure that our 

interests on free trade are protected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And they come to this legislature, they 

come to this legislature saying that this is, in fact, the way of the 

future. Well I say to the minister opposite, the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade, I say to the hon. Premier 

and the entire front bench that what you have done here stands 

as yet another stark testimony to the incompetence of this 

administration. You can’t run a government; you can’t run a 

negotiations. 

People don’t want you singing the Hallelujah Chorus to Prime 

Minister Mulroney; people want you to stand up in the interests 

of the province of Saskatchewan and the people of 

Saskatchewan. They want you to start talking for the family 

farmer; they want you to start talking for the worker; they want 

you to start talking for the local entrepreneur, and to get off this 

old idea of playing to the big, large, multinational companies of 

this world, because it’s never helped Saskatchewan in the past, 

and it won’t help Saskatchewan in the future, especially under 

your administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Chairman, this free trade fiasco 

doesn’t give me any particular pleasure. I’m not particularly 

pleased as a Canadian to see the talks at an impasse. I’m not 

happy that the circumstances are such that our government is 

embarrassed. As a Canadian I don’t like to see us held up to 

ransom by the Americans or by anybody else. 

 

I don’t think that it gives anybody any happiness to see the 

circumstances the way they are now. But I’ll tell you something 

else, Mr. Chairman, it gives me no comfort either to see our 

provincial Premier grovelling to the Prime Minister, and our 

Prime Minister grovelling to the President of the United States 

on free trade either. That gives me no pleasure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — What I want to see, Mr. Chairman, is an 

economic strategy which benefits our province and benefits our 

country, one which identifies the strengths and the weaknesses 

of this great nation, one that gets our labouring people working 

together with our business people and the public sector to set 

our economic goals and to develop industrial strategy which 

builds on our strengths. 

 

What I want to see is a policy which guarantees the cultural 

sovereignty and guarantees the economic independence of our 

country, that does not put at risk our social programs and our 

social policies. The members opposite say that we don’t have to 

worry about it, yet we see that Peter Murphy, the American 

negotiator, says by variety of reports on his negotiations that 

unemployment insurance is on the table. Why? Because the 

Canadian fisherman are entitled to it; the Americans aren’t. 

They say that’s a hidden subsidy, an unfair advantage. They 

want to examine social programs inasmuch as they impact on 

the economic trade between Canada and the United States. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Chairman, if that logic applies to unemployment 

insurance, that logic applies to every other social program that 

we’ve built up in this country and in this province that the 

United States doesn’t have. Where does the logic stop? 

 

If it applies to the unemployment insurance, why would it stop 

when it comes to medicare or hospitalization? Sure it may not 

be on the table at the present time; I don’t know if it is or isn’t; 

I’m led to believe that it’s not to be there, but  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2922 

 

how do we know that to be the case. 

 

I guarantee you, Mr. Chairman, that if you get a free trade deal 

negotiated in the circumstances that we have before us, namely 

where Canadians have given all of their bargaining chips in 

advance of the deal, namely where Canadians enter into this 

kind of a forum, of a dispute resolving mechanism, I guarantee 

you four, five, six, eight, nine, 10 years afterwards, the next 

demand will be to start dismantling the social service programs 

of this country because the business sector will be saying that’s 

the only way they can have the level playing field. 

 

And we’re seeing this already taking place, here in 

Saskatchewan. I don’t say that it’s part of the free trade 

negotiations; it’s part of the philosophy of these people 

opposite. We see the dismantling of the denticare program, of 

the drug care plan — one could go to discuss this, it would be 

appropriate under the health estimates — but it won’t take very 

much, Mr. Chairman, it won’t take very much. And I say to the 

government opposite that it’s tired, that it’s lost its vision, that it 

keeps on trotting out these old statements and these old 

concerns. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan want something more. They want 

something more from the Minister of Economic Trade and 

Development. They want a Saskatchewan-first policy. They 

want a Canada-first policy. They want one that doesn’t put at 

risk our businesses. They want our ministers to be competent 

when they negotiate with the United States. They don’t want 

our ministers and our Premier to be on their hands and knees in 

the negotiating stances; they want our Premier and our Prime 

Minister developing from a position of strength; they want them 

to be developing an economic policy and a foreign trading 

policy which is complementary to the Canadian interests and 

the Canadian objectives. 

 

I ask you, sir, is that what you’ve gotten out of consideration of 

these estimates? Is that the picture that the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade portrays here? I don’t blame 

his officials, who are doing the best that they can under the 

circumstances. I don’t blame Mr. Wakabayashi, who goes 

around the province for a one month tour to listen to the free 

trade deals and the submissions of Saskatchewan people. He’s 

asked to do that. 

 

But was that consultation? That wasn’t consultation. They 

invited people on a selected basis, Mr. Chairman, to consider 

who could make presentations on free trade. They didn’t allow 

the individual members of the public to express their points of 

view. There was no consideration of a general hearing of public 

concerns about free trade. 

 

And moreover there is no tabling of any documents to allay 

those fears, none whatsoever, Mr. Chairman. This is a 

government which is caught in a fortress Legislative Assembly 

mentality. This is a government which is afraid to get out and to 

listen to the people. This is a government which is so old and so 

tired and so decrepit, and so now holed in to the legislature of 

Saskatchewan, like the 1930s, that they refuse to listen to the 

people of Saskatchewan on free trade, and I say, shame on the 

provincial government for that position. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Chairman, this is perhaps the last 

straw of a bankrupt government that is dying and on its last 

political legs, this particular action and failure. 

 

This is the government which is now searching for any kind of 

a solution that it can, and I say to you, Mr. Chairman, as I close 

my remarks on this particular subvote, and on this particular 

important issue of free trade, that far from being satisfied about 

the concerns that I’ve raised, the answers of the hon. minister 

opposite have heightened my anxieties. They’ve heightened my 

anxieties because of the failure to produce the evidence, the 

failure to have the ratification processes, and all the other 

failures which I have identified. They’re heightened by a 

government which contents itself to play the role of the 

Hallelujah Chorus choir to a federal government rather than just 

standing up for provincial interests. 

 

I say it’s time to put this sorry episode behind us now and let’s 

get on to building a bright, new future for Saskatchewan people 

and not look back to the old solutions of an old government and 

an old group of people who were in government in the Dirty 

Thirties. Let’s go on to build a bright, new Saskatchewan. 

That’s what this is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let me be brief and make 

three basic comments, three basic comments. Number one, the 

member opposite, while very eloquent in his delivery, what did 

he say? 

 

When you come forward in debate, whether in the legislature or 

wherever else, it’s easy to say what am I against, what is wrong, 

and what do I see wrong, and what am I against, but do we hear 

alternatives coming forward from the hon. member? 

 

What are the alternatives, Mr. Speaker? What are the 

alternatives? The alternatives are nothing. The member opposite 

talks about alternatives. His alternatives are to go back to when 

he was in government. The hon. member now has logged 

20-some years, I think, since you were elected in this 

legislature, and has seen debate back and forth. 

 

The hon. member knows that after 20 years, after being elected 

some 20 years, that you don’t win simply by saying: I’m against 

this; and I’m against that, and I’m against this; or you don’t win 

by simply fear mongering — they’re going to take away the 

church, or they’re going to take away medicare, or they’re take 

away the wheat board, or they’re going to take away this or this 

or this. I don’t know whether they will, but maybe they will, is 

what he says. Mr. Speaker, you cannot have that type of 

situation. You don’t win with that type of situation; you win by 

offering alternatives. 

 

And the members opposite somehow think in 1982 we won 

because they were old and tired. In 1982 we won because, one, 

they were old and tired, and we offered alternatives and showed 

a different direction by which we would go, and that’s why we 

won. And in 1986, Mr.  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2923 

 

Speaker, in 1986 we won again, Mr. Speaker — in 1986 we 

won again. The members opposite wish to yell, wish to yell 

when you’re speaking. Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members 

opposite to be quiet and listen. We won again in 1986 because 

the Premier went out and said: I want to build this province — 

not, I want to go back to where we were before, Mr. Speaker — 

and the people elected us again. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, to this House and to the people of this 

province, we believe the access to the U.S. market is very, very 

important. We believe that for the potash worker living in 

Rocanville it’s important if he can sell his product into the 

United States unhindered by U.S. trade laws and unfair U.S. 

trade laws. We think it’s important that the person working in 

the lumber industry in northern Saskatchewan has access to that 

U.S. market because his job relies on it, Mr. Speaker. And we 

believe it’s important for the person working in the uranium 

industry in the far North of Saskatchewan. It’s important that 

we can sell our product in the United States because his job 

relies upon that and depends upon that. 

 

But we’re not prepared to go into the United States and into 

these trade negotiations so it’s all one-sided against 

Saskatchewan. If it’s not on balance in our favour, then we say 

no to the Americans, and we say no to the Prime Minister. And 

I don’t think you have to go beyond the response of this 

government as it relates to potash, so we’re prepared to stand up 

for our industry and for our people and for the people working 

in our industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But let’s do one thing further. Let’s look at one thing further 

that I think these trade negotiations are about, but they’re about 

a wider dimension of our economy. Has Canada and has 

Saskatchewan grown up enough to go out into the world? 

That’s what really we’re talking about. Do we have the resolve 

and the strength and the confidence in ourselves to build our 

province and to go out and trade it to the rest of the world and 

to deal with the rest of the world? And I say we do. And that’s 

really what is at issue in this debate, not only between Canada 

and the United States, but between Canada and the rest of the 

countries of the world. Are we prepared to play in the big 

markets of the world? That’s the question. Or will we hover 

back and say, no, protect me; protect me, somehow; somehow 

we should stay within ourselves, within our own little cocoon. 

 

The people that built this province had the courage to go 

forward and look for new frontiers and new opportunities. And 

that’s what the people of today face, exactly the same problem 

as our forefathers did 50 and 100 years ago. And that’s what the 

members opposite do not understand. 

 

You must have the courage, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the 

Chinese or with the Japanese or with the Europeans or with 

South America or with Africa, or with the Soviet Union or with 

the United States, Mr. Speaker. We think they’re all important, 

Mr. Speaker. We like to maintain access to that trade market, 

and we believe that we have the courage, and we believe the 

people of Saskatchewan support a government that has the 

courage, to come forward and try to turn over new stones, to 

find new  

markets, to build new economies. And that is what this debate is 

about. 

 

The members opposite want to stay back with the Crown 

corporation model. We believe it’s the right of the individual to 

take initiative to go forward into the world, to have the courage 

and the vision to try. And that’s what our forefathers did, and 

that’s exactly what we’re going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I only have two short 

questions for the minister, and the minister need not provide the 

information now. All I need is an assurance that he will provide 

the information in writing as soon as possible. The first one is to 

provide a list showing the department’s space or allocation from 

the Saskatchewan Property Management, listing: community, 

building address, and square metreage. 

 

And the second request is with regard to a list of all the 

departmental consultants paid for in ’86-87, showing the name 

of the consultant, the purpose of the consultant, and the cost; 

and where the consultants’ results were shared with another 

department, agency or commission, or other government, etc., 

indicate who, and the total cost of the study, as well as your 

department’s portion of the cost; provide the actual global cost 

of your department for consultants in ’85-86 and the estimated 

global cost in ’87-88? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, I undertake to provide 

that information with regard to the space allocation. I will 

undertake to provide it as the various departments have prior to 

me the same type of information, the stuff I think is normal 

stuff for order return; I have no problem providing that. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Just one question to the minister, and this 

relates to a letter that I wrote him several months ago regarding 

SED Systems which he would not answer at the time. 

 

At the time I asked the minister if he would provide me with the 

information to justify his comments, late last year, that when 

the government share of SED Systems was sold to Fleet 

Aerospace of Ontario — a sale that we on this side of the House 

opposed because what it meant was that the Saskatchewan 

government lost its ability to ensure that SED would continue to 

be a Saskatchewan-based company in the long term during 

cyclical periods in the high-tech industry when things are not 

bright and when operations could be consolidated in such a way 

that parts of SED Systems would be lost from this province. 

 

At the time, the minister said that he had assurances from Fleet 

Aerospace of Ontario that SED Systems would continue to 

operate in this province over the long-term, and that all 

Saskatchewan jobs in that company would be assured. 

 

And I ask the minister today to table in this Assembly the  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2924 

 

written assurance that he received from Fleet Aerospace of 

Ontario that, in fact, all employee jobs at SED Systems would 

be protected not just for the next few months or the next couple 

of years but in the long term in this province. Will the minister 

now table that written assurance from Fleet Aerospace? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would have to go 

back and review the undertaking with regard to the assurance. I 

think Fleet Aerospace is a very small holding company, if I 

recall, and I’m taking this from memory. They are a very small 

holding company in Ontario with various branches, and the one 

being the SED operation in Saskatoon. The member opposite — 

she might ask the employees of SED who are very happy with 

the new arrangement. SED is in fact building new facilities in 

Saskatoon, and that does not sound like the concept of 

somebody about to pick up and fold their tent and leave the 

province. In fact, quite the contrary, is that they are in fact 

building the base of that type of operation in Saskatoon, and the 

employees are quite pleased with the way things are unfolding. 

 

Now if I indicated to you that I had written assurance from the 

company that they would never, ever, ever, ever, ever, 

regardless of what, move from Saskatoon, or that employees 

would be there for ever, and ever, and ever a day, I don’t know 

whether I undertook that or not — I would doubt it. It would 

not tend to be what I would say. 

 

If I indicated to the hon. member that they gave their assurance 

that Saskatoon was big on their plans, I think that’s coming 

forward now. And I’m sure that we will have to talk ten years 

from now, when we see that it’s still there and flourishing, 

before I could ever convince the hon. member that somehow 

there’s not some devious, sinister mentality to move this to 

Ontario or Quebec, because clearly that company sees 

Saskatoon very much, and very big in their future. They’ve 

indicated that to the employees; they’ve made that publicly, and 

they’ve put their money where their mouth is, and I think that’s 

exactly what is, in fact, happening. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — A comment to the minister. I asked the 

minister to provide me in writing whether or not he has written 

assurance from Fleet Aerospace that over the long-term 

Saskatchewan jobs will be guaranteed, because the minister said 

last fall that he had assurance. And I say to him that unless he’s 

got that assurance in writing, it means very little. 

 

I want to the minister also to provide me in writing, to give his 

commitment that he will be providing me in writing, the 

answers that he refused to provide me before on exactly how 

much the government received from the shares that you sold — 

the province of Saskatchewan shares in SED Systems — what 

the amount was that you received from Fleet Aerospace? You 

sold those shares for little more than a million dollars, Mr. 

Minister. For little more than a million dollars you traded away 

an opportunity for the government of Saskatchewan to ensure in 

the long term that SED remain a Saskatchewan-based company, 

because the history of Fleet Aerospace, the minister will 

acknowledge, is such that there have been numerous examples 

of other high-tech companies that Fleet Aerospace purchased 

and  

very quickly pared down, consolidated, wound down — lots of 

examples of employee lay-offs in companies that Fleet 

Aerospace have purchased in other parts of North America. 

 

The minister says that Fleet Aerospace is building. I say to the 

minister that Fleet Aerospace inherited a very generous gift 

from the Government of Saskatchewan in the form of grants 

and interest-free loans that were originally made to SED 

Systems to build at the University of Saskatchewan, and Fleet 

Aerospace has been the lucky recipient of that Saskatchewan 

government money. 

 

If that’s what you call building, I’d say there’s been little that 

Fleet Aerospace has had to put into that new University of 

Saskatchewan facility. 

 

So I ask the minister again, will he indicate to this House 

whether he has written assurance from Fleet Aerospace that 

SED Systems jobs, as they currently exist, will be guaranteed in 

the long term in this province; and if he doesn’t have written 

assurance, will he explain to this Assembly why he sold the 

$1.1 million worth of — approximately; I’m asking for the 

exact amount from the minister — but why he sold the 

government’s shares in SED Systems to Fleet Aerospace 

without getting written assurance from Fleet Aerospace that 

Saskatchewan jobs would be preserved here in the long term. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the deal with SED and 

Fleet Aerospace falls under the jurisdiction of CICII, or the 

Crown corporations side, and those are the people that 

negotiated. It was not Economic Development and Trade, and I 

think the member is more appropriate to ask that question of the 

minister responsible in Crown Management Board because 

that’s where the whole thing was perpetrated there, and I think 

the response or the question might be appropriately asked in 

question period or in there, but not in the estimates of Economic 

Development and Trade because we haven’t been doing it. 

 

But let me leave only the hon. member from Saskatchewan 

University with this question: what bothers you the most, really, 

down deep inside? Is it the fact that a company came in and 

took over and is expanding it? Are you really concerned about 

the ownership not being in government and in the private 

sector, or are you concerned about the fact that SED and Fleet 

Aerospace are now doing military contracts or are bidding on 

military contracts? Well that creates lots of jobs. Isn’t that really 

what the hon. member is against, is the fact that nobody in this 

province should bid military contracts? Isn’t that that’s really 

what it is all about? 

 

Item I agreed. 

 

Item 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to,. 

 

Vote 19 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Economic Development and Trade 

Vote 66 

 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2925 

 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 66 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 

Item 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 19 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank my 

officials. I also would like to acknowledge the member from 

Riversdale. I quite enjoyed the debate of being wider ranging 

than simply rhetorical and repetitive. So I quite enjoyed the 

debate this evening and this afternoon. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice that: 

 

Notwithstanding rule 8(3), the daily order of business for 

Tuesday, September 29, 1987 shall be the same as 

Monday, and the daily order of business for Wednesday, 

September 30, 1987 shall be the same as Tuesday as 

prescribed in rule 8(3). 

 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:15 p.m. 

 


