













































July 27, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 27, 1987 

 

 

1419 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise with 

pleasure to take part in these debates on estimates in education. 

And before I really go into these debates, Mr. Chairman, I 

wonder if I could ask the minister if he would be so good as to 

introduce his personnel that he has with him tonight. He 

brought them in at a time when I wasn’t in the Assembly. I was 

away representing this entire Assembly at a CPA 

(Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) conference, and 

I’m wondering if we could start our estimates, our debate on 

this, by having the introductions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — On my right is the deputy minister, 

Lawrie McFarlane, the deputy minister for the department; 

behind him is Elizabeth Crosthwaite, assistant deputy minister; 

to her left, Kevin Costante, executive director of training; and to 

his left, Mike Benson, acting executive director, finance and 

administration. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The issue of 

education and education estimates is a very important one, and 

having the introduction of the officials here is also of 

significance, Mr. Minister, because the entire community, 

educational community - and including the parents and 

students, young adult students - are quite concerned about what 

is happening to education, about the abrupt changes that have 

come about in education. 

 

And they’re asking questions and wondering just where is the 

new minister taking the Department of Education because they 

had embarked on a course which was quite clear before. The 

entire education system has always been - and people involved 

in it - have been used to being consulted and used to knowing 

where they’re going and used to having control over their 

education system. And here we have a minister who has 

dismissed the larger portion, a large portion of his department, 

and is starting out anew. And we want to today establish what 

direction it is that he is really going, if he knows what direction 

he’s going. 

 

You see, what happened, Mr. Chairman, was we had a 

Department of Education which, seven years ago, set up a 

study, a study to establish the directions of education for the 

‘80s and for the ‘90s and would work even towards his 

favourite number - the minister’s favourite number - the year 

2000. And as a result of this study, there was a booklet 

produced which summarized the entire study, Mr. Minister. 

Now as a result of this, we were expecting that we were going 

to follow the direction that was stated in this booklet, 

Directions. The previous minister, the member from Swift 

Current, followed through on that study. The study was started 

in ‘81. She followed through  

on it, laid a direction, and established goals which were adopted 

by the entire province and which educators and parents and 

trustees had ownership in. And to her credit, she established 

funding for that. 

 

Now, abruptly, we have a change of minister, a change of 

personnel, and decisions that signal a change, a complete 

change in direction, without consultation. And that’s what we 

want to establish today. Where is it that we are going? What has 

happened, Mr. Minister, that signalled these changes in 

direction? 

 

Ask any school board member what has happened. Ask any 

teacher what has happened. Cuts by the Department of 

Education, cuts which were announced in the budget and 

previous to the budget, cuts of 1 per cent in granting to all 

school boards, cuts to the educational development fund. 

 

This fund was established and people were asked to plan for 

five years. School boards diligently did this. They planned for 

five years, then suddenly they were betrayed. Right in the 

middle, right in the middle of their planning they were betrayed. 

The five-year program became a 10-year program, not with 

more money but with the same money - a 10-year program. 

 

I didn’t hear anybody asking for an extension of a five-year 

program to a 10-year program. I didn’t hear anybody during the 

election campaign asking for cuts of 1 per cent to education. If 

anything, people in the province are willing to go and wanting 

to go with a steady course. 

 

And that’s not what they’re getting, because immediately after 

those things happened, after those were announced, then we had 

an announcement of the repulsive treatment of firings, of firings 

of some 20 people in the department. People who knew and 

who had lived the development of the core curriculum and the 

development of Directions. A summary dismissal. And we will 

want to know why the minister made such sudden decisions. 

Why did he lose confidence in these people who had worked so 

diligently to work up this particular Directions and this core 

curriculum proposal? 

 

So there are very important issues to be addressed, Mr. 

Chairman, when it comes to education. Education takes a full 

20 per cent of our budget, of our budget of some 3.6 billion - a 

full 20 per cent. Education traditionally in Saskatchewan has 

not been politicized. Never in my lifetime has it been politicized 

to the extent that it has been politicized under this minister. 

 

And that’s why the people feel betrayed, because suddenly the 

direction that they were used to going in and the directions that 

they were going in have suddenly been switched. And we want 

to know where, and then why, and in what direction these 

things have been switched. Is it just a power grab? Is it just that 

the minister wants to grab power and manage things from him, 

Mr. Chairman? Is it that he doesn’t have faith in the boards 

which were elected and appointed? 

 

Let me give you an example. In my constituency of Prince 

Albert, and we’re dealing with community colleges  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1420 

 

which were established under a former government in the ‘70s, 

we had an elected board, a board which was partly elected and 

partly appointed - four people elected, four people appointed. 

This board had an unparalleled success equal to or better than 

any community college in the province. They had a record of 

success which was supported by the people in the community. 

They had a record of success which other boards were trying to 

emulate. They were forced to resign by this minister, by the 

actions of this minister. They felt compelled to resign because 

they could no longer abide by the direction that he was going, 

that they were going . . . they were taking this particular 

community college in. 

 

The minister talked earlier today about governance of 

community colleges, and he indicated that he was taking 

community colleges in the direction of autonomous 

government. And then he indicated also, of course, as he has 

over the past month, that the community colleges and the 

technical institutes are being amalgamated into one, and this 

one unit was being given autonomy. 

 

And then he indicated also that the NDP agreed with the 

autonomy. Well that is partly true, but that’s where he stopped. 

Because what he’s done with his new super board is he has 

actually taken away autonomy from the community colleges in 

Prince Albert, in Moose Jaw, in Regina, and in Saskatoon. He 

has taken it away, and he has given that autonomy to one super 

board who he will appoint. 

 

Now that’s not autonomy, Mr. Chairman. He is controlling that 

particular board. All of those board members are being 

appointed - one big super board. No more control - does not 

believe in local control. These are questions that will be posed 

in these estimates. 

 

It’s a matter, Mr. Minister, when you’re in the position like 

having a department like Education, it’s very important to 

maintain credibility with your voter, credibility with the school 

board, credibility with educators. I have here portions of a press 

release made on May 14, 19987. This is a press release from the 

president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and it 

says: 

 

Recent unprecedented actions by the provincial 

government have put K to 12 education at serious risks. 

 

That’s why these questions have to be asked because this is a 

body that represents 11,000 teachers in the province. This is the 

body upon who the minister depends on implementing any 

changes, or the course that he implements . . . that he 

authorizes. 

 

And the statement is: 

 

Recent unprecedented actions by the provincial 

government have put K to 12 education at serious risks. 

 

It goes on . . . The president goes on. He says: 

 

The provincial government is in the process of decimating 

the Department of Education. These actions signal a major 

change of direction for K to  

12 education and violate (violate) the long standing history 

of co-operation, collaboration, respect, and trust. 

 

I never heard the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) say 

anything like that about the former minister. And I would 

advise that the present minister should consult a little more 

often with the former minister and should maintain the course 

that was set by the former minister and the former government, 

and maintain the course that Saskatchewan people want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, we want to find out where you 

are going, where you are trying to take us, and we will start by 

asking the question, questions related to your department. What 

is happening in your department? I want to ask you, Mr. 

Minister: how many people did you fire in your department? 

How many people did you fire? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, there 

were no firings. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, he tells me he didn’t fire 

anybody. Mr. Minister, how many people did you terminate or 

did you retire, or how many did you just ask to leave? How 

many did you dismiss? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, there 

were 162 lay-offs, 162. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — There were 162 lay-offs in the department. 

Of those . . . Does that include people who were retired under 

the early retirement plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Within the Department of Education 

there were 178 employees eligible to take early retirement; of 

these, 72 per cent, or 128 in fact took early retirement. So we 

have 162 permanent employees whose positions were 

abolished, and we have 128 who took early retirement. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — So how many employees are you left with 

now, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The estimates, under Education, 

which I think all members received a copy of, advised the 

legislature that we have 1,472.2 person-years, made up of 1,237 

permanent, 235.2 non-permanent. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Now could you advise me how many vacant 

positions there are at this particular time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t have a precise number, but I’m 

advised something in the neighbourhood of 30. If the hon. 

member would like, we can have that information for him at the 

next sitting of Education estimates, but our best guess at this 

point in time would be in the order of 30. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Now, Mr. Minister, you have advised me 

that there were 162 lay-offs, 128 early retirements. I want to 

clarify this. Is that number of 162 lay-offs over and  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1421 

 

above the 128 early retirements, or does it include them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The numbers 162 and 128 are 

mutually exclusive of each other. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Now, Mr. Minister, when you were dealing 

prior to the lay-offs and to the early retirements, how many 

people at that time did you have working on the core curriculum 

implementation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our curriculum development branch 

has 20 people in it. That however doesn’t tell the whole story, 

in terms of work on curriculum, because there are a number of 

secondments. School boards, for example, to serve on 

committees which would make that number substantially higher 

insofar as who . . . how many are involved, if you like. But the 

branch itself has 20 people. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — You’ve told me that the branch now has 20 

people. But the question was: how many people did the 

curriculum branch have prior to the firings and prior to the 

laying off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the curriculum development 

branch, as the blue book points out, had 25.8 and now has 21.8. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Of these people that were eligible to retire 

that you were talking about earlier, you were talking about 

earlier - 178 employees eligible, 128 took early 

retirement - how many people that did not take early retirement 

but were eligible, were laid off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There were 178 employees in 

Education who were eligible for early retirement; 128 took 

early retirement, and there was 10 who were eligible for early 

retirement but did not elect to take it and were subsequently laid 

off. And half of those, I’m advised, were in one particular area 

that was eliminated totally from the budget in terms of funding. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — What was that area that was eliminated 

totally from the budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Educational media services. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Now did you lay them off, Mr. Minister, 

these people from educational media services? Because you’ve 

just dropped that department. Did you replace it with contract 

work, or what happened with that particular aspect of the 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The production facility unit was 

completely eliminated. It is not used, and we aren’t contracting 

it out or anything else. It’s just a function that we’re not 

utilizing at this time. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Was the decision to cut these positions, was 

it a result of a philosophical decision, because it’s something 

you felt you shouldn’t be doing? Was it a result of lack of 

demand for services? Was it as a result of just wanting to cut 

back finances and changing priorities? Would you explain that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The decision to eliminate this  

unit was part of the budget process. It was viewed as a lower 

priority and for that reason was eliminated from the funding. 

I’m advised that it was responsible for the production of some 

TV spots and videos, those kinds of things. In the event, I 

suppose, that we need that, we could look at getting it outside 

the department. I suspect in some instances school boards 

undertake it themselves; in fact, I’m almost certain they do. So 

it was a lower priority area and one that came about as a result 

of the budget review process. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — So, Mr. Minister, we’ve established then 

one little piece of information about a direction that you want to 

take. You don’t believe that educational media and technology, 

and that is related to the portion of the department we’re talking 

about, is priority. Or if it is, it’s something that you’re not 

willing to handle. It’s something that you feel that the school 

boards should be taking over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I suppose that’s a fair statement. It 

was our view that it was a service that had become relatively 

expensive to provide against the backdrop of many priorities in 

the department. It’s not as though it can’t be provided as need 

be by other sources. 

 

On balance, I think it was a reasonable decision because the 

acid test for all of this was to not jeopardize the quality of 

education. And this was one of those moves that we could 

undertake without jeopardizing the quality because access 

would still be there, albeit perhaps not through the department. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Related . . . You mentioned also earlier that 

it was a matter of priority. I want to know where you got this. 

Whose priority is it we were talking about here? Are we talking 

about the priority of the directors of education? Are we talking 

about priorities of principals? Priorities of school boards? 

Priorities of teachers? Priorities of people within your 

department? Or priorities of parents? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think I can honestly say, as 

much as I . . . I wouldn’t want to suggest that it hasn’t 

performed some useful function in the past. But at this point in 

time I can honesty say I haven’t had one teacher, one director, 

one board of education, the teachers’ federation, the school 

trustees, I haven’t had one person raise with me that by 

eliminating this unit that somehow education is going to fall 

apart. In fact, I haven’t had one person raise this issue with me 

at all. 

 

And so I think that supports our view that it was a lower 

priority. It can be picked up if need be, and on balance, I think 

the right decision was made. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, be advised that this is 

now July - it’s holidays. Teachers and students are on holidays, 

and they probably have not been made aware of this particular 

thing being cut. And come September they’re probably going to 

come along and wonder, now, what exactly has happened to the 

educational media services. 

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1422 

 

I haven’t heard it announced. I haven’t heard you consult . . . or 

asking directors or boards or teachers about it. And the reason 

I’m asking is to find out whether you got information from any 

of the actors in education to see if this was an area that you 

should cut. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the view was that the unit had 

become not all that widely used by the K to 12 system - point 

number one. And, in fact, who was using it more most recently 

was other departments, and it had become almost a tool of the 

bureaucracy, a tool of the bureaucracy of government as 

opposed to the school system. And certainly we don’t . . . I 

don’t think that’s in anybody’s best interest and certainly not 

the K to 12 system who we are here to serve. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Getting back to the lay-offs and the early 

retirements, Mr. Minister, could I have the names and positions 

of the 170 . . . 128 early retirements and the 162 people whose 

jobs were abolished with lay-offs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t have that here. I could 

undertake to provide it to you if you so wish. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I’d like to be able to get that before the next 

time that we come together with Education estimates. 

 

I want to ask the minister as well now about some senior 

personnel within his department. Number one, the first question 

relates to a deputy minister. Could you advise me, Mr. Minister, 

and could you advise this Assembly of the qualifications and 

experience of the previous deputy minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t have a curriculum vitae for the 

person you’re referring to because, as you will know, he’s no 

longer with the department. But the former deputy, Mr. 

Wickstrom, I’d advised had a Ph.D. in Education, was deputy 

minister of the Department of Education when it was then the K 

to 12 department for three years. Prior to that he had been a 

superintendent in B.C., North Vancouver to be exact; prior to 

that, served in the Saskatoon school system. He has just this 

summer returned to Delta, B.C., I believe it is, as a director of 

education. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — We’ve established, Mr. Minister, that the 

former deputy had extensive experience in education, as well as 

more than ample qualifications in the field of education. Could 

you advise me, Mr. Minister, on the educational qualifications 

and experience of your present deputy minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The present deputy minister, Lawrie 

McFarlane, education: Queen’s University, Ph.D., philosophy; 

St. Andrew’s University, Scotland, master of literature, 

philosophy; University of Dundee, Scotland, master in 

economics. Previous experience includes, just prior to 

becoming deputy minister of the new stronger and enlarged 

Department of Education, was deputy minister of advanced 

education and manpower. Prior to that, associate deputy 

minister, Department of Finance. And between ‘76, ‘81, some 

various positions, including director of budget bureau in the 

Department of Finance. 

Mr. Kowalsky: — You have hired a deputy minister who has 

very limited experience in education. An extensive background, 

but in the field of education, Mr. Minister, very limited 

experience, and that is only with the department of advanced ed. 

I would ask you to give me an indication of what the experience 

in the field of education your assistant deputy ministers have, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t know where the hon. 

member is leading us in his questions, but if he is somehow 

trying to suggest that my present deputy is somehow not 

qualified, with one Ph.D., two masters, plus along the way, in 

addition to what I already gave you, was that he taught at a 

couple of universities, namely the University of Trent in 

Peterborough, and Carlton as well, I would suspect that the 

public of Saskatchewan and myself and my colleagues would 

be left speechless as to your logic in trying to suggest that he’s 

not somehow qualified. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I’ll repeat the question. But 

before I do, I’ll make this statement. I had asked in the first case 

what his experience was with respect to the field of education. 

That’s what we’re after here because we’re talking about 

education. Now I want to know also what - and that was my 

question - what the assistant deputy minister’s qualifications are 

and his experience in the field of education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Okay. Glenn Penner, associate deputy 

minister. Education: University of Saskatchewan, Bachelor of 

Education, 1970; University of Saskatchewan, Master of 

Education. Previous work experience: regional director of 

education, Saskatchewan Education; director of education, 

Saskatoon East School Division; for some several years, 

teacher, vice-principal, principal, assistant director, director, 

Saskatoon public school division. 

 

Elizabeth Crosthwaite, assistant deputy minister. Education: 

Master of Arts in history at Carlton University. College: year in 

Athens; classical civilization archaeology; University of 

Toronto, high school teachers’ certificate; University of 

Toronto, Bachelor of Arts in history. 

 

Steven Pillar. Education. He is associate deputy minister, as 

well. Bachelor of Arts from York; Master of Public 

Administration, Carlton. 

 

Don Wright, assistant deputy minister, Ph.D. Economics, 

Harvard University; Master of Arts and Economics, University 

of British Columbia; B. Comm., Economics Honours, 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s just the educational history of these four individuals. So I 

think the hon. member will see, as will the public of 

Saskatchewan, that we are well served by our officials. 

 

And while I’m on my feet I want to take this opportunity, 

because you have raised the issue as it relates to Directions and 

where we’re heading, and as well your seat mate and colleague, 

the Advanced Education critic, made reference earlier today to 

the blueprint for the  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1423 

 

future as it relates to post-secondary education. 

 

I want to tell you that two of the finest documents probably to 

ever come out of Saskatchewan education were, in fact, the 

Directions document that was largely tutored under my 

predecessor, the Hon. Pat Smith, the current Minister of Energy 

and Mines; and as well the document entitled Preparing for the 

Year 2000, which laid out the blueprint for adult education for 

the next two decades in this province. 

 

And I just publicly want to say again, while we’re going 

through officials, that although I have obviously some senior 

ones in the legislature here with me here tonight to help in these 

estimates, there are many, many people behind the scenes that 

have done a lot of very, very fine work in putting together these 

two documents. 

 

The Saskatchewan people, the Saskatchewan children, the 

Saskatchewan students, those seeking opportunities in adult 

education, will be well served by these blueprints and the 

foundations that have been laid by these documents. I’m very, 

very proud of them, as we all should be, because they represent 

the culmination of a lot of consultation - on the one hand with 

the public involved - and a lot of research and tireless 

dedication by an awful lot of very fine officials. And I would 

just want that to be clearly on the record. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — There’s no question, Mr. Minister, about the 

support that the document Directions and the document core 

curriculum has by the entire community of Saskatchewan - that 

includes the professional and that also includes the consumers 

of education in Saskatchewan. The difficulty here is: what is 

happening to the direction that you’ve got? What is happening 

to it? 

 

So you’ve just indicated to me, Mr. Minister, that you have 

replaced the top . . . that the top four people in your department, 

who were knowledgeable about education, in the field of 

education, and who were knowledgeable in the development of 

Directions have been replaced, so that there’s only one. You’ve 

replaced them with people who are expert in finance, expert in 

finance. 

 

Well we’re talking education here, and we’re wondering, what’s 

happening. What’s happening to the field of education? What’s 

happening to K to 12? Which way are you going to be taking 

the province? And if you are taking us in a different direction, 

why don’t you announce it? What’s happened to your corporate 

memory of the people who have been dismissed, people who 

have been working on the core curriculum over the last four, 

five years, that have taken it to the community, taken it to all 

different divisions and different schools where the students and 

where the teachers are starting to take ownership of it, and all of 

a sudden the leadership is pulled out from under it. Now they 

have just established confidence in the people that were 

working on it. Then now they see the leadership is gone, with 

the exception of one person who is still qualified in that, and 

knows, and knowledgeable of what has happened. Are you 

taking us in a new direction? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The direction that we are proceeding 

in is no different before the . . . after the early  

retirement and the lay-offs than it was before. I want to make 

that abundantly clear. The Directions process is intact, it’s 

alive, and it’s well. 

 

(1945) 

 

And on the post-secondary education, obviously we are taking 

in a new direction, because the people of Saskatchewan expect 

it if we are in a position ourselves for the information age and 

the knowledge-based economy that’s rapidly emerging upon us 

and our young people and our young adults. And that is a new 

blueprint. It’s a bold blueprint. It’s an exciting blueprint. It’s 

one that will set Saskatchewan education apart from the rest of 

Canada once again, and I would argue apart from the rest of 

North America, and maybe even the world. And we’re excited 

about that. It’s a new direction. It signals some change 

certainly, and a change in the right direction, I would argue. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, here’s a paragraph from a 

letter, a copy of which you should have in your office, but I 

want to put it on record. It deals with the release of qualified 

people who have given the service, given good service to the 

department. It says: 

 

Surely your department needs a historical perspective in 

order to have a good sense of where it is going. Also the 

manner in which they were released (and “they” refers to 

the people in the department) shows that there is a large 

measure of either insecurity or arrogance on the part of the 

decision makers. 

 

That means you, Mr. Minister. How could you fire these people 

callously and now say that you’re still maintaining the course? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Point number one, for the 

record - because I don’t think you would want their professional 

records blemished by an inaccuracy - they were not fired; there 

was some lay-offs. And I want to be clear on that again, 

because there’s quite a difference in terms of one’s work record 

as whether you were fired or laid off or had your position 

abolished. 

 

For the hon. member to suggest that somehow, because the 

department last year had something over 1,600 people in it, and 

this year it has 1,472 person-years, which probably represents 

even, in fact, more people than that, that somehow we can’t 

function, and that somehow we . . . Albeit that there was some 

people who left through early retirement who carried with them 

a great deal of knowledge. 

 

And that’s always one of the down sides of an early retirement 

exercise. You have no control over who leaves, because it is a 

voluntary process. And we regret that. And that’s one of the 

down sides. But at the same time, to suggest that in that 1,472 

people that are left behind that we don’t have the expertise or 

those who had knowledge of the process, whether it be in the 

advanced education side or the Education side, would be a 

wrong conclusion. And because in the larger scheme of things 

the department still has 1,472 person-years as opposed to 

something in the order of 1,600 last year, and I think we  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1424 

 

can quite well function. 

 

We’ve got, I might add, just really good teams who have 

worked long and hard to produce some of this very, very 

exciting initiatives, whether it be on the K to 12 side with the 

announcement of the new core curriculum which was the 

culmination of some several years of study and consultation 

with the teachers and school boards and trustees and the public 

at large across this entire province. And we’re well on our way 

with that now being laid out and curriculum development 

proceeding. Or on the other hand, in the post-secondary 

education side, the new blueprint - very exciting times. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — It is precisely the reason that you stated, Mr. 

Minister, that the team had established something quite good, 

quite good in terms of where they were going in core 

curriculum. I find it very difficult to understand why you would 

encourage a dismissal, whether by firing them, whether by 

laying them off, whether by early retirement, that you would 

encourage a dismissal of people in your department who were 

carrying the ball on this. 

 

Were you dissatisfied with their performance, Mr. Minister? Is 

there something that they were . . . Was there a direction that 

they were going that you did not believe in? What was it, if 

that’s what was happening? Because it just does not make sense 

to take people that were working on something that had such 

solid foundations and to throw it away. It just didn’t make 

sense. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the member is inaccurate in a 

couple of instances again. 

 

First of all there were no firings; there were some lay-offs, yes. 

And secondly, the early retirements, we do not pick who 

decides to early retire. There was a package put forth for those 

who so wished. And we got into some fair debate this afternoon 

about . . . The NDP apparently would prefer that we walk 

around and hand out 2,000 pink slips. That is not our approach. 

It seemed much more reasonable to abolish vacant positions on 

the one hand, and secondly, offer early retirement for those who 

wish to take it. 

 

In the case of Education, 72 per cent of those who are eligible 

for early retirement took early retirement. Yes, we lost some 

very intelligent and capable and experienced people, and that is 

unfortunate. That is the price you pay for an early retirement 

program. 

 

On the other hand, it gives a chance for some of those who are 

well into their careers in the civil service a chance for some 

upward mobility and the rejuvenation of a department and of a 

service. And that’s very useful as well in terms of their careers 

and what they can contribute to Saskatchewan education. 

 

So to somehow suggest once again that the jobs will not 

continue as they have in the past would be erroneous. And 

you’re wrong in your suggestion that there were firings, and 

you’re wrong in your suggestion that somehow the jobs will not 

get done. In fact, we’re on a  

very ambitious course. And, in fact, I can . . . (inaudible) . . . 

with the hon. member, since he referred to the STF press 

release, I believe it was. And I have met with the STF 

leadership on more than one occasion since the budget came 

down, and even before that. And I have assured them. Because 

they’ve asked the questions too, about core curriculum and 

directions. Will it continue? Has there been a change of 

direction? I assured them, no. 

 

When it came to core curriculum, the answer I gave there, I 

said: if anything, we want to pick up the tempo there a little bit. 

And I think that should be reassuring news to you and to all the 

people and the teachers of Saskatchewan. So it’s not on the 

back burner. It’s not a forgotten agenda item. It’s still very 

much part of our agenda. We’re going to be very proactive on 

it. We are not changing direction. 

 

You know, one ought not to equate the fact that we have 

down-sized the Department of Education. One ought not equate 

that with some change in direction. I mean it continues to 

boggle my mind how I can now be in the third session, the third 

basically three-hour session of Education estimates, and you 

have yet to ask about students, the real benefactors of what 

we’re talking about in this Education budget. You have yet to 

ask about students and about excellence in education and about 

having the training spaces available for the job of the future and 

identifying the opportunities in the future. Are the students not 

important? 

 

I mean, I agree that whether we have person X in position B, 

and person Y in position C, is relevant and germane to some 

degree, but let’s get into the meat of the things. Let’s talk about 

education matters, if you like. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, you can see why the people 

and the educators of Saskatchewan are frustrated. You first of 

all say that there are no lay-offs, no firings. They’re lay-offs and 

they’re retirements. 

 

Well let me tell you about a conversation I had with a fellow 

who was so-called retired. He said, I don’t have much choice. 

He says, if I don’t retire, what’s going to happen to me? I will 

lose a retirement package and I will also lose my job. 

 

Now when you’re faced with a choice like that, what do you 

do? You retire. And then you go around looking for a job. And 

this particular person who was a high-paid official with the 

department ended up taking another job in a school. 

 

And I asked him, well were you asked to . . . did you see that 

you were going to get fired for incompetence or some method 

like that? He says no. And he had an unblemished record. 

 

So then what else can we conclude, Mr. Minister, but that you 

are switching direction somehow. And we want you to come 

clean with it. Which way are you going? That’s what we’re 

trying to get at. 

 

Now you talk about students. Who do you think this affects 

most? Of course it affects students. And if you change 

directions of the Department of Education, then that’s whose 

being affected most, and that’s why I’m  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1425 

 

talking about it. 

 

I want to ask you a couple of questions, Mr. Minister, about 

possible directions that some people are going, and I want you 

to tell me whether or not these are things that you are 

considering. Are you considering, Mr. Minister, mandatory 

external testing in schools? Are you considering, as your part of 

a new policy, mandatory external testing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, as it relates to our 

direction and your observation that somehow we’ve changed 

course because there’s been some administrative positions 

abolished. And as I said to your colleague from Moose Jaw 

North earlier today, I can appreciate the NDP sensitivity on this 

because you’re interested in larger bureaucracies, and big 

government is better government, and the traditional NDP 

socialist arguments. 

 

What we are interested in, what the thrust . . . and the basis for 

our budget in education was this. Above all, we wanted to 

maintain those positions that are important in the teaching and 

in the education, and that’s the front line teacher. And that’s 

why the operating budget was shielded as best it could be 

shielded from the belt-tightening exercise. We wanted to make 

sure that the students, those in the class-rooms, had the teaching 

component necessary, the teaching force necessary to provide 

for all the education for them. 

 

And sure . . . I don’t apologize for it. We made some decisions 

to chip away at the administrative side of the department. The 

fact of the matter is, government generally was top heavy 

administratively, and that’s why the down-sizing exercise was 

aimed for the most part and focused for the most part at 

managers, not front line staff, whether it be in the public 

service, across the piece, or on the teaching front. Because 

we’re committed to quality education for these young people. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, you’re not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And I’ll tell you our record . . . The 

Hon. member from Regina Rosemont says, no, we’re not. Well 

let’s put it on the record, what our commitment is that he says, 

no, we’re not. Let’s put it on the record. Let’s put it on the 

record. 

 

Between the time the NDP left office in ‘82 and we took office 

under our Premier, Grant Devine, in ‘82 and this year . . . 

Here’s the story . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. 

member says we’re not committed. Well here’s the story. On 

the K to 12 side, grants are up 56.8 per cent, up 56.8 per cent, 

and that’s in the fact of the fact that there’s 2 per cent less 

children in the K to 12 system - more money for even yet less 

students. Grants per pupil, money for the real things, not for 

administration but on the front line and the schools and the 

class-rooms, for the teaching forces and for books and for 

resources - grants per pupil up 60 per cent, and that’s at a time 

when inflation of the CPI (consumer price index) rose 34 per 

cent. 

 

And what was the NDP record in those days? Well their 

inattention to education forced school boards to increase  

mill rates 69.7 per cent in their last six years. And during the 

time the PC administration’s been in place, what’s the mill rate 

gone up? Fifteen per cent. So who has been pushing back, who 

has been laying the . . . displacing their obligations, onto the 

local school boards? Well certainly that was the trick of the 

NDP: 69.7 per cent increase during the NDP days; 15 per cent 

increase during our time. 

 

(2000) 

 

So by every measure, Mr. Chairman, by every measure: grants 

up nearly 60 per cent; grants per pupil up 60 per cent - and 

that’s in the face of inflation running at half of that - by every 

measure we’ve been committed to education in this province. 

And I ask the members of this legislature, and the public 

generally: when the NDP were in power did we have an 

education development fund to focus on quality education and 

more services in the class-rooms? No, we did not. And certainly 

we’ve had to stretch that out over 10 years, but I’ll tell you, 

when the NDP were in power there was nothing but lip service 

given to education. That is the reality. There was no new core 

curriculum; there was no education development fund; there 

was no new Agriculture college at the University of 

Saskatchewan; there was a fund . . . Universities were being 

starved of funds, and the story would be the same for libraries, 

if we were to get into the debate on that tonight, Mr. Chairman. 

 

So by every measure we have been committed to education, 

whether it be to the K to 12 side or the post-secondary side. 

And since the hon. member who’s questioning me tonight 

wasn’t in the House on these two previous occasions when we 

did estimates - when he wasn’t in the House we talked about the 

pattern of funding under the NDP. We talked about the pattern 

of funding to the universities under the NDP, and the only time 

they ever saw an increase . . . And I know I’ve hit a bit of a 

nerve there for the hon. member from Regina Lakeview, 

because a number of her constituents are in fact heavily 

involved with the university and they know the sorry state that 

you left universities in; underfunded; equipment left 

unpurchased while you built mausoleums to everything but 

education. 

 

And what was the pattern of education under the NDP 

administration, Mr. Chairman? Well it showed this 

phenomenon called electoral “wave-itis.” Every time there was 

an election coming there was a blip in the funding, and then as 

soon as the election was over they were starved for funds again. 

And, Mr. Chairman, that is a fact and the numbers bear it out. 

They gave nothing but lip service to education; nothing but lip 

service. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s difficult to believe the 

rhetoric. The members on your side of the House, Mr. 

Chairman, may believe the minister’s rhetoric but there’s no 

one else in the province of Saskatchewan who does. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, I want to start on the 

question of the presence of all members for these Education 

estimates. Never before, Mr. Minister, never before during my 

time as a member of the legislature have  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1426 

 

I seen a minister who hasn’t had the courtesy to tell members 

on the opposition benches when the estimates for that 

department are going to come forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Never before have we run this legislature in 

such a way that there is no advance notice to members before 

estimates for departments begin. And so what do we have? We 

have Thursday afternoon, when I happen to leave to go to an 

appeal hearing in Saskatoon, we were doing Parks and 

renewable resources. And lo and behold, the minister happens 

to notice that the relevant members aren’t here on the 

opposition benches, and in the evening we suddenly switch to 

Education with absolutely no notice. 

 

Now I say to you, Mr. Minister, if you want to make a political 

point about the fact that the critics on the oppositions benches 

are not here, I suggest to you that first you extend the basic 

courtesy to members of this legislature and let us know when 

Education estimates are going to be done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, I want to make a second 

point. And that is . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please, order, please. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — You say, Mr. Minister, that you offered early 

retirement to members of the public service. We on this side of 

the House say, Mr. Minister, that you forced members of the 

public service to take early retirement. 

 

We know, Mr. Minister, that deputy ministers were evaluated 

on the basis of the number of people in their department who 

took early retirement and I’m sure that your deputy minister 

was no exception, no exception at all. Public servants had no 

choice. They either took early retirement or they faced the 

threat of being fired or, in your words, laid off. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to raise a third point about the 

nonsense that we’ve heard from you this evening. You say that 

your objective in cutting back the Department of Education, 

that your objective was to cut back on administrative fat. Now 

that is a load of nonsense, Mr. Minister. The large number of 

people that you fired were front line teachers, primarily in the 

technical institutes. Over 130 of the 162 firings were teaching 

staff in the technical institutes. They weren’t people in the 

administration. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, in addition to that, most of the people that 

you singled out in administration were not middle-level 

administrative staff; they were senior-level administrative staff 

in your department who you obviously either wanted to get rid 

of or felt that those staff were no longer philosophically in line 

with the direction that you were taking. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you talk about students. We’ll tell you on 

this side of the legislature the kind of impact that your  

budget is having on students. What do you think a 1 per cent cut 

in grants to school boards means for the average student? It 

means a higher pupil-teacher ratio in the class-room. It means 

less counselling services. Mr. Minister, it means less program 

options for students. That’s what your cuts mean; that’s what 

your 1 per cent cut means. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, how do those cuts square with 

your commitment that you were going to make education one of 

the pillars, one of the four pillars in your policies and your 

programs? How does your 1 per cent cut in funding to grants 

for school boards - which is in effect a 5 or 6 per cent cut after 

inflation has been considered - how does that square with your 

commitment that education is one of the four pillars in your 

policies and programs, Mr. Minister? Maybe you’ll explain that 

to the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’m sorry if we somehow caught 

both Education critics off guard by calling estimates. It seems to 

me that we’ve all known for probably three months that we 

were going to deal with this department. In fact, you’ve 

probably had three or four months to lay awake at night and 

think up questions. But I’m sorry if we somehow caught you off 

guard. 

 

By every measure the reality is today . . . And I deal in facts. I 

deal in hard numbers that translate into real quality in terms of 

education on the front line and our class-rooms. By every 

measure, as I talked about earlier, whether it’s the university 

sector or the K to 12 sector, by every measure we can stand here 

and hold our heads high because we put more money into that 

system than the NDP ever did. By every measure. And in fact 

this year the blue book would back that up once again even in 

these so-called times of belt tightening and fiscal restraint. 

 

Those are the facts, Mr. Chairman. And the reason that we will 

provide that commitment and continue to provide that 

commitment to education is because in the world of the 

future - the post-industrial age, the technological era, the 

information age, the knowledge-based economy - we don’t 

subscribe to some of the views of the opposition. We don’t 

subscribe to their observations about where the jobs of the 

future are going to be. 

 

And I’ll use the university as an example of how out of touch 

. . . because the hon. members were not here. The critics were 

not here when we touched on this at a previous session. And I 

refer to a February 1980 memo from the Hon. A. Blakeney, 

premier, to the Hon. D. McArthur, minister of Education and 

continuing education. And here’s what the premier, here’s what 

the NDP premier said. I mean, this epitomizes the NDP’s 

commitment to education, Mr. Chairman. And what did the 

then premier, Allan Blakeney, say to his minister of Education 

and continuing education? 

 

Well he talked to him in this memo about . . . He wanted to 

know the manner in which we intend to reduce the rate of 

growth of university funding. He wanted to know the manner in 

which we intend to reduce the rate of growth of university 

funding as enrolment declines in the early  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1427 

 

1980s. Now have you ever seen anybody more wrong than 

that - talking about how we’re going to reduce funding and 

enrolment declines in the ‘80s, when the ‘80s have been 

characterized by a time of high enrolments. I mean, these are 

not hard numbers to come up with. I mean, we know who’s 

born in what year and when they’re likely to end up in 

university. And yet the NDP premier of the day was giving the 

mandate to his minister of Education to come up with a strategy 

to reduce the growth of university funding. Wrong on one 

count. But it got worse, Mr. Chairman. And he went on to say: 

 

And the methods by which we intend to ensure that 

Saskatchewan young people are trained in the skills which 

are required by a resource related growth over the next 

several years . . . 

 

I presume he was talking about potash mines and the growth in 

that area. And we’ve seen what’s happened there in the ‘80s in 

the potash sector. How wrong you can be! He wants to reduce 

funding; secondly, he suggests that enrolments are somehow 

going to go down; and thirdly, that the growth in jobs and job 

opportunities are going to be in the resource-based economy. 

And really, that statement, more than any other, is what 

separates the out-of-touch NDP with the young people, the 

young adults, and society as a whole today in Saskatchewan. 

And I might . . . That also is what separates the NDP from the 

Progressive Conservatives. 

 

Everyone out there who has addressed the issue and given it 

some thought realized that the implications . . . And I don’t case 

what label you put on it, because every futurist has a label. But 

this issue that we’re talking about is so serious, the issue that 

we’re talking about is so serious that we ought to rise above 

partisan debate on this. 

 

I mean, this is . . . We’re talking about the next two decades in 

this province. And I would ask the hon. members to join with 

me and let’s rise above partisan debate and discuss what are the 

implications, what are the implications of the post-industrial 

economy. What are the implications for our young adults, and 

in fact our adults now in the work-force? What are the 

implications in the new economy, or the technological age, or 

the information age, or the knowledge-based economy? 

 

And the hon. member from Saskatoon says, oh, come on. Well I 

would suggest to you - in fact, I challenge you - to read what 

virtually every sector in post-secondary education is saying. 

And I don’t care whether it’s the Issues and Options paper that 

the University of Saskatchewan has put together, or whether it’s 

the report by the Community Colleges Trustees Association, or 

the work that we’ve done in-house in conjunction with a couple 

of conferences that were held, or The Canadian Manufacturers’ 

Association, as one of my colleagues points out, the Canadian 

ministers of Education council. It doesn’t matter which sector 

you go to. They might come at it from a different perspective 

but they all end up with the same conclusions, and that is this: 

we are in a new era. 

 

And it’s not as though somehow what we’ve done in the past, 

we’ve been wrong and we’ve failed, because we have not. And 

I’ve said that time and time again, and I say  

it again. What we’re talking about is positioning ourselves for 

the future. What we’re talking about is making sure that we 

have the job opportunities identified, with the diversification 

that our province will undergo as we move from merely this 

agrarian age and the industrial economy into the post-industrial 

era, the technological era, the information age. 

 

And there are new . . . And the hon. member from Regina 

Rosemont somehow suggests that we don’t understand farming 

and farmers. Well he couldn’t be more wrong. And what I’m 

talking about for the hon. member from Regina Rosemont is 

exactly that when it comes to farming. Because what are the 

kinds of headlines we see today, if one watches? What are the 

issues in agriculture? And I had a particularly good meeting in 

Melfort some several weeks ago after the budget. You know 

what the farmers there told me? It was information that was the 

key to success on their farm. You see, we understand the sense 

of those young, modern farmers - information, and knowledge, 

and the technology of herbicides, and the technology of 

bio-technology, and the technology of marketing, and the 

technology of sensing where the new markets are, is what 

they’re interested in. 

 

(2015) 

 

And that’s why you see headlines like this one in the 

Star-Phoenix a few . . . a couple of months ago: “Education: a 

key grain marketing tool.” You see, that’s what the new 

economy is all about. And the hon. member talks about how 

agriculture somehow is going to disappear off the face of the 

earth in Saskatchewan. And no, it is not. What we’re talking 

about is what are the implications of the information economy 

here. And that’s why we see that kind of headline, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

And I could give you other examples of the same sorts of 

situations, Mr. Chairman, where education is going to be the 

flywheel, if you like, for future economic development. And 

that’s why I say the issue is so important. And we can debate 

process and I quite freely am happy to do that. But the reality is, 

if you want to cling to the past, if you want as a party to cling to 

the past - even with your youth wing, they do not want to - if 

you as a party want to cling to the past, and the signposts of the 

old economy, that is your prerogative. But every sector out 

there wants to go forward and address the implications of the 

new economy. 

 

And we intend to go forward, Mr. Chairman, because to do 

anything other than that would be irresponsible. To not plan for 

the future would be irresponsible. To not address the question 

of excellence, and quality, and accessibility across this province 

would be irresponsible. To not talk about how we build this 

economy, how we meld our education system, and the job 

opportunities that are going to exist in the future, would be to 

let our young people down. And to not identify diversification 

strategies that make sense for this province, and not to provide 

the leadership in those areas would be a failure to the people of 

this province. 

 

So I would suggest to the hon. members that the challenge is so 

great, it’s too great in fact to let partisan politics stand in the 

way. And I say that in all sincerity. And I don’t  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1428 

 

pretend to have a monopoly on good ideas. But I can tell you, 

I’ve been mightily impressed by things, by, for example, the 

forward thinking of the University of Saskatchewan when they 

put out that Issues and Options paper that asks some very, very 

tough questions, including, in essence: do we have the courage 

to undertake change? That’s what they were basically saying. 

Do we have the courage to ask the questions and face the 

answers? Not to reduce every issue to a simply duality, to an 

either, or; them, us; right, wrong; as the hon. members are 

trying to do here tonight. The issue is too big for that. 

 

As a politician - and certainly you recognize the strength in 

it - as a politician, it’s very easy to adopt the status quo and say 

don’t; don’t, you know, don’t make waves in the water; don’t 

ruffle feathers; don’t have any changes in the administration in 

the department. You know, don’t have any lay-offs; don’t have 

early retirements; let the size of the civil service continue to 

grow 10,000 people during the ‘80s . . . ‘70s when you were in 

power. It’s very easy. That’s the easy way out, in fact, is to say 

the status quo will serve us well, and we can go on and on and 

on with that. There’s nothing easier than to argue for no change. 

But there comes a time when you have to make change, not for 

change’s sake but because it’s the right course for the future. 

And that’s what we’re talking about here. 

 

And I see the hon. members laughing and joking. Well this is 

not a laughing and joking matter. This is not an issue that 

should be written off with cynicism and scepticism. This issue 

is too important. 

 

And the hon. members may not believe, as I said, about the 

realities and the implications of the new economy. And I don’t 

care what title you put on it, or what label you put on it, but the 

reality is we’re into a changed world, and whether you like it or 

not the world is going to change. And I would argue, come with 

us and provide some constructive input as we plot this course. 

Provide some constructive advice and guidance as we 

restructure the system and as we embark on distance education; 

and as we embark on literacy; and as we embark on a plan to 

make education accessible across this province like it has never 

been accessible before. 

 

Whether we’re talking K to 12, whether we’re talking technical 

institute courses, whether we’re talking university courses, at 

the end of the day Saskatchewan people will know that we’re 

not charting this course because it is some bitter pill to be 

swallowed, because it is not a bitter pill that has to be 

swallowed. It, in fact, can be an exciting future. 

 

Saskatchewan people have always opted for common sense. 

They know that there has to be changes. If anybody has 

recognized that, it’s our agrarian society who have constantly 

had to adapt and to change whether it be to competition on a 

global basis or to compete with the elements out there. And 

what we’re doing is right; it’s right for our young people, it’s 

right for our adults, and it’s right for Saskatchewan and I ask 

you to join with us in this very exciting agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, the original question, lest 

you forget, is how it is that the 1 per cent cut in funding to 

school boards and the firing — in your terms the laying off — 

of 162 personnel, most of whom were teaching staff, how that 

squared with your commitment that education was going to be 

one of the four pillars of your overall program and policy in the 

coming years. And I note, Mr. Minister, that you didn’t answer 

the question. You didn’t explain to the public or to members of 

this Assembly how, in effect, cutting school board grants by 5 

per cent squared with your election promise to make education 

one of the four major pillars of your policy and program. 

 

And the reason, Mr. Minister, that you skirted that question was 

because you’re unable to answer the question. You simply can’t 

square your election promise with the funding cuts that you’ve 

implemented since the election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, I want to comment on a 

few of the points that you chose to make. 

 

First of all, you talk about keeping education out of partisan 

politics. I suggest to you, sir, that you are the government and 

you are the minister that has politicized education for the first 

time in this province, and that you are the minister that has set a 

precedent in this province for treating professional educators in 

a highly unprofessional way. You choose not to consult with 

them. You fire them without notice. 

 

You’ve created uncertainty in the technical institute, in K to 12 

system in this province. You’ve demoralized the technical 

institute and community college system in this province 

entirely, sir. Your government and your government’s record is 

not in the best interests of the students in this province. 

 

You must be held directly responsible for a decline in the 

quality of education that Saskatchewan’s young people will 

experience this fall, sir. I say that rests squarely on your 

shoulders. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — You talk, sir, about the New Democratic 

Party’s record with respect to university funding. And you read 

the 1980 Blakeney memo. May I remind you, sir, that a year 

and a quarter later, in March of 1982, the NDP government 

brought down a budget with a 17 per cent increase for the 

University of Saskatchewan. May I remind you of that. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to get to the question of consultation. 

I want to ask you - since you declined to answer my first 

question about how it was that your 1 per cent cut in school 

board grants, a 5 per cent cut after inflation is considered, 

squares with your election promise to make education one of 

the four pillars of your plan for the remainder of the 1980s; 

since you failed to answer that question - I want to ask you 

another question, a very simple question, sir. Why was it that 

the Department of Education cuts that you undertook were  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1429 

 

made without any consultation whatsoever with the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and why was it that the 

cuts that you undertook to the technical institutes were made 

without any consultation whatsoever with the staff involved? 

 

Why did you not consult with the STF and with the staff 

involved before undertaking these far-reaching cut-backs to 

education staffing in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I want to put on the 

record again, because I want it to be clear to the public of 

Saskatchewan, because day in and day out we have seen 

inaccuracies come from the members of the opposition 

benches - and I might add, the media as well - when it comes to 

the issue of funding for Saskatchewan education . . . Because 

the constant and inaccurate rhetoric is of cut-backs. That’s the 

constant and inaccurate rhetoric. 

 

The hon. member talked about our record. And I don’t care if 

he’s talking about our record in universities or at the K to 12 

level. I read into the record here tonight earlier about the 

increases - 60 per cent increase at the same time that our 

enrolments have gone down 4,000 in the K to 12 side. Now 

how does he square that with the term cut-backs? How does he 

square the fact that when the NDP were in power, there was no 

such thing as an education development fund? 

 

Now we can argue tonight, Mr. Chairman, about whether we 

should have had it spent over five years or over 10 years. But 

the reality is, when that member’s party was in government, 

there was no education development fund. There was less 

money spent on education. 

 

And tonight, what do we see the focus of the question is, 

whether it be the member from Prince Albert or the member 

from Saskatoon? Well, what about these administrators in 

central office in Regina? Somehow the department won’t 

function without them, Mr. Chairman, when the question should 

be: what are you doing on the front lines with the students and 

with the teachers in the class-rooms? And by every measure the 

student-pupil ratio in this province is one that we can hold our 

heads high on, by every measure. 

 

And there have been libraries that have been upgraded, and 

computers put into those schools, Mr. Chairman, because we 

recognize that our young people must be trained for the 

opportunities of the future by every measure. 

 

And I want to flip this question around, Mr. Chairman, about 

not 5 per cent as the hon. member erroneously tried to 

suggest - a 5 per cent cut in the operating grant, he tried to 

suggest. The reality is this, Mr. Chairman, the reality is this, and 

it’s in the blue book, Mr. Chairman: the money spent on 

education, and that’s comparing apples to apples and oranges to 

oranges; we’ve adjusted for the fact that the department is 

amalgamated - Saskatchewan library, K to 12, post-secondary 

education - the number in this blue book this year is higher than 

it was last year. How does he square that with the question of 

cut-backs? 

But put that argument aside, because we can debate that all 

night. The record is clear. Our record is clear. And the point that 

I want to make, Mr. Chairman, the point that I want to make, 

because this is really the issue: if you ask the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . because this is what the hon. member is 

saying: we’re not spending enough on education, albeit it’s a 60 

per cent increase since the NDP left office, in five years. Now 

he’s saying it’s not enough. And I say, yes, education, like 

health, could always use more money. 

 

But I would put it this way. This blue book says we are 

spending something slightly over three-quarters of a billion 

dollars on education in this province, Mr. Chairman. 

Three-quarters of a billion dollars! Sure, we could always use 

more. 

 

But whereas the hon. members in the NDP want to carp about 

how much we cannot do with three-quarters of a billion dollars, 

you know what I hear the teachers saying and the parents 

saying, and the community colleges and the institutes and the 

universities saying? I hear them saying: Mr. Minister, I look to 

the fine things we can do with three-quarters of a billion dollars, 

not the things we cannot do with three-quarters of a billion 

dollars. 

 

And that perspective was put to me by a person who I very 

much respect in the post-secondary education system. He said, 

Mr. Minister, we are proud of what we can do, not what we 

cannot do. And the hon. members may not be proud of what we 

can do with three-quarters of a billion dollars, but I, as part of 

this government, on behalf of all the taxpayers and the children 

and the young adults in this province, I am proud with what we 

were doing with three-quarters of a billion dollars, provincial 

dollars, in the education system. 

 

And really that only tells half the story. Because, as well, the 

property taxpayers come up with a substantial amount of 

money. And if you add it all up, we’re going to be well over $1 

billion in funding for our education system in this province. 

 

(2030) 

 

And so the hon. members may say, well, that’s not enough. And 

I ran into this very question in a number of meetings that he 

asked about consultation. I held a number of meetings across 

this province, from La Ronge to Meadow Lake, to Weyburn, to 

Swift Current, to see what the people thought. Not some 

simplistic poll that the hon. members circulated around one 

segment of our post-secondary education system. And I talked 

to the universities and the boards of governors, and looked at 

the Issues and Options paper, and listened to what the 

community college trustees had to say. And the list goes on and 

on and on, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And at one of these questions, the hon. member, the person 

there posted the question not unlike the critic here tonight. He 

said, you politicians are all the same. You talk about making 

education a priority. Why don’t you put your money where your 

mouth is? And so I said to that hon. member, or to that person 

at that meeting, I said, you know, ma’am, you’re right. I said, 

how would it be if we took every single dollar we collect in 

income tax from  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1430 

 

every person in this province and earmarked it for education? 

How would it be if we took every dollar from the single largest 

source of revenue for the public purse, how would it be if we 

took that money and earmarked it for education? Would that be 

putting our money where our mouth is? And that lady said, yes, 

and that’s what you should be doing. And I said, well, ma’am, 

last year in this province we did that and added another $50 

million besides, because we view, as do Saskatchewan people 

view, education as a priority. 

 

And that’s the kind of money we’re putting behind our 

commitment - more than every single dollar we collect in 

income tax in this province. Now isn’t that a commitment to 

education? 

 

One of your own members today, the member from Prince 

Albert talked about how the Education budget - and I haven’t 

figured it out exactly - is 20 per cent of the entire budget. One 

department, 20 per cent. I’m proud of that. They want to look at 

what we cannot do; I want to look at what we can do with 

three-quarters of a billion dollars. 

 

And I raise this example of putting three-quarters of a billion 

dollars in perspective. Because if you ask the average person on 

the street, how much are you spending on education, or if you 

asked the average person on the street, well, what is the blue 

book on Education estimates say, the average person, the 

average parent, doesn’t even know this book exists, much as we 

think it’s so very, very important - as it is. 

 

But if you ask them, how much should you been spending on 

education - should you be spending 30 million, 300 million, or 

3 billion? - how can they judge? How can they know? They 

hear the inflamed rhetoric of the NDP saying, cut-backs, 

cut-backs, cut-backs, when it’s not the truth. 

 

And that’s why you have to put it in perspective for them, that 

that education budget is more than all the tax we collect from 

every mom and dad in this province. And they’re proud to pay 

it. And I’ll tell you why. Because they’re proud of the 

educational system and they’ll continue to pay it because they 

want more than ever - and I made this point to the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation spring council. They are 

proud to pay it and they may well be proud to pay more, and I’ll 

tell you why. Because they realize that in the future, more than 

it has even been in the past; that the job opportunities in the 

future are going to be linked directly to education. And in 

individuals, in provinces and in nations, economic security will 

lie in education. That is a fact of life in the information age. 

 

And that is the kind of thing we have got to sort out, and figure 

out what are the new signposts going to be on this new 

economy. That’s why I’m happy to have this new . . . the 

conference, the symposium on post-secondary education, in 

which I’m happy to extend an invitation to you, in Saskatoon. 

I’m very proud to host that. And the one thing that I’m looking 

for to come out of that conference is for the signposts that we 

have so much difficulty grasping . . . the signposts of the new 

economy, what are they? 

We knew what they were in the old economy. We knew what 

they were in the agrarian economy. We knew what they were in 

the industrial age. But what are they in the knowledge-based 

economy? What are they in the post-industrial age? What are 

they in the technological age? What are they in the information 

age? These are the questions we must have answers to. 

 

You know, John Diefenbaker, when it comes to talking about 

how much money should be spent on education and how do you 

put it in perspective for the people . . . Because if somebody had 

told me six years ago how much are we spending on education 

or how much should we spend, I would have been like the 

average citizen. I had no knowledge of what the budget 

numbers were and if somebody had said 30 million, I’d have 

said, well, I suppose; how should I know? How do I judge? And 

that’s why the perspective of income tax, I think, helps frame it 

for the average citizen out there. 

 

I’m reminded of that when I recall the story of John 

Diefenbaker on one occasion, when somebody had made the 

point that the defence department was spending $75 million on 

jet aircraft for the defence department. And the point was made: 

well, you know, is that too much or too little? And the average 

person, like myself, I mean, how do I know what a military 

plane costs? I don’t know whether they cost 7 million or 75 

million or 700,000. And John Diefenbaker made the point that 

that is right - the average person doesn’t know that. But you tell 

them they’re spending $75,000 on plants for the Prime 

Minister’s office and the whole world goes crazy because 

everybody knows what geraniums cost. 

 

And that is the reality of the numbers that we deal with here 

sometimes, Mr. Chairman. We have to put them in perspective. 

I’ll tell you I am proud, the people of this province are proud 

that we’re spending three-quarters of a billion dollars on their 

behalf for education of the person who enters kindergarten right 

on through to those who are into the university and 

post-secondary levels, whether it be technical institutes or 

regional colleges. 

 

And I’ll tell you they’re proud to pay taxes because they’re 

proud of those institutions. And they know on occasion that 

there has to be some restructuring, and some of that’s painful. 

Change is never easy, but, by golly, we’re not going to let the 

people or the children in this province down. We’re going to 

pursue this course that will keep us ahead of the rest of the 

world when it comes to education, which is the position we’ve 

always enjoyed. And we’re going to continue to enjoy it by 

making these changes to adapt to a new economy, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Excellent filibustering. Now let’s get to the 

meat of the matter. I asked you the question earlier: are you 

proceeding with plans to institute mandatory external testing in 

K to 12 system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In the blueprint that we put together, 

the document we put together, Preparing For The Year 2000, 

we raised that very question in there, or a  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1431 

 

variation of it. I don’t have any plans, but I think it’s an area 

that we need to engage in some discussion in. I think, as well, 

for example, the university, in their paper, Issues and Options, 

raised questions around that same area. I don’t have any 

preconceived notions, particularly about that question, but I 

think that it’s one that we need to engage in some discussion in. 

And that was exactly how we raised it in our blueprint, in our 

paper. It is an area that needs some discussion, and I would 

suspect that we will engage in some discussion, although I have 

no plans at this very moment one way or the other on it. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — The difficulty here is, Mr. Minister, is if you 

are entertaining those type of plans, that you would take 

exceptional care to do extensive consultation and open 

consultation with the members of the public, following up the 

type of consultation that was established by the department, by 

those people who were talking about the core curriculum. I 

think the people of Saskatchewan and particularly the educators 

would be very surprised and rather dismayed if all of a sudden 

you came forward and said, well we’re going to institute 

external testing based on our consultations, in the manner that 

you did when you said, well we’re going to amalgamate the 

institutions based on our consultations - when really there 

weren’t any public consultations that took place. 

 

I would ask further, Mr. Minister: is it your intention, at any 

time, to talk about centralizing local school boards and the 

mandate of the local school boards, as is being done now in 

Great Britain by the great Conservative, Maggie Thatcher? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To your last question first: no, we do 

not have any plans; and secondly, you suggested that somehow 

we haven’t, or did not undertake consultation. And I take rather 

rigorous exception to that remark because in fact one of the 

very first meetings I held in the post-secondary education was 

in Prince Albert. 

 

And I don’t know how the hon. member can stand in this 

legislature and say that although I, the minister, met with 550 

individuals, groups, and associations throughout the winter, and 

I didn’t undertake consultation. And In fact we prepared, and I 

probably sent you a copy of the summary of the public 

responses on the ministerial consultation meetings. And over 

and above that, I could probably tell you as well that I held a 

number of private meetings relative to this process. 

 

And as well, I could tell you, as I’ve said before, that this idea 

for restructuring isn’t something - and our blueprint for the 

future - isn’t some magic plan that just dropped out from 

underneath the dome in this building. As I’ve said before, the 

university - both universities - recognize that we’re into an era 

of change. And that’s why the University of Saskatchewan 

undertook the very excellent Issues and Options review process. 

And if the members haven’t read it, I would recommend it to 

you. I would heartily recommend it to you because it is an 

excellent paper and it talks about the very things we’ve been 

talking about here tonight, and really does put things in 

perspective for us. 

 

As well, I couldn’t ignore what that report was saying and  

that process was attempting to address no more than I could 

ignore what the Saskatchewan community college trustees were 

saying in their report that they did after being in operation for 

10 years. 

 

So here I was faced, as minister, with two out of the three major 

groups in the post-secondary side - the universities, the 

community colleges - saying yes, it’s time we look at what do 

we need for the future. We know where we have come from in 

the past, and it’s a successful track record. What do we need for 

the future? The third component of course was the technical 

institutes which were an arm of the department. I couldn’t 

ignore all those extraneous views any more than I could ignore 

what the council of ministers had, and their recommendations. 

 

Everybody recognized the world is changing - I think 

everybody, that is, except the NDP opposite. Join with us in this 

agenda for change. 

 

You know, if you go back into the roots of your party, into the 

times of Tommy Douglas, there was a party of change. There 

was a party that at that time authored change - the reform party. 

Today you people are more conservative than the 

Conservatives. You don’t want to change anything. Let’s stick 

to the same old thing. Don’t make any waves. You’re 

pro-establishment. Your party, in the past, was known as a 

reform party. Join with us and the rest of the people across 

Saskatchewan will recognize the need for change in this area. 

Join with us. 

 

We can argue about whether we should have a single board, or 

four boards, or appointments, or elected, as the hon. member 

and I argued the other night - from Athabasca. But the reality is, 

there has to be change because everybody recognizes that the 

world around us is changing. And I know this embarrasses the 

hon. member somewhat, to be tagged with pro-establishment; to 

be tagged with the guardians of the status quo; when your roots 

have been more reform oriented. But I say, join with us. There 

is nothing to be ashamed of today in adopting a non-partisan 

stance in the very serious political and public issues that we 

face today. 

 

In fact, I have said many times in this House that too often what 

we do, and what the media do, unfortunately, is reduce every 

complex issue to a simple duality - you are right, we are wrong; 

we are right, you are wrong; NDP versus PC; either, or; left, 

right - that kind of thing. It has no place . . . it has no place in 

the issues and the agenda of the future. We must take a look at 

what we are faced with and come to some practical conclusions. 

And that is the course that we intend to pursue. 

 

(2045) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — The member seems to prefer to talk than he 

does to act, Mr. Chairman. The issue here is one of credibility, 

Mr. Chairman. And I asked a question that was quite concise, 

and I was hoping to get a reply that wouldn’t have, you know, 

too much in the way of politics. The minister has been accused 

of being the minister who has most politicized education, and 

we just  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1432 

 

saw another example of that. And I hoped that, when it comes 

to their educational system, educational reform is high on the 

agenda. he would come off of his high political horse and try to 

answer these questions, which I am posing in a very serious 

manner, about the direction that we are taking in K to 12 

education. 

 

Now the last question I asked related to the centralization of 

schools, whether you had any intentions regarding the 

centralization of schools as . . . And I indicated as you had done 

with the case of community colleges; as you did in the case of 

community colleges - and then he went on this long diatribe. 

 

Now there is a concern, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, about not 

going in a direction of more centralized control, particularly in 

education, the reason being, of course - I think the minister 

would agree with me - that the most efficient form of 

government in our country has been local government. They are 

the ones that have showed the most responsible course. They 

are the ones that haven’t amassed deficits that will be paid for 

by generations to come. Now I’m trying to find out where he is 

getting his clues from as to where he’s taking the Department of 

Education. 

 

Now in Great Britain, one of the things that is mentioned in this 

article from The Globe and Mail of July 24 . . . It indicates quite 

specifically where the Prime Minister of Great Britain, a 

Conservative Prime Minister, has taken education. And one of 

the things that it indicates she wants to do is to shift the power 

from local control to national control. She is providing for 

creation of a national curriculum, and furthermore she is 

providing for a situation where schools will opt out of local 

authority and get direct . . . financing directly from the national 

government. And I want to make sure, and I want to get a 

commitment from the minister, that this is not a direction that 

we are going in. Would you comment on that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’m not entirely clear about what 

Margaret Thatcher is doing, or intends to do for that matter, In 

Great Britain as it relates to education. I would make a couple 

of observations, though, about the press reports that you and I 

have both read over the last year as it relates to Great Britain, 

and as it relates to an observation I made as a result of attending 

the European ministers of Education meeting earlier, either late 

this spring or earlier this summer. And that is this - because I 

think it’s particularly germane to the discussion we are having 

tonight; because what those stories point out and what I saw at 

the European ministers of Education meeting was this: that no 

matter which country one might care to discuss 

 

They are all talking change. Now someone may say we should 

take this course, some may say that course, some may say this 

course, but the things that impressed me particularly at the 

Helsinki meeting was over and above the agenda items, if you 

like, was the sense you got in talking to the people, whether it 

be those from Japan there as observers who sat on my left, or 

from any one of the European countries or even the . . . I think 

there was the odd member observer nation there from the East 

bloc, is that everybody is talking about change, the changed  

world economy, how we must change our system, how much 

we must take off the blinkers and be prepared to look at all 

options in making sure that we adapt to this changing world. 

That was what particularly impressed me. I suspect that is 

what’s fuelling the high profile of education in the last election 

in Great Britain. 

 

And I would suggest to you tonight here, the members of the 

opposition, and to the public in Saskatchewan, and for all the 

right reasons, you are going to see education become 

increasingly a public agenda item. It always has been important 

to the public, and it’s going to be more so. As I said earlier 

when I talked to the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 

annual spring council, I said there the expectations for our 

system are going to increase even higher than what they’ve 

always been - and they’ve always been high - and that is 

because the entire world is really on a reform agenda, and not 

just making change for change’s sake. 

 

Let me be clear about that: and not making change because 

somehow what we’ve done in the past has failed. I’ve said that 

many times. What we are talking about are the implications of 

this new economy. 

 

And I referred to the Issues and Options paper, and I would just 

like to take a couple of minutes and refer to a couple of 

passages in it. The Issues and Options discussion paper, subtitle 

“Seeking Opinions on Issues Facing the University of 

Saskatchewan.” I had, along with some of my colleagues, as 

perhaps did some members of the opposition, a chance to meet 

with President Kristjanson and Vice-President Blaine Holmlund 

who is chairing the steering committee, and I want to say 

publicly to them what a very fine exercise they are engaged in 

and also a very brave exercise, and that they’ve had the courage 

to ask some of the very tough questions that society is facing. 

And I was particularly intrigued when I read on page 2 of the 

report, a section entitled “The Currents of Change.” And that’s 

why I said earlier tonight that the course that we’re embarking 

on is not one simply that we have decided on in isolation or 

without consultation, but in fact I would argue that many 

sectors have seen the same handwriting on the wall. 

 

We may not know exactly what it means, but we do know there 

is change. And I would quote from this report. The hon. 

members have assured me they have read it, but it is such an 

excellent piece of work and one that will go down in history as 

setting a new course for our university. And it starts off on this 

particular section, 1.2, “The Currents of Change,” by saying, 

and I quote: 

 

The current era has been called the atomic age, the age of 

uncertainty, the post-industrial society, and the 

information age. These labels suggest that we are living in 

a period of change so profound that we are experiencing 

the turbulence of a major social readjustment. The 

underlying force driving change is the recognition that 

information and knowledge provide the individual, the 

corporation, and the nation with a competitive advantage, 

and with an opportunity to accumulate wealth and 

maintain a high standard of living. 

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1433 

 

The influence of this realization can be seen in the rapidity 

of technological development, developments in computer 

and information technology, the sweeping influences of 

genetic manipulation, and other forms of biotechnology, 

and advances in the physical sciences. 

 

That says, it really says all when it talks about the basis for why 

we’re undertaking the changes that the hon. members are 

having so much difficulty with in the NDP party. 

 

And it further goes on to talk about, in the same section, Mr. 

Chairman, it goes on to say this: 

 

We now live in, and depend on, a global community as 

well as a provincial one. The rate of change in today’s 

society brings with it increasingly complex moral 

challenges. Individuals will need to make sound moral 

judgements in the face of an uncertain future. 

 

And finally, on that same page, it talks later on and makes this 

point: 

 

The challenge for the University of Saskatchewan is to 

pilot itself through this period of change. 

 

End of quotation. And I applaud them, Mr. Chairman, for their 

recognition of the currents of change, their courage to ask some 

of the questions, to face up to some of the challenges of this 

new economy. And as they have so aptly stated that “The 

challenge for the University of Saskatchewan is to pilot itself 

through this period of change,” so that too is our challenge in 

this legislature. 

 

The status quo simply is not good enough for the new economy. 

It is simply not good enough. It will not do. And certainly for 

myself as a politician, or for my colleagues as politicians, the 

easiest thing for me to do would be to sit on my hands and do 

nothing; to not make waves; to just embrace the status quo - but 

we would be letter down future generations; we would be 

letting down the young adults in this province. We’d be letting 

down our province and our people and our country. And our 

government is not going to let the people of this province down, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, I’m embarrassed at having to 

listen to that answer. I asked a very specific question. Once 

again, the minister thinks he’s making a campaign speech. 

 

We’re listening to series and series of cliches. The minister says 

education reform is high on his agenda. When is education 

reform ever not high on the agenda? Was it not high on the 

previous minister’s agenda? Was it not high on the agenda 

before that? Can you give us a few more cliches, Mr. Minister? 

He says the status quo is not good enough. What a profound 

statement. He says: and the opposition will sit on their hands. 

What an original statement. Mr. Minister, I’m embarrassed 

having to listen to that. 

I want to get to some specific questions, Mr. Minister. And I 

would ask if you could deal with them specifically, because I’m 

still trying to establish a direction, where we’re trying to go 

with K to 12 education, and where your department is trying to 

lead us in K to 12 education. 

 

I want you to advise me, Mr. Minister, whether you still have 

people, or whether you have hired people, to write papers in the 

specific areas related to six common essential learnings which 

we’re dealing with as recommended in the core curriculum. 

And these are the critical and creative thinking areas, 

technological literacy area, independent learning, 

communications, numeracy, and social skills area. 

 

In what way are you going to . . . What method are you going to 

use to integrate those into the skill development as indicated by 

the core curriculum proposal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I said before, when it comes 

to core curriculum and its implementation, it’s business as 

usual. In fact, if anything, we want to pick up the tempo there a 

little bit. The common essential learnings will be integrated into 

the new curriculum. And we’re most advanced in the language 

arts and science areas. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Now in the language-science areas that you 

mentioned, what exactly is being done? How are you 

implementing this? How are you doing the integrating? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We have a number of committees, 

many of them staffed by secondments, if not entirely be 

secondments, and they are doing the work for us. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — And that’s relating to the ones that you are, 

as you say, in an advanced stage. How about the ones that are 

not quite as nearly advanced? Now I just want to get those 

straightened around again. How about critical thinking aspect, 

and the independent learning aspect, and the communications 

one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The process is the same for all areas. 

It’s just that in those two particular that I mentioned, that we’re 

most advanced in them. In our discussions with STF they were 

very much of the view that this should be an open process, if 

you like. And we’ve made every effort to do it that way. And in 

fact, either this week or this past week there’s been interviews 

as far as looking for individuals to do some of this work for us. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — So my understanding is then, Mr. Minister, 

that you are seconding people to write papers on each one of 

these areas, and the purpose of these papers is to outline a plan 

as to how the six common essential learnings will be integrated 

into the core curriculum. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — When we announced the new core 

curriculum, part and parcel of that announcement was the 

establishment of an educational policies committee. And that is 

our sort of umbrella overseeing steering committee, if you 

like - made up of, as has been  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1434 

 

traditional in Education, a very good co-operative effort and a 

very good co-operative mix, I would suggest - made up of 

representatives from STF and SSTA (Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association), LEADS (League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), the 

universities; all the traditional players, which makes eminent 

good sense. Certainly I rely and look to the advice and guidance 

and good judgement of the professionals in the area. And they 

are, if you like, our sort of overall . . . if I could characterize 

them with the steering committee concept. And I’m presuming 

that answers the hon. member’s question. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — My understanding is then that in each of 

these six areas this educational policy committee is making 

recommendations as how to advance, and then you’re doing the 

hiring after that, or the follow-up work on the advice of this 

committee. I would ask: is this committee . . . Has it been 

recently established? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The announcement of establishing 

this committee was made concurrent with the announcement 

relative to the new core curriculum. And the organizations have 

responded kindly by . . . Either they have put names forth or are 

putting names forth. And I’m advised that their first meeting 

will be early in the fall as the school term gets under way again. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well then what happens, Mr. Minister, to 

the six people, or six groups of people that were originally 

assigned by your department to write papers on these essential 

learning areas, common essential learning areas? What 

happened to those original six? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think, based on the hon. member’s 

question, that we can probably help you by giving the setting 

and where we’re at in the timetable of some of this stuff. And 

based on your questions, I’m led to believe that there is some 

view in your minds that we’re still in, what I would call phase 

one of this core curriculum process and the common essential 

learnings, when in fact we’re - to use the analogy - more likely 

into phase two. 

 

But to back up first a little bit. What we’re talking about here 

when we’re talking about common essential learnings are those 

basic things, if you like, that . . . those common threads that 

ought to be taught whether one’s studying science, or history, or 

mathematics. To use an example . . . for example, the ability to 

write correctly. It’s not just an issue that should be left to the 

English teacher, if you like, or to the English courses. Spelling 

mistakes, to use an example, ought not to go unnoticed whether 

it’s in mathematics, or science, or English. And other examples, 

I suppose, would be the capacity of the individual in basic 

numeracy. 

 

We have defined those common essential learnings through the 

process the hon. member was talking about. That’s done. That 

work is completed. And now we’re in to implementing it. Does 

that bring the hon. member up to date in so far as where we’re 

at in this process? 

 

In many instances . . . I think the six who you referred to, those 

jobs are largely done . . . and now we’re in the process of 

threading it through the science curriculum, or  

social studies, or whichever curriculum. And as I said earlier, 

we’re farthest along in social studies and languages as I recall. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I understand what is happening there then, 

Mr. Minister. There appears then to have been some slow-down 

of the implementation of the process. And that’s why exactly I 

wanted to get this on record, Mr. Minister. You see, from your 

department you had, prior to the firings, people who were very 

knowledgeable - knowledgeable in the field, and had 

established contacts in the educational community and had 

established a trust with the teachers in the field. And now, of 

course, you have to . . . once you’ve got the plan set up, the 

problem of implementing it becomes that much more difficult. 

 

Now are you going to hire people to replace Bill Wells and Ken 

Horsman and Al Schell and Barbara Keirnes and Tom Quade 

and Phil Schalm? Are you going to replace people, or are you 

going hire people to replace them to implement this - to 

implement this core curriculum and the integration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I want to put on the record, firstly, 

that there has been no slow-down; no slow-down at all. In fact, 

I would argue that we’re ahead of where you think we are, that 

phase one has been completed; we’ve announced the core 

curriculum; the educational policies committee is in place; the 

common essential learnings have been defined. The curriculum 

is now being written so as to incorporate those, and we’re most 

advanced in the two areas that I talked about. 

 

So there has been no slow-down, and even the names that 

you’ve mentioned, most of them were not involved in the core 

curriculum process, so I’m sure why they are raised in this 

context. 

 

What I would sense from your questioning is that we’re farther 

along then you realize or give us credit for. And as I’ve said 

before, if anything, two points I would want to make. The 

directions established in Directions has not changed, and if 

anything we want to pick up the tempo a little bit on that core 

curriculum stuff because it has been in the making for some 

good long time. 

 

We know now what we want to do; we know what the areas 

are; we know what the common essential learnings are. They 

are defined, and now we want to get these curriculums written 

and implemented. And that’s the phase we’re into, is 

implementation. We’re past the definition stage; we are now in 

implementation. 

 

And I realize, as have many teachers pointed out to me, that 

implementation is probably as critical as the policy changes 

themselves, and we’re cognizant of that. We’re not going to, 

you know, be stampeded into this, but at the same time we’re 

certainly not dragging our heels. We’re going to continue down 

that track, realizing and cognizant of the fact that 

implementation is a very critical process and a very critical part 

and, as some teachers have pointed out to me, equally as 

important as the development itself of the new policies. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — There appears to be some fragmentation 

here then in your approach, because of the  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1435 

 

dismissal or firings or retirements of these people. I want to just 

dwell on that for a minute, and then we’ll come back to the 

process itself again. 

 

Could you indicate to me why . . . and I will go through these 

one by one to establish which ones in core curriculum were 

involved in them, with their core curriculum, and also what 

their reasons were for the dismissals. 

 

In the case of Bill Wells, was he involved in core curriculum 

and what was the reason for his dismissal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, he was not involved in the core 

curriculum. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — And what was his reason for . . . what was 

your reason for his dismissal? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The position was abolished. It was 

part of our overall down-sizing exercise and was abolished with 

the view that it would not place the departmental functions in 

jeopardy. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Place the departmental functions in 

jeopardy. Is that another way of saying that he was of the wrong 

political stripe, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. Quite frankly, politics has not, 

should not, will not, and I reiterate again, has not entered into 

this. As I mentioned to the hon. member, the position was 

abolished due to a general down-sizing exercise, but also with 

the view to making sure that that function could be covered off. 

And I take exception to the hon. member’s suggestion. And 

quite frankly I don’t even know what his politics is nor do I 

want to know, nor would I know him if I saw him, to be very 

honest with you. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Advise me - in the case of Ken Horsman, 

was he involved in core curriculum development, and the 

reason for dismissal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, he was involved in core 

curriculum. And this was, for the most part, a plain and simple 

example of the duplication that occurred when we amalgamated 

the K to 12 in advanced ed side. We had two bodies, if you like, 

and need for one in one position. and it’s examples of the kinds 

of efficiencies and savings that can be garnered for the people 

of Saskatchewan through the amalgamation of the department, 

the one new strong department, that fits the public’s agenda in 

lots of other ways. But certainly I think this is some of that 

administrative fat, if you like, that we were able to trim away 

without jeopardizing departmental priorities. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Could you advise me about Al Schell, 

whether he was involved in core curriculum. Could you advise 

me about the reason for dismissal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, he was not involved in core. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — And what was the reason for his dismissal, 

Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s the same reason as for your first 

inquiry - position abolished, part of the general down-sizing, 

but done with a view to making sure we could maintain 

departmental functions. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — With respect to Barb Keirnes: was she 

involved in the core curriculum development, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, she was involved. But once 

again, when the two departments came together we had two 

positions that were identical in so far as their functions for the 

most part, albeit one was on the K to 12 side, one on the 

advanced ed side. We had a straightforward case here of 

duplication. It did not make sense to . . . it does not make sense 

to the government; it doesn’t make sense to the people of 

Saskatchewan. We’ve captured some efficiency here and some 

dollars that we’re able to plough back into front line services, 

into the classrooms of this province, if you like. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Now in the case of Tim Quade and Phil 

Schalm, were they involved in core curriculum development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Phil Schalm, and I’m sorry I didn’t 

catch the second one? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Tim, is there a Tim Quade? Quade. I believe 

the name is Quade. I may have the spelling incorrectly before 

me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The Mr. Quade, or Quade I think you 

referred to, was one of those individuals who was part of the 

lay-offs as a result of the dismantling of the educational media 

services. 

 

Mr. Schalm had worked on the early stages of core curriculum 

but not on the implementation stage, so was not involved in so 

far as the part of the program that we’re into now. And once 

again that was a case of position overlap with the two 

departments coming together. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, are there any other 

people from your department that were either dismissed or laid 

off or retired who had worked in core curriculum development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — We’ve gone through a . . . I’ve asked you 

about six different positions here, and I believe you indicated to 

me, Mr. Minister, that five of them had involvement in core 

curriculum. And I mention this because you can see why the 

community and people involved who had contact with them are 

somewhat apprehensive about the future direction of core 

curriculum because these people that have been working with 

them over the last year or more have all of a sudden seen them 

dismissed. And they’re wondering, well now what’s happening, 

what stage are we at. The continuity has obviously been 

dropped. 

 

Now I want to know, Mr. Minister, whether you’ve replaced 

any of the . . . I want to know who has replaced each of these 

people. Who has replaced Bill Wells? Who  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1436 

 

has replaced Ken Horsman? Who has replaced Schell, 

Keirnes-Young, Quade, and Schalm? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If I have the question right, I think 

these will be the answers. And first of all, you mentioned that 

there were five people involved in core curriculum, and of the 

list of six you gave me, and if you came up with five based on 

the answers I gave you, that’s a case of almost magic. And I 

would ask the hon. member to check the record and I think you 

will see quite clearly that four of the six had no involvement. 

And I don’t know where you came up with the number five. 

 

Now as it relates to the position held by Mr. Wells, it was 

abolished. As it relates to the position held by Mr. Horsman, 

there is no replacement. As it relates to the position held by Mr. 

Quade, it was abolished. As it relates to the positions held by 

Keirnes-Young, overlap there with a position from the 

advanced ed side. As it relates to the position held by Mr. 

Schell, it was abolished. As relates to the position held by Mr. 

Schalm, there was overlap there in terms of a position held by 

administrator on the advanced ed side, Marine Perran. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, we have spent some time this 

evening discussing the core curriculum implementation and 

some of the planning involved before, and as it relates to our 

students now, and to our teachers involved, and to the people in 

the planning. And the concern being, how was this thing, how 

was this core curriculum proposal going to be filtered down to 

those people who it’s intended to filter down to, and that’s to 

the students. 

 

My concern was to establish that a direction, that the direction, 

as started here, started in 1981 under a committee which was 

chaired by Mr. Karen Rongve, starting in May of ‘81 and 

followed through by the previous minister, and which you 

inherited and followed through, and after we finally came up 

with the program policy proposals which are indicated in this 

document which was indicated in 1986, but was, I think, 

commissioned some time before that. 

 

(2130) 

 

Now the issue here, Mr. Minister, is of course, is one of 

credibility, is one of differentiating between the rhetoric and the 

action. You see, we have considerable reason to question the 

rhetoric. For example, in a news release that was issued on your 

behalf on March 17, you indicate here that core curriculum 

marks the first major policy in program review in education 

since 1963. And you go ahead and you say it began in 1984. 

And quite clearly in here when you say it began, I guess you’re 

talking about the core curriculum. It began in ‘84. This thing 

here says that according to the chairman’s remarks - it says: 

 

In May of 1981 I had the privilege of being asked to chair 

the minister’s advisory committee on curriculum and 

instruction review. 

 

This is the Directions report. And the Directions report very 

clearly, very clearly recommends follow-up of a core 

curriculum. But your cleverly, very cleverly written news 

release makes it sound like it only started in 1984 -  

everything started in 1984. Well that’s making a political point 

maybe, Mr. Minister. But I think you should acknowledge 

where it came from. And you wonder why people are 

questioning it, because statements like that make us wonder, 

make us wonder about the direction that you’re following. 

 

So I am concerned, Mr. Minister, as are teachers, as are 

educators, as are superintendents, as are school boards, that 

there is continual follow-up on the Directions curriculum. And 

you indicated to us tonight, you indicated to us tonight that you 

were not following the direction . . . Or you were not 

indicating - and you correct me if I’m wrong - that you were not 

going to follow the direction of Maggie Thatcher with respect 

to abolishing more local control. 

 

You indicated that you were planning to follow through and 

even speed up this core curriculum process. Now the difficulty, 

of course, is if you’re speeding it up, how can you speed it up 

when the people that were involved in it, or a lot of the people 

that were involved in it, are all of a sudden gone? How many 

are left? How many are left of the original bunch? How many of 

the original bunch are left, is the question. How many are left? 

 

The continuity has been broken. And that means the trust has 

been broken. And so it is an issue of credibility, Mr. Minister, 

and it’s a very serious issue of credibility, because people in 

Saskatchewan do not like to see education politicized, and 

they’re not used to having these sudden switches in staff. 

They’re not used to having a department taken over by finance 

experts. They’re used to having educational experts. They’re 

used to having educational experts guide the Department of 

Education. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I ask you once again to maintain the course by 

doing continual consulting in the fashion that the Saskatchewan 

people have been used to - in the fashion that the previous 

minister followed through. Ask her for some advice; she’s had 

an entire life career close to education, as have I, and we’re 

quite concerned. We’re quite concerned when we see 

indications of sudden changes in direction which affect the 

children of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I would like the hon. 

member to clarify for the House what the change of direction is 

that he sees. What is the change of direction? 

 

He’s quite right when he talks about the excellent work done by 

the previous minister, the Hon. Pat Smith, in terms of following 

through on the Directions in getting core to the point we got it; 

now we’re implementing it. We want to pick up the tempo of 

that process, if anything. I have not once tonight suggested that 

anything laid out in Directions is somehow going to be set 

aside, turned off, put on the back burner or anything like that. 

 

So I challenge the hon. member to tell this Assembly, the 

members in this House tonight, exactly what change in 

direction he’s talking about. Put it on the record; clarify your 

point. I don’t know what you’re talking about. What is the 

change of direction? Put it on the record. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I have put it on the record.  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1437 

 

That’s what we’ve been talking about all night. I’ve put it on 

the record. I have put it on the record, Mr. Minister. I have 

asked you about - and I will indicate one more time - I’ve spent 

all of this time this evening to establish to you that the 

educational system, the educational actors are deeply 

concerned, Mr. Minister, about your actions, not about your 

words - about your actions. And that’s what it’s about - a lot of 

talk, and you’re very good at talk - but it’s the action that we’re 

asking, and that’s what we want to continue maintaining a 

steady course, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — I just want to make a few points, Mr. Minister, 

and I just want to review some of the major issues that have 

arisen this evening. 

 

You, sir, first of all, have refused to answer to this legislature 

about how your one per cent cut in funding to school boards, 

and how your overall reduction in funding for the Department 

of Education, squares with your election commitment that 

education was going to be one of the four major pillars of your 

policy in the late 1980s. 

 

You’ve also refused to answer, Mr. Minister, in this Assembly, 

why it was that you have, in effect, gutted large parts of the 

Department of Education and fired 162 staff without any 

consultation with either the technical institutes where those staff 

were fired, and without any consultation with the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation. You have failed to explain to this 

Assembly why you did not consult with those bodies, and why 

you did not consult with students, Mr. Minister. 

 

You’ve raised, Mr. Minister, a concern this evening about why 

we’re not spending more time talking about students. All these 

cut-backs ultimately affect students. The K to 12 cuts mean, Mr. 

Minister, less program options for students in the high schools, 

less counselling services available for students, less remedial 

services available for students . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where? Where? 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Across the province. The members say, 

where? In almost every community in this province . . . and go 

to the city of Saskatoon or the city of Regina and begin to look 

at what the impact of the cut-backs means this fall. Go to the 

northern communities and see what the cuts mean. 

 

In Saskatoon alone, for members opposite who ask: and what 

are the results? In Saskatoon alone most of the tutoring services 

that need to be available for remedial instruction have been cut 

. . . (inaudible) . . . I say to the member for Saskatoon Mayfair, 

he ought to find out what’s happening in his own riding, in the 

schools in his own riding that he represents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — This Minister of Education has failed to 

explain, has failed to justify why half the senior positions in the 

Department of Education were eliminated. He has failed to 

justify why half the senior positions in the Department of 

Education have been eliminated, Mr. Chairman. 

And what we’ve seen in addition, despite the fact - and we 

don’t dispute, Mr. Minister, the fact that your senior staff are 

well educated. What we do dispute, Mr. Minister, is that with 

the exception of Mr. Penner, that Mr. McFarlane and Miss 

Crosthwaite do not have the qualifications that justify giving 

them senior positions in the Department of Education. They are 

well-qualified persons, Mr. Minister, to be in government. They 

are not qualified to take on leading posts in the Department of 

Education. 

 

And it’s our position on this side of the House, Mr. Minister, 

that what you’ve done is, you’ve put people with expertise in 

finance, you’ve put people with expertise in finance in charge 

of education. And we say that it’s not surprising that those 

people have been responsible under your guidance for 

implementing a major series of cut-backs, budget cut-backs, 

rather than being responsible for taking initiatives which will 

improve the quality of education in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, it’s our view that you made an error in 

amalgamating the Department of Education and the department 

of advanced education. We believe that the people of this 

province were well served with two separate departments, with 

each one giving a special focus to its area of education. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, one of the things that we are concerned 

about is that most of the people now with expertise in the K to 

12 system at the senior levels of the department are gone. We 

think that that’s an error on your part. Only time will tell, but 

the people of Saskatchewan have every reason to be sceptical, 

in light of the budget cut-backs that have come down today. 

And I’m going to turn the estimates over to my colleague, the 

member for Nutana. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member has somehow 

suggested that education and the commitment to education is 

not forthcoming from this government. And we went through 

the numbers earlier tonight about the 60 per cent increase, the 

60 per cent increase in funding from this Progressive 

Conservative government to education. Our record stands head 

and shoulders above the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And he talked about the fact that somehow funding the 

operating grants to 99 per cent of last year’s level, $3 million 

shortfall and a $333 million budget, that somehow the 

educational system will fall apart. He conveniently ignores, Mr. 

Chairman, that those school boards will have access to 

something in the order of $8 million of increased revenue 

because of assessment increases and new assessments. He 

somehow conveniently ignores that. 

 

Now it seems to me if you have an $8 million increase there, 

albeit a $3 million decrease from the operating grants from the 

provincial government, that somehow they net out with more 

money. That seems to me pretty straightforward mathematics. 

 

But the members opposite consistently try to suggest to the 

public that there are cut-backs in education. And  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1438 

 

what has the focus of discussion been here tonight, Mr. 

Chairman? Because what they have not asked speaks well for 

what we’re doing in education. Have there been questions in 

this legislature tonight, Mr. Chairman, about the front line 

teachers that have been dismissed because of this budget? And 

the answer is no. And the answer is no because school boards 

have kept the front line teachers. 

 

Has there been questions tonight about what goes on in the 

class-rooms of this province, Mr. Chairman? The answer is 

once again, no. Because the opposition members are more 

interested in this administrative position in Regina versus that 

administration position in Regina, and did my friend get fired or 

laid off or have to take early retirement? That’s what they’re 

interested in. 

 

I’ll tell you what I’m interested in. I’m interested in 

class-rooms, and teachers in class-rooms, and the students in 

those class-rooms, and chalk boards, and computers, and books 

for the libraries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, 

there was one change in that core curriculum process. And just 

so I’m not accused of misleading this House, when the hon. 

member from Prince Albert talked about this dramatic change 

of direction that the department has somehow taken because 

half a dozen senior administrative folks that for the most part, 

whose positions were duplicated, have now left the 

government - well, the change we made in that core curriculum 

process and this headline says it all, “Revised curriculum boosts 

English.” And why did we boost the English, Mr. Chairman? 

Because the people of this province, including the 12,000 

teachers, wanted not less time spent on English and language 

arts but, in fact, more time; not less, Mr. Chairman. That’s the 

issues in education today on the K to 12 side. That’s the issues. 

 

And what have the newspapers from across this province been 

saying about this so-called budget cut-backs in education to the 

NDP talk about. Well here’s one from The Melville Advance in 

May of this year: “Comprehensive school budget increases 11 

per cent for 1987”; that’s the headline for that one. Another one 

here from the Prince Albert Herald, I believe, and it goes on to 

talk about the school budgeting there and Mr. Pylatiuk is being 

quoted as saying, and I quote: 

 

The way things are right now, we’re not facing severe 

problems as far as programs and academic standards. But 

if the governments backs down on salary freeze, we’re in 

trouble. 

 

They’re not facing any problem, they say. 

 

And in this one here from the Swift Current Sun, an official is 

quoted as saying: 

 

Students are not going to be affected by the budget cuts. 

All the programs will remain, and it will have a limited 

impact on staffing. 

 

This one talks from The Estevan Mercury: “Public school board 

retains healthy status” is the headline on that one. 

This one here from The Estevan Mercury: “Public school board 

sets surplus budget” is the headline. 

 

This one here from the Battleford News Optimist. I believe it is: 

“World class library at U of R”. 

 

(2145) 

 

This one from the Assiniboia Times: “Assiniboia School 

Division gets electronic encyclopedia.” That’s the headline on 

that one. 

 

That’s the kinds of things that are happening around this 

province. If you think somehow that the directors of education 

and the trustees across this province - because this year the 

funding from the provincial government is 99 per cent of what 

it was last year, and that with their increase in assessment 

revenue, 8 million across the province - if you think the 

directors and the trustees and the teachers of this province are 

going to somehow lay down, roll over and play dead because 

there is $330 million coming from the provincial government 

this year instead of $333 million, you’re sadly wrong, and these 

reports from across the province back up my observations. 

 

We have a fine system. It’s had the money it needed over the 

years since the Progressive Conservatives come into office to 

make sure that education wasn’t forgotten. It had the money in 

place for the education development fund that was so important 

in terms of quality and rebuilding some of those resources. And 

we’re continued to be committed to that direction, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been interested in 

what the minister has been saying this evening, and it appears 

that there is a communication problem. And the minister seems 

to be having some trouble communicating to this side of the 

House. But he is also having some trouble communicating to 

this side of the House, but he’s also having some trouble 

communicating elsewhere in the province. 

 

I have a clipping here from the Star-Phoenix, April 9, ‘87, and 

it states: “Education chagrined by decision to stretch funds over 

10 years.” And this talks about the education development fund. 

These people were so concerned about the minister’s decision 

to stretch these funds over 10 years rather than five years that 

they issued a joint release on the matter. And it was the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association and LEADS, which is the professional 

organization for school administrators and teachers, issued a 

join release on the minister’s stretch-out of the funds. 

 

Now the minister may say, we’re putting more money in, but he 

obviously hasn’t got the message across to these people. Now I 

don’t know whether the minister . . . I would think the minister 

would be able to get the idea across to the chamber of 

commerce, for example. Well, what does the Regina Chamber 

of Commerce say? On as  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1439 

 

recently as June 1987, the Regina Chamber of Commerce has 

an education committee, which is examining three issues. Issue 

number one: 

 

The Committee is attempting to determine the implications 

of the recent government cut-backs in provincial 

education. 

 

Now obviously, Mr. Minister, you haven’t got your message 

across to the chamber of commerce in Regina. 

 

And you may, Mr. Deputy Premier, you may issue whatever 

comments you wish from your seat, but if you want the date, I 

can give you the date of the news release where the chamber of 

commerce hasn’t got the message from the Minister of 

Education. And furthermore, the chamber of commerce went on 

to say: 

 

The committee is extremely concerned about the removal 

of business education programs from Wascana Institute, 

and relocation of these programs at STI in Moose Jaw. 

 

This same committee of the Regina Chamber of Commerce 

goes on to say: 

 

The Committee is also examining the Department of 

Education’s exclusion of economics from high school core 

curriculum. 

 

Now apparently the minister hasn’t got his message across to 

the Regina Chamber of Commerce. And it may be too that the 

minister has not got his message across to the Canadian 

Manufacturers’ Association. 

 

Now I’m putting myself at some risk quoting the Canadian 

Manufacturers’ Association in this Chamber. And I must say, 

Mr. Chairman, that I quote the Canadian Manufacturers’ 

Association without saying where I stand on the issue as they 

raise it, but merely the points that the Canadian Manufacturers’ 

Association raises in their document entitled, “The Importance 

of Post-Secondary Education”. And among other things, the 

Canadian Chamber of Commerce or the Canadian 

Manufacturers’ Association says: 

 

The federal government must reverse its present plans to 

curtail funding.” It goes on to state that while the CMA 

fully supports the deficit-cutting intentions of the 

government, they feel that post-secondary education is one 

area that warrants more . . . funding. 

 

Provincial governments must strengthen their weak 

commitment to universities and community colleges. 

 

This is the Canadian Manufacturers’ Association in July of 

1987. 

 

Provincial governments must strengthen their weak 

commitments to universities and community colleges. 

Here it is recognized that the real culprits of underfunding 

are provincial governments . . . 

It goes on to cite that the province of Alberta and Ontario are 

not all that bad, but it does pick out the province of 

Saskatchewan as being one that’s in the area of underfunding. 

 

And the Canadian manufacturers, in this submission, “The 

Importance of Post-Secondary Education”, gives me the 

impression, whether they’re right or wrong, is that the Minister 

of Education of this province has failed to get his message 

across that he’s doing better for education. What he’s doing is 

he is stretching out the education dollar, and he’s unable to 

make his points with organizations outside of this Chamber. 

And for that reason I think the Minister of Education is 

deficient in his duties as a Minister of Education. And I want to 

hear what he has to say about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member made reference 

to a report from the Canadian Manufacturers’ Association, to a 

story in the Star-Phoenix, made reference to the chamber of 

commerce . . . And as it relates to the Canadian Manufacturers’ 

Association, I have recently written them advising them of our 

new initiatives there. I think if you read their entire paper, 

you’ll see that very much what we’re doing is consistent with 

their view, quite simply, in so far as what has to happen to 

address the opportunities of the future and make sure we’re 

positioned well for the future. 

 

And albeit that the hon. member can find a headline from the 

April 9 Star-Phoenix, April 9, 1987: “Educators chagrined by 

decision to stretch funds over 10 years.” 

 

Certainly you can find that headline. But I would challenge you 

to find a headline from the era of the NDP administration, ‘71 

through ‘81, where it even made reference to an education 

development fund. And the reason is, you cannot find one 

because there was no fund during those days. I could point out a 

number of other stories. 

 

You want to make reference to the Star-Phoenix. Here’s one 

from the Star-Phoenix: “Education system able to weather 

cut-backs.” 

 

That was the headline there. And the story talked about, and I 

quote from it: 

 

Spending on a per student basis increased by 35 per cent 

between ‘76 and ‘86, putting Saskatchewan in a very 

favourable position to where the roll-backs compare with 

other provinces. 

 

And the story went on. And you can talk about news releases 

from the STF and LEADS and SSTA. Here’s one. The 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation news release, April 24, 

1987. And the headline here is: 

 

Education not all gloom and doom. 

 

So let’s put all sides of the story on the table. Prince Albert 

Daily Herald, June of this year: “Very little in education 

changed.” 

 

Talks about, and I quote: 

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1440 

 

Meanwhile Ron Jevons, Chairman of the Prince Albert 

Public School Board, said his board expresses “cautious 

satisfaction, or satisfied caution” over the budget. 

 

And here’s one that I think speaks particularly well for 

accessibility in this province. Leader-Post, May 23, 1987: 

“Record graduation against the background of cut-backs.” 

 

And that speaks well for accessibility of post-secondary 

education in our universities. We had a record graduation at our 

University of Regina; I suspect, as well, the University of 

Saskatchewan. And yet somehow the hon. members like to 

paint a scene of cut-backs and lack of accessibility. And the 

reality is, there are more students consistently graduating from 

post-secondary institutions in this province than when your 

party was in power. Consistently - and that is a fact! 

 

But to the point about the one per cent cut-back in operating 

budgets, and somehow we’re bleeding them to death and 

jeopardizing the quality of education in rural Saskatchewan, 

well, I ask the hon. members this simple question: if somehow 

what we’re doing on the operating grant side with our budgets 

to school boards, how is it then in 1981 the school boards across 

this province had slightly over $30 million in accumulated 

surpluses, and in 1986 under this awful Tory government, with 

their awful cut-backs as you would describe them - erroneously 

I might add - how is it that the $30 million surplus has risen to 

nearly 60 million? Now how do you square that? 

 

How do you square it that when your party was in power, 

pressure was put on school boards to raise their mill rates, and 

as a result their surpluses stood at 30.694 million - which I 

might add was even less than what they had available to them in 

1980. And now that same surplus is at nearly 60 millions of 

dollars. How do you square that? 

 

Let’s see some more of this mental gymnastics, this 

mathematical magic that you employ, to make the case 

erroneously and inaccurately across this province about 

cut-backs in education. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, and 

hon. member, and the public of Saskatchewan, the truth is, the 

commitment to education in this province has been second to 

none. There has never been an administration who has put such 

an emphasis on education, whether it be at the university level, 

technical institutes, the new regional college system, or a K to 

12 system. There has never been a commitment like it. 

 

And one of the hon. members tonight made my point for me, 

when I talked about this electoral “wave-itis” that the NDP 

practised when they were in power. They talked about 1981 and 

the budget they brought down. In 1981 the budget that they 

brought down - was that budget ever voted on? Or rather the 

1982 budget, the March ‘82 budget, which talked about a 17 per 

cent increase to universities. Was that budget ever voted on in 

this legislature in 1982, in the spring of ‘82? I ask all hon. 

members, and the answer is no. They played that fancy game of 

electoral wave-itis. The premier of the day, now Leader of the 

Opposition, the NDP party, said, well,  

we’re going into an election, I guess we better spice up the 

university budget. Let’s pay a little lip-service here. Let’s 

increase it by 17 per cent. And if you check the numbers, if you 

check the numbers, you’ll find that they did the same thing 

prior to the 1978 election. 

 

And I see the hon. member from Saskatoon, the advanced ed 

critic, wincing a little bit - and so he should. Because the legacy 

that the NDP left the people of this province and the universities 

of this province was this: buildings that were run down; 

equipment that was run down; no new buildings; no new 

equipment; no new agriculture college; no geological sciences; 

none of the initiatives on the library side that our government 

has brought about; no university renewal and development 

funds; no education development funds. 

 

By every measure you were a failure. You paid nothing more 

than lip-service to universities and to the K to 12 system. And 

yet somehow they would suggest that we are bleeding the 

school boards of funding, when what has happened under our 

administration is their accumulated surpluses are now 60 

million, and when you were in government they were $30 

million. 

 

Now how do you square that, hon. members of the opposition in 

this legislature? You can’t square it. You couldn’t square it 

then, and you can’t square it now. The reality is, education has 

never enjoyed funding like it enjoys today. And let me tell you 

. . . and let me tell you, it could always use more money. It 

could always use more money, but it sure would never get it 

under an NDP, but it will always get it under a Progressive 

Conservative government. 

 

Because what does our Premier have to say about this? What 

does our Premier have to say? Our Premier says this: there is 

always money for quality education in this province. There is 

always money, and that’s the way it’s going to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 

 

 


