


















































July 9, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 9, 1987 
 

1045 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Closure of Hospital Beds in Saskatoon 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Health, and it has to do with the fact that over 10,000 people are 
on the hospital waiting list in Saskatoon. That situation, Mr. 
Minister, is critical, and has been made even worse by your 
government’s underfunding of hospitals. This underfunding has 
forced the closure of 308 hospital beds this summer. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you justify the closure of 308 hospital 
beds, including a number of surgical beds used regularly by 
cancer patients, at a time when the waiting list is at more than 
10,000. How do you justify that? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said to the hon. 
member, and to others on previous occasions, there’s no question 
that the hospital . . .that the surgery waiting list in Saskatoon is of 
extreme concern to us, as it is to obviously a good number of 
people in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — By your actions. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That’s true. 
 
The point also needs to be made, Mr. Speaker, that the solution to 
that problem as, I believe, the member’s suggestion of a solution 
is that more money just needs to be pumped in there again — as it 
has been for a good long time, and that’s the case. But that is not 
the long-term solution. 
 
We have . . . Two solutions we have to have. First, the long-term 
— or first, a very short-term solution, and we’re looking at that, 
and we’re working with the hospitals right now on that. I’ll give 
the member the assurance of that. And the long-term solution is 
for a more of a rationalized system in Saskatoon . . .and some of 
the other things which we’re also working on with Saskatoon, the 
hospital boards and the presidents of those hospitals. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, yes, we’re very concerned about it as well. 
We’ll continue to be, and we’ll continue to work very diligently 
on the specific problem the member mentions. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, there are 
patients with cancer, there are children with tracheotomies 
waiting to get into hospital beds, and the situation is urgent and 
the situation is critical. Yesterday morning a Saskatoon doctor 
stated that it’s taking from four to six weeks for patients who are 
on the urgent list to get into hospital. The Saskatoon hospitals 
define “urgent” to include cancer patients and other patients for 
whom excessive waiting lists may result in deterioration of their  

condition. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me, in light of such delays, why didn’t 
you provide Saskatoon hospitals with funding so that we 
wouldn’t have to close those 308 hospital beds. Why didn’t you 
provide them with funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I suggested to you 
earlier, the member suggests that the hospital waiting list problem 
would be solved by one thing only — the very simplistic answer 
of that member is just send more money. 
 
Frankly, Mr. Speaker, that is not the only answer. There is no 
question that more money has been sent, more money will be sent 
to deal with the waiting list problem. We are working on that 
problem specifically with surgeons in Saskatoon and with the 
hospital administrators and the hospital boards presently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in Saskatoon myself yesterday at the 
University Hospital . . . We will work on that. We will continue 
to work on it. We do not deny that there is a problem with 
waiting lists in Saskatoon, but we do not admit as well that this is 
the first year that there have ever been waiting lists in Saskatoon 
hospitals, Mr. Speaker. The point needs to be made how hospital 
waiting lists in Saskatoon have been a problem through good 
times and bad times, Mr. Speaker. and in good times there were 
waiting list problems in Saskatoon as well. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I refer you to a document that a 
group of Saskatoon doctors gave to you a few weeks ago and 
their report states: “over the past several . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I’m assuming that 
the member is asking a supplementary because she didn’t indicate 
whether it was a supplementary or a new question, so I must 
assume it was a supplementary. And since I’m assuming that, I 
cannot permit you to quote. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. This document states very 
clearly that the hospital waiting list in Saskatoon has deteriorated 
over the last several years, and there are many patients waiting in 
excess of 12 months for surgery. With each summer closure the 
problem has worsened, and we know of no other major Canadian 
city in Canada where the hospital waiting list is so great and the 
hospital waiting times. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is not uninformed rhetoric and it’s not inflamed 
rhetoric. That’s fact. Those are the words of the doctors. Why do 
you choose to ignore people who know their patients and have 
the information? Why do you choose to ignore them? 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1046 
 

Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, we have not chosen to 
ignore them. That is not so. We have not chosen to ignore the 
problem. I have said to you, said to the House, said to the hon. 
member on several occasions, and to the people in Saskatoon 
involved with the hospitals, we have not chosen to ignore them. 
We will be addressing the problem. We are addressing the 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem is a very complex one. We are 
addressing that problem. we’ll continue to address the problem. 
Some of what we see, Mr. Speaker, some of what we see in terms 
of some of the stories that are out there in terms of in the news 
media and so on, are stories which are certainly having an effect 
on people and saying, well, can that possibly be true, and so on. 
 
There was a story in the newspaper yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
There was a story in the newspaper yesterday in Saskatoon 
regarding one lady’s circumstance. As it turns out, that lady has 
been . . .and the request from her doctor in University Hospital 
for surgery came to University Hospital yesterday. That patient 
has been booked for surgery on the 20th of July. That request 
came to University Hospital for the first time yesterday, after the 
newspaper story was there. I would suggest the right order would 
be a request to the University Hospital, and then perhaps a 
newspaper story. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the 
Premier. On June 23, sir, in the legislature you made it clear that 
you felt that a wait of five or six weeks for urgently needed 
medical treatment was far too long. 
 
At page 638 of Hansard, and these are your words: 
 

. . . we have long line-ups in Manitoba; it’s running five or six 
weeks. I’m concerned about the health of the patients in 
Manitoba. 

 
Now those are the words. When, Mr. Premier, are you going to 
be equally concerned with the health of people in Saskatchewan 
who are similarly waiting five or six weeks? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And how many people’s lives have to 
put at risk before you understand the urgency of the situation in 
Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, as the hon. member knows, our 
expenditures on health care are the highest any place in Canada, 
and we don’t charge, Mr. Speaker. I note that Manitoba’s largest 
hospital has closed beds for the summer. And I can refer to 
Edmonton hospitals, and I can refer to hospitals across the 
country. 
 
Now we have the most beds per capita in Canada. We have the 
most money per capita going to health in Canada. We don’t 
charge premiums as they do in other jurisdictions in Canada. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health is right, and the hon. 
member knows, and this  

former minister of Health would stand here and say, line-ups are 
a source of efficiency. That’s what the NDP said. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say nobody’s happy with line-ups, but 
the line-ups are not the same in Regina; they’re not the same in 
regional hospitals. And there are things that we can do with 
respect to administration, Mr. Speaker, that would make a 
significant difference. And that’s precisely what the Minister of 
Health is going to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier may have heard Dr. Scharfstein on the radio this 
morning, indicating that in his judgment there were twice as 
many beds closed this summer in Saskatoon hospitals as there 
were in previous summers, when waiting lists are at least double 
what they were five years ago. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, in the fact of those facts — which come from 
Dr. Scharfstein, who was the president of the medical society and 
not in any way biased in this regard — in the face of those facts, 
why are you not acting to reduce the bed closures this summer, at 
least to a normal level, rather than doubling the number of beds 
closed this summer in Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
the health care budget used to be 25 per cent of the total; now it’s 
up to over 30 per cent of the total, Mr. Speaker,, and we have 
more beds per capita than we’ve ever had. And, Mr. Speaker, on 
top of that you will find that the unique situation in the city of 
Saskatoon is addressed, and is being addressed by the Minister of 
Health. 
 
He met with the doctor you mentioned yesterday, and he’s aware 
of the concerns. He’s also aware of some of the reasons why it’s 
only happening in Saskatoon and is not happening in Regina, 
nearly to the extent, or is happening in North Battleford. And 
those reasons are the very things that the Minister of Health and 
the medical profession and hospital administrators are addressing 
now, because we’re saying there were line-ups five years ago. 
 
Why this year? Why this year? It’s a very good question. Why 
this year, when the health care budget is higher than it’s ever been 
in our history, higher than it’s ever been in any lace across 
Canada, is all of a sudden the line-ups in Saskatoon that much 
higher? Now that’s a very good question, and we want to get to 
the bottom of that question. 
 
We’re putting more money on it. We’ve got more beds, and 
we’ve got approximately the same population; we’re spending 
more than anybody else in the country, and the line-ups, 
interestingly, Mr. Speaker, are going up in Saskatoon. Now we 
have a unique situation in that city, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going 
to address it. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr.  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1047 
 

Premier, the combined actions of your government, and the 
actions forced upon the university by your government have 
meant an exodus of specialists from Regina — a sharp movement 
of patients form Regina to Saskatoon. Is this your way of solving 
the bed problem in Saskatoon? And why don’t you take the 
rational step of retaining specialists in Regina to relieve pressure 
in Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker,, in answer to the hon. 
member’s question, the rational step as he refers to, in terms of 
retaining specialists and doing everything possible to retain 
specialists in the various areas in this city of Regina for southern 
Saskatchewan, are being taken. Those movers are being taken. 
 
There’s no question in some of the sub-specialties that were 
related to the university teaching program here that there is a 
problem here. There’s no question that that’s the case. 
 
Some doctors — once that has been referred to in the House 
before — Dr. Boctor, I believe now is to be going to Saskatoon, I 
believe that’s the case. Dr. Boctor will be practicing for some 
portions of the week in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decision by the University of Saskatchewan to 
consolidate their teaching and the academic side of medicine at 
the College of Medicine in Saskatoon, where the College of 
Medicine has always been, is a rational decision by the College of 
Medicine has always been, is a rational decision by the College of 
Medicine. That’s a rational decision by the College of Medicine. 
 
The decision, as it affects the availability of specialists in the city 
of Regina and, therefore, for southern Saskatchewan, presents 
some problems to the hospitals here and to the medical care here 
in southern Saskatchewan. Those problems are being addressed, 
and I will say to the member and to others, in the area of 
neonatology for example, that’s been solved. The General 
Hospital has its program that’s been solved by the General 
Hospital. Those areas have been solved. There are other areas — 
ophthalmology for example — where recruiting is going on in a 
very active way and new people will be here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary to Mr. Minister. You tell 
me that the movement of specialists from Regina to Saskatoon to 
the College of Medicine was rational. And it was, on the part of 
the College of Medicine, because their obligation is to teach. It is 
not rational on the grounds of providing medical services in 
southern Saskatchewan and that, sir, is your obligation. 
 
I ask you, sir, how can you say that it is not putting pressure on 
Saskatoon hospitals to move specialists from Regina to 
Saskatoon, as you admit has happened, and provide service to 
Regina on a “flying doctor” basis like the Australian outback? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Two or three points, Mr. Speaker. The 
member says it’s a rational decision by the College of  

Medicine. It is something . . .it’s the first time they have admitted 
that. So that’s good. It’s a rational decision by the College of 
Medicine because their obligation is to teach. I admit as well, 
admit. . . I accept the responsibility for the delivery of health care 
services in all parts of this province, regardless of how remote or 
how much of a major city it is. The city of Regina has an 
excellent system. This city of Regina is now, as a result of that 
decision by the College of Medicine, this city of Regina is short 
in some sub-specialist areas. There’s no question that that’s true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are addressing that in conjunction with the 
hospitals. There is active recruiting going on and there is success 
in some of that recruiting. Ad we all have, Mr. Speaker, those 
specialists in place in the near future. 
 

Medicare Coverage for Chiropractic Care 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, on 
Tuesday last we presented a petition to this legislature, signed by 
over 3,000 Saskatchewan residents, urging you not to proceed 
with your plans to limit medicare coverage for chiropractic care. 
Your government has proposed a cap of 10 to 12 insured visits 
per patient per year for chiropractic care, a move which would hit 
chronic sufferers the hardest. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: in light of this public 
reaction, have you reconsidered this decision, and will you now 
assure the people of Saskatchewan that you will drop these plans 
to limit medicare coverage for chiropractic care? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, an example of . . . just 
an example of . . . just a couple of things, a couple of points prior 
to answering this specific question. The member . . .and as I have 
said as well to a couple of his colleagues earlier, there has been 
no reduction in chiropractic care. That’s number one. 
 
Contrary to what that member and others in that caucus over 
there have been saying to people, openly saying to people in the 
province, that chiropractic care is no longer there. Okay. They’ve 
been openly saying that. There has not been a change. Mr. 
Speaker, we are actively discussing with the chiropractic 
profession a way in which we can change, and there may well be 
changes in chiropractic coverage, ways in which that change can 
take place. 
 
It’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note the members opposite 
do not change anything — do not change chiropractic coverage; 
do not change dental coverage; do not change any of the 
supplementary programs; the drug coverage; do not change any 
of these things. At the same time send more money to Saskatoon. 
At the same time send tremendous hundreds of millions of more 
dollars to Regina . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. order. Order. Order, please. Thank you. 
Supplementary. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1048 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, on May 
27 the president of the Saskatchewan Chiropractic Association 
confirmed in the press that your government has proposed a limit 
of medicare on chiropractic care. And jut three days later, Mr. 
Minister, you had indicated that we haven’t announced anything 
yet, but that we are thinking of putting a cap of 10 to 12 visits per 
year on chiropractic care. 
 
Why not, Mr. Minister, be honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan? Don’t follow the lead of your Premier. Be honest 
with the people of Saskatchewan and tell them now that there will 
be no limits on chiropractic care per year per patient. Would you 
tell the people that now? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say to the hon. member, 
Mr. Speaker, there is one province in Canada where there is no 
cap in terms of the number of visits to a chiropractor allowed — 
one. Okay. That is the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have said on many 
occasions when we went through this budget process, when we 
go through this budget process, it’s extremely important that we 
look at every service provided; the way in which that service is 
provided; the rationale for that service, in every case. And that’s 
what we have done. 
 
As it relates to the specifics of chiropractic service, I have said 
that we are discussing this and continue to with the chiropractic 
profession, as we are, I might add for the next questioner, with 
the physiotherapist profession. We’re discussing that with both of 
those professions. And if there are changes, they will be 
announced at some future time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I get a clear indication that you are 
thinking of limiting chiropractic care. But you simply don’t want 
to be honest with he people of Saskatchewan. I want to say you, 
Mr. Minister, in the budget that has just been presented, is there 
sufficient funds for unlimited chiropractic care for people in 
Saskatchewan? Or have you already taken into account a limit of 
10 to 12 visits per year in this year’s budget. Which one is it? Is it 
a limited number of visits, or is it unlimited? Which one is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very pleased to go 
through when we go through a line by line in the budget in 
estimates, to go through with that member or any of his 
colleagues. The estimate number that’s in the budget for various 
services. I’ll be pleased to go through that in estimates, and that 
will be the appropriate time. 
 

Meech Lake Accord 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier, 
respecting the Meech Lake accord on the constitution. And, Mr. 
Premier, there seems to be a discrepancy between the full Meech 
Lake accord which you signed on June 3 on behalf of 
Saskatchewan, and the  

specific motion which is now on the order paper at this 
legislature. 
 
The motion that we have before us does not include the preamble 
that was a part of the accord which you signed. And in that 
preamble there are certain very specific matters referred to in 
respect to immigration and population. 
 
And my question, Mr. Premier, is this: by approving this motion, 
which is more limited that the accord itself, will this legislature, 
by implication, also be approving the preamble to the full Meech 
Lake accord? Will we be adopting the Cullen-Coulture formula? 
And will we be restricting the potential growth of 
Saskatchewan’s population in proportion to other provinces? 
Because that is one of the implications of the preamble contained 
in the accord, but not contained in the motion that is specifically 
before us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will be addressing the 
motion before the House after question period, and I will be 
going through it in some detail, as I am sure others will be at that 
time. The changes in the constitution that apply to the preamble 
will have to have the appropriate recognition by Canadians, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I could only say, in response to changes that would affect 
Saskatchewan’s population, we will all have the same powers 
over population. And I point out to the individual, the hon. 
member, that when you’re in Canada, there’s nothing restricting 
you from moving anywhere else in Canada. So any assumption 
that you couldn’t move into Saskatchewan or you couldn’t move 
out of Saskatchewan would not be accurate. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. The Meech Lake 
preamble says Quebec is guaranteed its proportionate share of 
population growth plus 5 per cent, and other provinces can 
effectively have the same deal if they want it. Now, Mr. Premier, 
doesn’t that say to you that Quebec will, for all intents and 
purposes, forever be seven times larger than Saskatchewan; 
Ontario will for all intents and purposes forever be about 10 times 
larger than Saskatchewan; B.C. about three times larger than 
Saskatchewan; and so forth. And it doesn’t imply the federal 
spending on . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. It’s a 
supplementary and you’re getting very long on your 
supplementary. I would like you to put the question immediately 
if you have one. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, indeed I will. Does not the 
language preamble, Mr. Premier, specifically imply that 
Saskatchewan will be restricted for all intents and purposes to the 
same proportion of propulsion that we have today in relation to 
other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t imply that at 
all. As I mentioned, that when you’re looking at immigration, 
people can come into Ontario or into Quebec but nothing 
prevents them at all from coming into western Canada or the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have the same rights with respect to immigration as  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1049 
 

does the province of Quebec. And if everybody in Canada wants 
to move to Saskatchewan or people want to move into Alberta or 
they want to move into Quebec, that’s fair ball. 
 
So I don’t read into it at all that it limits Saskatchewan’s growth 
on our right to have immigrants or the opportunity for French-
speaking people to move into the province of Saskatchewan or 
Irish-speaking people or anybody else. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member for Weyburn 
on his feet? 
 

Variable Grain Rate Benefits 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a 
question, I think it was two days ago, and I’d like to report to the 
House on that now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I took notice on a question from the member for 
Quill Lakes on a question relative to variable rates. The 
opposition had suggested Cargill will not be passing on all of the 
$1.50 per ton savings of the variable rates to producers taking 
advantage of a variable rate point. The question was something to 
the effect of: will the government be doing anything to 
discourage farmers from using these services? 
 
The answer, Mr. Speaker, is this: that Cargill will in fact be 
passing on to farmers all of the $1.50 per ton rate discount 
received by Cargill. The discount of $1.50 per ton only applies to 
grain moved to 18-car blocks form one origin to one destination. 
Cargill has announced that it will accumulate all the savings 
generated from shipping 18-car blocks in a special performance 
rebate fund. 
 
Then when a producer delivers grain to an elevator . . . rather, 
when a producer delivers grain to an elevator, it is not knows at 
that time where the grain will be shipped out as part of an 18-car 
blocks. Therefore, for every 18-car block of grain delivered, 
Cargill will put the $1.50 per ton discount in a special discount in 
the special account. Once Cargill determines how many 18-car 
blocks were shipped out, they will then divide the accumulated 
discount in the special account among all producers who 
delivered to that point. Each producer will receive a minimum 25 
cents per ton rebate, presuming 17 per cent of Cargill’s grain 
handlings are shipped in 18-car blocks. 
 
The Saskatchewan government will not be doing anything to 
discourage cost savings to our financially hard-pressed farmers. 
This, Mr. Speaker, sounds eminently fair. Other companies may 
choose different methods but, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, the 
farmer will be the final judge. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Constitution Amendment, 1987 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak to a matter 
which is of paramount interest the Government  

of Saskatchewan, as well as to all people of Canada. 
 
Today I am introducing in this Assembly the resolution to 
authorize the proclamation of a new amendment to the Canadian 
constitution. 
 
This amendment represents a major achievement for Canada. The 
text of the constitutional amendment which I am presenting to 
you today was the subject of unanimous agreement by all first 
ministers in Canada. This agreement was forged at a meeting of 
the first ministers on June 2 and 3 of this year, in which each first 
minister participated in a constructive and co-operative spirit of 
accommodation. This meeting was a testimony to the fact that 
through open dialogue and a willingness to participate 
constructively, even such important and complex matters as 
changing this country’s constitution can be the subject of 
unanimous agreement in Canada. 
 
To succeed in dealing with the challenges of the future, Canada 
must be a strong and united country. However, the constitutional 
exercise that resulted in the Constitution Act, 1982, left Canada 
with a difficult legacy. Although the Prime Minister of Canada of 
the day, and the premiers of nine provinces came to an agreement 
about an appropriate constitutional text for Canada, one 
jurisdiction, the province of Quebec did not assent. This was a 
major problem, because to a large extent, it was the calls from 
and promises made to Quebec for constitutional change that were 
the impetus behind constitutional reform. Without the agreement 
that has recently been negotiated, the constitution would have 
been a source of discontent and division in Canada and this, in 
turn, would have hampered our ability to deal with the major 
issues which we will have to face as we prepared for the 21st 
century. 
 
The constitutional talks that resulted in the text which I put before 
the Assembly today began with the conference at Mont-Gabriel, 
Quebec, in May of 1986. It was at this conference that the 
Province of Quebec indicated that five topics for future 
discussions were impossible. These areas of concern reflected a 
strong belief in the future of Canada, and of Canadian federalism, 
by the government of Quebec. In the months following Mont-
Gabriel conference, a series of meetings took place between 
governments to attempt to find a basis for agreement. These 
discussions took place at both the bilateral and at the multilateral 
level, and involved officials, ministers responsible for 
constitutional issues, and first ministers. 
 
Saskatchewan participated in these discussions with the objective 
of finding a set of constitutional reforms which would be 
beneficial, not just for Quebec, but to all Canadian provinces and 
to Canada as a whole. I feel that the amendment agreed to by first 
ministers on June 3 achieves this objective. As I mentioned in my 
speech at the first ministers’ conference on June 3, I believe that 
this constitutional agreement is an indication of the maturity that 
our country has achieved. This maturity is reflected in our 
increased capacity to give official recognition to the existence of 
two major linguistic groups in Canada and to take measures to 
meet the needs of each. This maturity is also seen in our 
recognition of the interdependence of the two orders of 
government, and the need for increased levels of consultation 
between the two orders of  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1050 
 

government in order to facilitate and attain national objectives. 
 
A word about Quebec as a distinct society. Section 2 of the new 
amendment recognizes the existence of French -speaking 
Canadians, located primarily in Quebec, but also present 
elsewhere in Canada; and English-speaking Canadians, 
concentrated in the other nine provinces, but also present within 
the province of Quebec. This linguistic reality is recognized as a 
fundamental characteristic of our nation. It is also recognized that 
Quebec constitutes a distinct society within Canada. Affirmation 
is given to the role of Canada, as well as that of every province, to 
preserve the linguistic duality of Canada. Finally, Quebec’s role 
to preserve and promote Quebec as a distinct society; within 
Canada is also affirmed. 
 
This provision, in my view, is a fair and a reasonable one. It has 
the very important consequence of not making the province of 
Quebec the sole protector of the French language in Canada. This 
was introduced into the amendment in order to protect the 
interests of French language minorities living outside of Quebec. 
It also has to effect off assuring the protection of the English 
language minority living within the province of Quebec. 
 
The role of Quebec to preserve and to promote the distinct 
identity of that province was included to recognize the fact that 
Quebec is the only jurisdiction in Canada and, for all practical 
purposes, in North America, where the French language is spoken 
by the majority of the population. In view of this, Quebec may 
need to perform a role with regard to the French language and 
unique culture in that province which is not necessary for other 
provinces. 
 
In terms of the division of powers, however, this section does not 
take away any powers form parliament or from any legislature in 
the country, including Quebec. In fact, a clause was included in 
this section, stating that this section does not derogate in any way 
from federal or provincial powers, including any powers related 
to language. 
 
I also think it is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the inclusion 
of this section in the new amendment does not affect the 
constitutional rights of aboriginal people, nor the right of 
Canadians whose heritage is neither English or French. In fact, 
section 16 of the amendment states specifically that the new 
section which I have just described does not affect those parts of 
the constitution dealing with aboriginal rights, nor those parts of 
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms relating to the 
preservation and enhancement of the multicultural heritage of 
Canadians. 
 
Immigration. Section 3 of the new amendment deals with matters 
relating to immigration. Under this provision, the federal 
government commits itself to negotiating with any province that 
so wishes an agreement on immigration that is appropriate to the 
needs and circumstances of that province. These agreements, 
once negotiated, can be given the force of law by the constitution. 
 
In these agreements, the federal government would  

maintain the power to set national standards and objectives 
relating to immigration, including the establishment of general 
classes of immigrants to Canada, and the identification of 
categories of individuals who are inadmissible into our nation. 
The federal government would also maintain the power to set the 
overall number of immigrants which would be admitted to the 
country. Furthermore, the agreements negotiated between the 
federal government and a particular province would not affect the 
continued application of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
This section of the new Act is a recognition of the fact that the 
provincial interests can be affected by immigration policies. Its 
significance is in the fact that it makes available arrangements by 
which a particular province and the federal government can 
assure that the specific needs of individual provinces in this area 
are represented, while at the same time preserving the powers 
necessary for the federal government to protect national interests 
in the area of immigration. 
 
The Supreme Court of Canada. The next significant change to the 
Canadian constitution deals with the Supreme Court. Under the 
provision included in the constitutional amendment, the Supreme 
Court of Canada is formally entrenched into the constitution of 
Canada. Furthermore, the provision sets the minimum criteria 
necessary for a person to become eligible for appointment to the 
Supreme Court. It also deals with the very important issue of how 
to make appointments to the Supreme Court. The legal 
requirement that three judges form the Supreme Court must be 
from the bar or bench of Quebec, which is already part of the 
Supreme Court Act, has not been constitutionalized. This is in 
recognition of the fact that Quebec is the only Canadian province 
that operates under the civil law system, and that this legal system 
just be represented on the Supreme Court. 
 
Furthermore, the new Act will allow provincial governments to 
participate in the appointment of judges to the Supreme Court. 
This is the first time, Mr. Speaker, in Canadian history that 
provincial governments will have this opportunity. As a result, 
when the amendment has been proclaimed, governments of each 
province will be able to submit the names of individuals they 
consider appropriate for appointment to the highest court of the 
land, and the federal government will make its decision from 
those names submitted. 
 
I believe this is an important step forward for Canada. The 
Supreme Court of Canada, as the final arbiter of the Canadian 
constitution, which of course now includes the charger, should 
not merely be a creature of the federal government. Because it is 
a crucial actor in the way our federal system works, it is entirely 
appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that provincial governments should 
have a role in selecting the individuals who will sit on this body 
and who will, by virtue of their position, play a major role in 
determining how Canada will evolve as a nation. The new 
provision, in my view, represents another dimension to the 
recognition of the federal fact in Canada, which is present in so 
many parts of this amendment. 
 
The amending formula. By virtue of the amendment to the 
constitution, the amending formula has been altered.  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1051 
 

Some issues, which previously required the consent of the federal 
government, as well as at least seven of the 10 provinces, with 50 
per cent of the population of the provinces, will now require the 
unanimous assent of the federal government and all provinces. 
The matters to which I refer are changes affecting the principle of 
proportionate representation of the provinces in the House of 
Commons; the powers of the Senate, as well as the method of 
selecting senators, and the method of determining the number of 
senators each province is entitled to; several matters dealing with 
the Supreme Court of Canada; the extension of existing provinces 
into the Territories; and the establishment of new provinces. I 
hasten to add, however, that the general amending formula, which 
I mentioned earlier, of the federal government and at least seven 
provinces, consisting of 50 per cent of the provinces, will 
continue to apply to most amendments to the Canadian 
constitution. 
 
Another change to the constitution that will be brought about by 
this amendment is that, where an amendment is made which 
transfers provincial powers to the federal government, provinces 
will be able to receive financial compensation if they decide to 
opt out of such changes. In the past, provinces were eligible for 
compensation only in cases where education and other cultural 
matters were involved. 
 
I believe that the revised Canadian constitutional amending 
formula will now contain the proper balance of protection, 
protection to the vital interests of all provinces, with the 
flexibility required to respond to rapidly changing environments. 
The general amending formula will still apply to most 
constitutional amendments. However, each province will receive 
a veto power over changes to central institutions which play a 
vital role in the function of Canadian federalism. 
 
The fact that each province will have a veto power over the 
creation of new provinces is quite appropriate, in the light of the 
effect of new provinces on federalism as a whole. The 
introduction of new provinces would affect the operation of the 
amending formula, the arrangements by which some provinces 
receive equalization payments from the federal government, and 
a wide variety of other matters which go to the core of how this 
country operates. 
 
However, the requirement that each province and the federal 
government must assent to the creation of a new province does 
not preclude new provinces from coming into being. The present 
agreement amending the Canadian constitution is ample proof 
that the unanimity is indeed achievable, even where very complex 
issues are involved. 
 
The same point could also be made in relation to the reform of 
the Senate of Canada. The difficulty of arriving at a consensus 
about what the form the future Senate should take should not be 
minimized. At the same time, however, there already exists 
significant consensus that the role the Senate is presently playing 
is unsatisfactory, and that ways must be found to make it more 
suited for the modern Canadian federal system. I’m quite 
confident that, given this firm basis on which to work, intensive 
discussions between the federal government and provinces will 
be open and constructive and will indeed  

lead to an agreement on how this institution — the Senate — can 
be reformed to meet contemporary needs and circumstances of 
the day. 
 
Federal spending power. Another change to the constitution 
which will be introduced by the present amendment relates to the 
federal government’s ability to initiate shared-cost programs in 
areas of exclusive provincial jurisdiction. In the past, the federal 
government has used its spending power to involve itself in areas 
of provincial jurisdiction. Of course, provinces have always had 
the opportunity of opting out of shared-cost programs established 
by the federal government in these areas. However, no 
arrangement was present to provide any financial compensation 
to provinces deciding not to participate in these programs. 
 
The new amendment will provide a much fairer arrangement in 
such circumstances. In the future, where the federal government 
wishes to initiate a new shared-cost program in an area of 
exclusive provincial jurisdiction — the legislative authority of the 
province — the province will receive financial compensation if it 
chooses to exercise its constitutional right to opt out of such 
programs, provided that it establishes a program or initiative 
which was compatible with national objectives. 
 
The provision in no way implies that the federal government will 
be inhibited in its role of providing leadership at the national level 
in the provision of new services to the population. This role will 
continue to be an important one. However, the practical effects of 
this new section will be to ensure that a high level of consultation 
between the federal government and the provinces precedes, Mr. 
Speaker, the initiation of such national programs. The availability 
to provinces of financial compensation, if they choose to opt out 
of these programs, will be an incentive for the federal government 
to insure that the program does in fact respond to the 
circumstances in all provinces, not just to the most populous 
ones. 
 
On the other hand, should a federal government decide to proceed 
with a new program which is not sensitive to the needs of all 
provinces, an important safeguard has been made possible as a 
result of this amendment. A province such as Saskatchewan 
would then have the opportunity of establishing its very own 
program, compatible with national objectives, but which would 
be more effective in responding to its specific circumstances here 
at home. Because of the availability of financial compensation, 
provinces will be able to make this decision without subjecting 
their citizens to paying taxes twice to receive the same benefit. 
The only alternative to this without the new provision, was to 
have the taxpayers of a province contribute toward a federal 
program that was not sensitive to the specific needs and 
circumstances of their own province. 
 
Some other sections. In addition to the five subject areas which I 
have described, the new constitutional amendment also contains 
significant sections on other matters. Perhaps the most important 
of these is the creation of permanent new forms for federal-
provincial consultation. As a result of this amendment, a first 
ministers’ conference on the constitution will be held on  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1052 
 

a yearly basis. At that time governments will have the 
opportunity to discuss mutual concerns which relate to 
constitutional issues. The first issues on the agenda are Senate 
reform, as well as the role and responsibilities related to fisheries. 
Both are important subjects and I have no doubt that they will be 
resolved once they have been extensively studied and discussed 
by all jurisdictions. Moreover, issues will be added to the agenda 
as deemed appropriate by the 11 jurisdictions. 
 
Furthermore, a first ministers’ conference on the economy will 
also take place on a yearly basis. This is not a new departure 
since such conferences have been occurring annually since 1985. 
However, it is significant that this conference will for the first 
time receive constitutional recognition. These two annual 
constitutionally mandated conferences, one on the constitution 
and one on the economy, create institutions which will address 
the need for an enhanced level of consultation between the 
federal government and provincial governments on a wide array 
of issues that face Canada today and will continue to face Canada 
in the foreseeable future. 
 
Finally, the new amendment provides a mechanism for provincial 
participation in the appointment of senators until such time as an 
amendment of Senate reform is passed. 
 
Let me conclude, Mr. Speaker. I have described in detail the 
various aspects of the new amendment because it is important for 
everyone in the province to understand how the new amendment 
will alter the functioning of governments in Canada. I also think 
it is important to explain why I believe that the proposed changes 
are good for this province and for Canada as a whole. However, 
the impact of the new amendment is best appreciated when one 
examines the amendment as a whole. This amendment signals the 
recognition of realities brought about as a result of changing 
national and international conditions. The complexities of the 
modern world make the rigid distinctions between federal powers 
and provincial powers anachronistic. 
 
(1445) 
 
Although our legal jurisdictions remain, we must come to terms 
with the fact that initiatives taken by one order of government 
will very often have important implications for the other order. 
To be effective, national policies need to evolve as a result of the 
sharing of information, Mr. Speaker, and insights between the 
federal government and all provinces. 
 
There are some who will say that what we have done by virtue of 
this amendment is to provide increased opportunities for discord 
in Canada. the argument is that, since there will be more 
participants in decision-making at the national level, then 
necessarily more conflicts and delays will characterize 
government in Canada. However, Mr. Speaker, this is not my 
view and not the view of the first ministers. I believe instead that 
this amendment will lead to increased dialogue which will in turn 
result and improve understanding between the different parts 
which constitute this country. 

Mr. Speaker, I think all Canadians could look to this achievement 
with pride. Through our efforts of the past several months, we 
have greatly solidified the Canadian federation. We have 
succeeded in finding a way to allow the province of Quebec to 
take its rightful place in the Canadian family. Furthermore, we 
have seized this opportunity to take measures to adopt our federal 
institutions to suit changing circumstances. Our success in this 
venture will allow us to prepare for the challenges of the future, 
united and confident in the belief that we are capable of resolving 
some of the most daunting problems of national well-being. In all 
respects, we have made important strides towards a stronger and 
indeed a better Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the Minister of 
Justice: 
 

Whereas the Constitution Act, 1982 came into force on April 
17, 1982, following an agreement between Canada and all the 
provinces except Quebec; 

 
and whereas the Government of Quebec has established a set 
of five proposals for constitutional change and has stated that 
amendments to give effect to those proposals would enable 
Quebec to resume a full role in the constitutional councils of 
Canada; 

 
and whereas the amendment proposed in the schedule hereto 
sets out the basis in which Quebec’s five constitutional 
proposals may be met; and whereas the amendment proposed 
in the schedule hereto also recognizes the principle of the 
equality of the provinces, provides new arrangements to foster 
greater harmony and co-operation between the Government of 
Canada and the governments of the provinces and requires that 
conferences be convened to consider important constitutional, 
economic, and other issues; 

 
and whereas certain portions of the amendment proposed in the 
schedule hereto relate to matters referred to in section 41 of the 
Constitution Act, 1982; 

 
and whereas section 41 of the Constitution Act, 1982, provides 
that an amendment to the constitution of Canada may be made 
by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the 
Great seal of Canada, where so authorized by resolutions in the 
Senate and the House of Commons and of the Legislative 
Assembly of each province; 

 
now therefore the Senate, House of Commons, Legislative 
Assembly resolves, and this Assembly resolves that the 
amendment to the constitution of Canada be authorized to be 
made by proclamation issued by the Her Excellency the 
Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in 
accordance with the schedule hereto. 

  



 
July 9, 1987 

1053 
 

Mr. Speaker, attached to the motion is a schedule containing the 
certain amendments to the constitution of Canada to affect the 
constitutional accord. I also, Mr. Speaker, move the identical 
motion in the French language, also seconded by the Minister of 
Justice, as it is contained in the motion no. 3, contained in the 
orders of the day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address the 
House on this motion this afternoon, and then, in the conclusion 
of my remarks, ask for leave to adjourn the debate, since I’d like 
an opportunity to study more fully the Premier’s remarks. 
 
May I say at the outset that I thank the Premier for his remarks 
which dealt with the resolution before us, highlighted the content 
of the resolution, and highlighted the serious nature of the 
resolution that is before us, because there are few more important 
laws dealt with by any legislature than the constitution. 
 
Prior to 1982, Mr. Speaker, constitutional changes were brought 
about in this country by a process which did not involve 
provincial legislatures in a formal way. It was done by sorts of 
agreements between governments which sometimes, but certainly 
not always, involved legislative action. The constitution which 
was patriated and varied in 1982 changes this process and gave 
this legislature, and the legislatures of all the provinces, a formal 
role to play with respect to constitutional amendments. And we 
are now discharging that constitutional responsibility which came 
to us in 1982, and it is an important responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want first to . . .and I may say, Mr. Speaker, that 
this is the first major change in the constitution which has come 
before the legislature of Saskatchewan since 1982 since this 
process was put in train; and accordingly, in the first such debate 
since 1905, since this is the first time our role has been out of 
participating in a formal way in amending the constitution. 
 
I want to address a few remarks to the question of the process. 
The Premier has put the resolution before the House, as I think is 
the only process open to him, but that leaves the House with the 
ability only to debate the resolution than deal with it. We don’t 
appear to be moving forward with any process whereby the 
resolution would be referred to a committee of the legislature 
where, in a much less formal way, questions might be directed 
and members might get more insight into what these changes 
mean. Nor is it proposed at this stage to have public hearings. 
 
It will be the view of the members on this side of the House, 
represented by my party, that there should be public hearings, and 
we will be putting forward in all likelihood this proposal to be 
dealt with by the House. 
 
A number of other jurisdictions, including the federal government 
and the Government of Ontario and the Government of Manitoba, 
are having a course of public hearings, and we think that this is 
entirely fitting since, in  

our judgment, the public should know the terms of the 
constitutional changes which are being offered for their 
governments. 
 
It is in no sense analogous, I agree, Mr. Speaker, but in the 
previous proceedings which led to the patriation and the very 
major changes of 1982, there was a process which went on 
almost interminably, but at least for 18 months or so, in respect of 
which there were lengthy hearings at Ottawa. There were many 
commissions, committees, and the like, putting forward opinions. 
And as a result, there was widespread and lively public debate on 
the content of the constitutional changes which were proposed. 
 
I would think, Mr. Speaker, that while it is unlikely to generate 
the same level of debate and of public discussion, steps ought to 
be taken to see whether or not we could not engage the public in 
considering the proposals which are being put forward by the 
governments of Canada to the various parliaments and 
legislatures of Canada. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we would do a disservice to adopt the view 
that because the motives which are behind this resolution are 
worthy, that we can ignore the content of the resolutions and that 
we can move ahead without the public understanding in a broad 
way, what the content of these resolutions involves. 
 
Because what we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, are changes in 
the constitution which, if I may so, will undoubtedly do a national 
service in 1987. But what we must ask ourselves is whether 
they’re going to do a similar national service 50 years form now 
in the year 2037, or 100 years from now in the year 2087. 
 
The Premier spoke of the Meech Lake accord being arrived at 
through open dialogue. In a sense that it true, but the number of 
participants in the dialogue was a handful, and the public have 
not in any way been involved in the open dialogue. and I think 
that we ought to address ways ;in which we can widen the ambit 
of the open dialogue and have the public involved. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that the proposal to have, as the saying goes, 
Quebec brought into the constitution, is an entirely worthy one. 
It’s interesting that we find ourselves using those terms, because 
in a legal sense Quebec is every bit as much a part of Canada as is 
Saskatchewan, and the constitution governs Quebec in precisely 
the same way that it governs Saskatchewan or any other province. 
so we’re not talking law here, we’re talking a precedent and 
custom and understandings. But it’s none the less important on 
that account. 
 
Our country is built partly on law, but partly on precedents and 
understandings between the various groups and among the 
various groups in this country. and it is fitting, if not strictly 
legally accurate, to say that we are acting to bring Quebec into the 
constitution. Because while it is undoubtedly legally binding, the 
government of the province of Quebec had not declared their 
adherence to the constitution, and in that regard it lacked the 
support of the custom and precedent that led to the first 
confederation being a deal between the governments  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1054 
 

of the various colonies involved, the three colonies involved that 
turned out to the four provinces. And we have carried that 
tradition with us, that it is appropriate that provincial or colonial 
governments be involved when there are major changes in the 
constitution. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are consequences which might well 
flow form this resolution and they’re not all good. They’re not all 
bad by any means, but they’re not all good. And the proposal 
which is before us has benefits and dangers for the future of 
Canada. I would like to think that Canadians understood the 
benefits and understood what I perceive to be some of the 
dangers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the resolution before us proposes a number of major 
changes, and the Premier has alluded to many of them. The role 
of Quebec; appointments to the Senate; agreements on 
immigration and aliens; constitutionalizing the Supreme Court; 
appointments to the supreme Court, shared cost programs under 
the spending power; and the analogous provision dealing with the 
transfer of legislative jurisdiction from the provincial 
governments to the federal governments; annual federal-
provincial conferences on the economy; the amending formula; 
the expansion of the unanimity rule to cover the powers of the 
Senate; method of selecting senators; and new provinces; and one 
or two other items referred by the Premier. 
 
Then the annual constitutional conferences are provided for. And 
then there are some special provisions at the end of the resolution, 
as the Premier alluded to, would say that the earlier provisions 
dealing with the role of Quebec are not designed to abrogate from 
treaty or aboriginal rights or multiculturalism or the second 
provision in the constitution, the section 35 dealing with treaty 
and aboriginal rights, or with the section 91 provisions dealing 
with Indians and Indian lands. 
 
(1500) 
 
And I think it’s useful for us to review briefly some of these 
provisions. I deal first with the question of the role of Quebec. 
And in many ways, Mr. Speaker, this is the core of the resolution 
before us. Because the reason why it is before us because there 
was a desire on the part of the parliament of Canada, or the 
Government of Canada I should say, and the provincial 
governments to get an arrangement whereby Quebec could be 
said to be in the constitution. And however nebulous that is as a 
legal concept, it’s a good, solid reason for acting because it is a 
political reality in Canada. 
 
In some ways one could say that the history of Canada has been a 
history of relations between Canada and the United States, and 
relations between French and English in Canada. That’s an 
incomplete list, but it covers a great number of the crises which 
we have had in our nation, and we are now dealing with one 
aspect of that relationship between French and English. And 
when I sue English, I am talking about Anglophones, not people 
of English ethnic origin. 
 
And the role of Quebec is one, in the resolution before us, is one 
which provides for the recognitions and existence of French-
speaking Canadians centred in Quebec but also  

present elsewhere, and English-speaking Canadians concentrated 
outside Quebec, and indicating that this is a fundamental 
characteristic of Canada. 
 
And I may say, Mr. Speaker, that the words of the resolution are a 
great improvement over the words which were in the Meech Lake 
accord, which talked about a French-speaking Canada and an 
English-speaking Canada. That offended me, and as it turned out, 
I think offended a good number of other Canadians . . . and I 
think was probably an error in drafting rather than an error in 
concept and has now been corrected, as I would say, by the 
resolution before us which talks about French-speaking 
Canadians and English-speaking Canadians — all of us 
Canadians. Not sort of one Canada and then another Canada over 
here, but all Canadians, some of whom speak French and some of 
whom speak English — and that’s a fundamental characteristic of 
Canada. And as I view it, that is akin to agreeing that the sun rises 
in the east, because it seems to me that that is a fundamental 
characteristic of Canada, and we lose nothing by recognizing it. 
 
We go on from there to say that the parliament and the 
legislatures are to preserve this state of affairs. That has certain 
mild dangers because none of us will know, I suppose, in the next 
100 years whether or not Quebec will continue to be essentially a 
French-speaking jurisdiction. But I suspect it will, and it doesn’t 
trouble me to say that the governments of Canada are directed to 
seeing if they can make that happen. And the resolution deals 
with the role of the Government of Quebec in preserving this 
distinct identity. 
 
And then it goes on to say that there’s no derogation of language 
right. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have some problem with what I regard 
as the underlying assumptions built into these types of provisions 
in the constitution. I have no quarrel with declaring that Canada is 
a country of two languages, because in every real sense it is. 
There are other languages, either aboriginal languages or heritage 
languages, which are used by some significant number of people. 
But overwhelmingly Canadians speak either French or English in 
their homes and in their businesses. So I have no problem with 
declaring that Canada is a country of two languages. 
 
It goes on to say that Quebec is a distinct society. That, I think, is 
a recognition of fact. What I wouldn’t want anyone to assume is 
that the rest of Canada is another distinct society. That is sort of 
suggested but not quite said. And I would not want it said, 
because in my judgment the characterization that came in the late 
‘60s of Canada being a bilingual and bicultural country was an 
inaccurate characterization. 
 
It is certainly a bilingual country, but I think it is not bicultural. 
And in many, many speeches in the past I have said that 
bicultural is the wrong term. It’s either one-cultural or many; but 
two is the wrong number. And it depends thereon on how distinct 
you’re going to draw lines before you say that it’s a separate 
culture. Because I am not at all sure, not at all sure that the 
Anglophones in Ottawa have more in common with the 
Anglophones in Whitehorse than they have with the 
Francophones in Hull. I’m not all sure of that. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1055 
 

Therefore, I think that we are a country of several cultures. This is 
not denied in the resolution, and in a sense this is extraneous 
except to the extent that we are saying we’ve got two languages 
and Quebec is a distinct society. I would not want anyone to 
conclude that that means that there’s another distinct society, 
meaning the rest, because that is not so. 
 
Harkening back to what I call, if I may be allowed to digress a 
moment, Mr. Speaker, the Laurentian view of history, where the 
history of Canada has been characterized as the tugs and pulls 
between what are now Quebec and Ontario, you can read many 
bits of Canadian history which seem to be based upon that 
supposition, that somehow Canada came into being when Quebec 
and Ontario joined in 1867; and at that time they annexed Nova 
Scotia and New Brunswick; and they later took the Hudson Bay 
lands; and then they made them into bits of provinces. And what 
we have here is Quebec and Ontario joining together and 
expanding and creating the hinterland, of which they represent 
the heartland. 
 
And you can find many, many instances of that in the writings 
about Canadian history. It used to always be bitterly represented 
by Nova Scotians who took the view that they were building the 
best ships in the world and sailing the seven seas when those 
people were hoeing the “back 40" about 20 miles north of what is 
now Toronto. And they didn’t feel that somehow they were 
annexed. 
 
And I sense, if I may say so, the same view with respect to 
western Canadians who feel that Canada is something more than 
Quebec and Ontario and its hinterland, which has been acquired. 
And I think that we would not want to see anything in the 
resolution before us interpreted in any way to suggest otherwise. 
So when we say that Quebec is a distinct society, we’re not 
suggesting that the rest is Ontario and the tributaries. 
 
I want now to turn to the provisions with respect to the Senate. 
That’s section 2 of the resolution and also section 9 of the 
resolution. And that deals with appointment to the Senate. And it 
provides that the powers of the senate and the method of selecting 
senators is subject to a change only by the unanimous vote of 
parliament in the 10 legislatures. So we’re dealing with two 
provisions here; how the Senate gets appointed, and how we can 
change those rules. 
 
And what the resolution proposes to do is to change the method 
of appointment from one whereby he federal cabinet makes the 
appointments form lists provided by the provincial cabinets. We 
here convert what has been, unquestionably, a chamber of federal 
patronage to one which will be a chamber of federal-provincial 
patronage. 
 
This country has shown in the last 40 years that we can do almost 
anything, or at least attempt to do almost anything, on a federal-
provincial basis. And we can virtually do nothing else, except on 
a federal-provincial basis. And we’ve gone one step further — I 
wouldn’t have thought it possible — we have found a way to 
make Senate  

appointments a federal-provincial matter. 
 
One remembers all those hoary old jokes about the elephant 
stories, about what is the nature of an elephant — Americans are 
bigger and better elephants than the French in the love life of an 
elephant. And the Canadians . . .That the elephant . . . .Is it a 
federal or a provincial matter? Now we must say; the elephant, is 
it a federal, provincial, or joint federal and provincial matter? We 
seem to have got another category, and we have placed the 
appointment of senators in that category. 
 
We shouldn’t suppose, Mr. Speaker, that much will change. 
When the federal and provincial governments are of the same 
political hue, senators will be appointed in the same ways they’ve 
always been done — by the appropriate consultation between the 
people of the same political hue and, doubtless, an appointment in 
the public interest being made. 
 
When the federal and provincial governments are of a different 
political hue, I suspect not much will change. The provincial 
government will put forward names, and, if the federal 
government doesn’t like them, there’ll be no appointments. 
 
And, of course, there’s no great impetus to appoint senators. No 
irreparable damage to the body politic is likely to happen if 
there’s a vacancy in the Senate. There are those who are unkind 
enough to say that there are vacancies in the Senate now, even 
though people are sitting there. And I don’t, therefore, think that 
much is going to change. I don’t think the federal government has 
given up much since, as I say, if they got a recommendation 
from, let us say, the Premier of Manitoba that they didn’t like, it 
may well be that there would be no appointment. And they’re at 
no great impetus to making appointments, so that in that regard 
not much has changed. 
 
But some things have changed, Mr. Speaker. What I feel has 
vanished is any realistic hope of Senate reform. The Premier 
suggests that we are likely to be able to convince the Parliament 
of Canada, including the Senate — subject to some qualifications 
which I won’t now go into — and the 10 legislatures, to some 
formula for Senate reform. But I feel that that is undue optimism. 
 
Can any advocate of, let’s say, an equal elected Senate really 
believe that any government in Quebec, or Ontario for that 
matter, will agree to, let’s say, six elected senators in substitution 
of the 24 appointed senators they now have? I think the answer is 
no, and I think that’s sad. I don’t think it’s tragic, since I don’t 
think that the Senate is doing much harm. I think it’s not a case of 
something that’s really going to cause us problems. It’s a case of 
an opportunity for change, constructive change, which I think is 
being foreclosed. But that’s perhaps a price we have to pay. 
 
I think we can recall that also most all the studies on Senate 
reform — the Pépin, Robarts, and the Canadian Bar Association, 
and the Government of Ontario studies — they all had proposals 
for a Senate which played an effective role. And I’m afraid it’s 
going to be very, very difficult now to bring those about. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1056 
 

Everybody’s idea is to have a Senate which would adequately 
represent the regions at the centre. That’s the theory of 
federalism. The theory of federalism is that the second Chamber 
represents the regions or the states or the provinces or the land — 
whatever the regional jurisdictions are called. And we don’t have 
that in Canada because for 75 years anyway, people have laughed 
at the senate as a representative of the region. 
 
And so we’ve developed another one which is the federal-
provincial conference. And I’m sure in the last 40 years, since 
World War II, the greatest growth industry in Canada has been 
federal-provincial conferences of first ministers or of ministers or 
officials, or as the case may be — all essentially because the 
people of Saskatchewan has doubts as to whether Senator Argue 
and Senator Balfour represent them. And I don’t cast aspersions 
on those two senators except that it’s pretty obvious they’re not 
thought of as representing Saskatchewan in any effective way at 
Ottawa. 
 
So we have, in the past at least, thought of some idea for a new 
senate, and now I think that that’s going to be very, very difficult 
to bring about. 
 
(1515) 
 
The next item covered by the Premier deals with agreements on 
immigration and aliens, and I think, Mr. Speaker, that we need 
focus a little bit of attention on the point raised by the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, because it’s by no means an academic 
point. 
 
I read the resolution, and it is clear from the resolution that the 
federal government and the provincial government can enter into 
agreements on immigration, with which I have no quarrel. 
They’ve been around for a fair while, and I suspect the 
government, which I had the honour to lead, signed some 
agreements on immigration with the federal government, the 
terms of which I do not remember, since by and large 
Saskatchewan allowed the federal government to operate in the 
field of immigration, more or less as it saw fit, and that has 
continued to this day. But the discussions not included in this 
resolution, but in the discussions at Meech Lake and in some of 
the preambles, it is suggested that the agreement with Quebec is 
going to be of a particular kind, one which to over-simplify, says 
that if 100,000 immigrants come to Canada, and Quebec 
represents 30 per cent of the population of Canada, then 30,000 
of those immigrants should come to Quebec. 
 
Now no one, I think, quarrels with the desire of the government 
of Quebec to have immigrants. I fear, however, Mr. Speaker, that 
the government of Quebec will, in exercising its jurisdiction on 
selection of immigrants, will want Francophones, or will want a 
preponderance of Francophones. Let’s put it that way. And I 
would very much disagree with an arrangement whereby 
immigration form non-francophone areas of the world to the 
provinces of Saskatchewan and B.C. and Ontario, to pick three, 
would be in effect barred because it wasn’t possible to get enough 
francophone immigrants to meet what I call the Quebec quota. 

I don’t mean to use any pejorative terms here. But that’s a real 
issue that ought to concern Chinese families, Italian families, or 
people who are interested in getting political refugees as 
immigrants into Canada — and I think of Ukrainian families. 
And it’s not clear, therefore . . . and it’s not clear to me, Mr. 
Speaker, whether or not an agreement with Quebec, and I will use 
Quebec because it’s the most germane case, but an agreement 
between the federal government and a province can, in effect, 
govern the number of immigrants which are likely to come to 
another province. 
 
I think I’ve made the point, and it’s one that I hope members 
opposite will turn their mind to when they enter the debate. It’s a 
matter of some considerable importance if you are a person in 
Canada who is hoping to be joined by a friend or a relative, and 
who are facing quotas and would like to see Canada’s gross 
number of immigrants expanded, and would not want to see that 
number contracted because of the difficulty of getting the 
appropriate number in each province. 
 
I turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the question of the Supreme Court, 
and I applaud the resolution to the extent that it includes the 
constitutionalizing of the Supreme Court. Everyone agreed during 
the 1970s and early ‘80s, when we were talking about 
constitutional reform, that it simply didn’t make sense not to have 
the Supreme Court as part of the constitution — didn’t make 
sense to have it simply a federal statute, and we’d have to get 
around to that. But it was one of those things which was put aside 
as being part of the second wave, and I’m very happy to see it 
here. 
 
It is appropriate that Quebec . . . let us say that three of the nine 
judges be common law lawyers. You could say it should be two, 
it should be three, but I don’t think any problem arises in having 
it three. One can envisage situations a hundred years from now 
where the common law might govern less than 20 per cent of 
Canadians, where that might be an interesting problem. But let’s 
worry about this year, and this decade, and the next decade, and 
not perhaps a hundred years from now. 
 
So that seems to me not unreasonable. It’s operated; that’s been 
the law. I don’t know whether fully the law, but it’s been the law 
in the practice now since the Supreme Court was set up in 1875 
or thereabouts — no problem there. 
 
It gets a little more difficult to deal with when the method of 
appointment is dealt with. Because it’s pretty clear that, on the 
basis of the resolution, the Government of Quebec, as I view it, 
can nominate three judges to the Supreme Court, and they have to 
be accepted by the federal government. You can say, oh no, they 
have to be acceptable to the federal parliament or the federal 
cabinet, but it doesn’t quite work that way. You couldn’t have 
vacancies in the Supreme Court for a long time. There will be 
enormous pressure to make appointment. 
 
I think, therefore, that this represents something which ought to 
be considered. It may be the best comprise we can make, to arrive 
at what is undoubtedly desirable, and that is federal and 
provincial participation in the appointment of judges. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1057 
 

With respect to the other nine provinces, the situation’s a bit 
different. Because as I read the resolution, even though it’s 
“Saskatchewan’s turn,” to have a Supreme Court judge, if the 
Government of Canada doesn’t like the name put forward — 
name or names put forward — by the Saskatchewan government, 
they can take one put forward by the Prince Edward Island 
government. And that obviously will mean that the matter will be 
the subject of some federal-provincial consultation. Some hard-
ball consultation, as I say, is entirely appropriate. 
 
But I’m not quite sure that, just as the federal government 
shouldn’t have had the absolute right as they’ve had in the past to 
ignore all provincial concerns, I’m not quite sure, with respect to 
Quebec, we should reverse the process, as I suggest we have. 
That may not be entirely accurate, and the lawyers can puzzle on 
whether or not the Government of Ontario could nominate a 
Quebec judge and that this would qualify — a member of the 
Quebec bar. But that would be thought of as a breach of faith in 
any case. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to complete all of my 
remarks this afternoon. I did want to touch on a few other things 
which the Premier had alluded to. 
 
He referred to the amending formula. And I think that while this 
is an arcane piece of business for the public, if we could say that 
we have two or three ways to amend the constitution, one way 
applies to one list of changes and one way applies to another list 
of changes, I think we make the thing clearer. And we have the 
big list which is covered by the general amending formula which 
requires the consent of seven provinces representing 50 per cent 
of the population — the 7 and 50 rule — and a shorter list in 
respect of which all the provinces and the federal government had 
to agree. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just for the sake of speeding up the 
presentation, I won’t say each time that it’s the parliament and the 
legislature that have to agree, but that’s what we’re talking about. 
I’ll say the federal government and the provinces. 
 
We’ve moved some things over from the big list of 7 and 50 to 
the little list requiring unanimity. And one of them is the 
amendments to the Senate, and I’ve already said I think that’s 
sad. 
 
The other has to do . . .certainly one other has to do with the 
Supreme Court, and that’s appropriate. We didn’t move it. We 
put it in because the Supreme Court wasn’t there before. That’s 
appropriate. We shouldn’t allow people to be changing the 
referee, and that’s what the Supreme Court is, without a very 
wide measure of agreement. 
 
With respect to the entry of new provinces, I understand the 
Premier’s arguments, but I think that is really very difficult for 
the territories of Newfoundland . . .correction, of Yukon and 
Northwest Territories, to be in a position whereby they simply 
cannot enter Canada unless all provinces and the federal 
government agree. 
 
Now that rule wasn’t applied to anyone else. It certainly wasn’t 
applied to Newfoundland, the last entry, and  

indeed no provinces agreed to that. And there was some question 
as to whether the Government of Quebec would have agreed, 
because of a number of reasons, but one of them was a long-
standing border dispute as between the province of Quebec and 
Labrador. And it certainly wasn’t true of Saskatchewan. Hard to 
know whether yet we’d be a province. And it seems to me a very, 
very tough test to make Yukon and the Northwest Territories 
meet. 
 
I will say a little more about shared cost programs. But I want to 
dissent from the Premier’s comments saying that now the 
Government of Canada will have to come forward with shared 
cost programs which meet the requirements of all the provinces, 
not just the most populous provinces. 
 
Well that’s not history’s lesson to us. You can hardly think of a 
shared cost program where the most populous provinces were the 
first in — certainly not true of the hospital plan, and certainly not 
true of medicare plan, and certainly not true of the Canada 
Assistance Plan. The most populous provinces, for the most part, 
have not been the first in. And it is the smaller provinces who 
have enjoyed the benefits of shared cost programs, notably 
Saskatchewan. We must have got more money out of shared cost 
programs per capita than any other province, perhaps not because 
of the formula that applied to Newfoundland, but because we 
were in so much earlier. We were first in on hospitalization, first 
in on medicare, and in as soon as any other province on virtually 
every shared cost program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on a couple of the other 
aspects. And you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that I outlined them in 
some detail at the outset. And I will deal quickly with the annual 
federal conferences on the economy and the like, and I think 
they’re of no great consequences, one way or the other. 
 
I do want so say something at a little more length on two subjects: 
one, the shared cost programs, and I think they’re very key, 
particularly to provinces like Saskatchewan; and secondly, on 
what I think are the omissions from this agreement, notably 
omissions dealing with the aboriginal peoples. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, because I want to prepare my remarks a little 
more fully with respect to these, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1530) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I want to go back to an item we 
were talking about yesterday. And I want to say to the minister 
that I still am kind of upset bout his remarks  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1058 
 

yesterday, accusing the elected people of Saskatoon of copping 
out on their responsibility of providing a sewage plant for the city 
of Saskatoon. 
 
And I want to say to the minister, although there aren’t any grants 
in his particular department, but as a member of the Executive 
Council he bears some of the responsibility that his government 
makes as they affect any city or any particular centre in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I want to say to the minister that 
his remarks are uncalled for. I think they were unfair. They were 
irresponsible, and you owe us an apology. When I say us, I think 
you owe the city of Saskatoon an apology. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Minister, because if you look at the way you 
have treated the city of Saskatoon, I mean your government, in 
financial assistance, then not only should you make an apology to 
the city of Saskatoon, you should say to the city of Saskatoon; will 
you forgive me, as the minister responsible for the Environment, 
for not being able to defend my position in the cabinet and for the 
cabinet being so meagre with the finances we have provided you -
- that’s the responsibility you should take. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to show you today how uncalled for 
your remarks really were. If we go through the financial situation, 
and all we have to do is just go through revenue sharing for 
example, we go through the revenue sharing -- had your 
government kept up with the financial assistance to the city of 
Saskatoon, we wouldn’t be in the predicament today, and you as 
minister could hold your head high. 
 
But had you kept up just with the inflation rate, the city of 
Saskatoon would have received ninety-five million, four hundred 
and-some-thousand dollars in revenue sharing alone. Over those 
years that you were the government, it received 87 million. In 
other words it lost over $8 million -- $8,354,000 because your 
government didn’t keep up with the cost of inflation in the 
province of Saskatchewan. You cheated the city of Saskatoon out 
of over $8 million in revenue sharing alone. 
 
Let me now turn to some of the other assistance programs. You’re 
saying the city of Saskatoon is copping out. I say to you, Mr. 
Minister, you are the one that was copping out. Your government 
was the one that wasn’t carrying it’s responsibility. That’s why we 
are in the mess that we are in in Saskatoon. 
 
On the other financial assistance programs, again, Mr. Minister, I 
did a quick calculation this morning. Had you only increased the 
grant by 3 [per cent per year from 1982 to 1986 on all the other 
urban assistance programs, the city of Saskatoon would have 
received in the neighbourhood of $95 million. However, you 
didn’t do that. Instead you cancelled whole financial programs and 
we lost in the neighbourhood of $45 million -- $45 million. Now 
add that on to the $8 million we already lost and we lost $53 
million. 
 
You admitted yesterday that a secondary plant would cost between 
$40 and $50 million, I believe. The moneys that we lost because 
you made the decision, not to finance or put the moneys into  

the cities of Saskatoon and Regina, but particularly Saskatoon as 
I’ve been talking about now, we lost in the neighbourhood of $50-
some million -- that would have paid for the whole plant, the new 
secondary plant. I think it’s irresponsible on your part to accuse 
the city people in Saskatoon, the elected people of Saskatoon, 
saying that they’re copping out. 
 
You’re putting your whole comments on, and I read from 
Hansard, from yesterday. The minister said yesterday, and I read 
... he said: 
 

And now to say that because the grant isn’t there (that means 
the 10 per cent grant), that’s the whole reason that we haven’t 
moved, that’s not fair. 

 
I say to the minister, no one, no one in this House, no one from the 
city of Saskatoon, ever said that we couldn’t proceed because the 
10 per cent grant was cut. That was an added insult. That was an 
added insult. But certainly because of the grants that were cut over 
the years that you people were the government, plus the 10 per 
cent, forced the city of Saskatoon to delay again a secondary 
sewage treatment plant. I say, Mr. Minister, the responsibility lies 
on your shoulders and the executive members of this government, 
not on the city of Saskatoon and the elected people there. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to give you an opportunity to apologize 
to the people of Saskatoon, and then we can go on to some other 
items. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- The member draws a very long bow today 
when he goes through all the figures. It doesn’t happen that this 
department is responsible for all the grants that are being talked 
about, so he’s off in a different realm altogether. 
 
The comments in the newspapers by the aldermen in the city of 
Saskatoon dealt only with the 10 per cent grant that normally 
would have come through the water corporation, and that’s the 
area where I considered it was a complete cop-out. And I do. 
 
And I can advise the hon. member that the city of Saskatoon last 
year accessed that program and got $396,000. And going back 
quite a few years, in 1972, they got $500,000. So they haven’t 
been entirely missed. So the concern that you’re raising, I don’t 
believe, is a real concern. 
 
Grant programs come and go in all departments. Every user of 
those grant programs must access them at the time that they are in 
place. And usually they are in place over a long period of four to 
five years or whatever, and then they’re gone. And something else 
takes its place. 
 
The city of Saskatoon had that opportunity over a long period of 
time. They didn’t choose to proceed to get their sewage treatment 
upgraded at that time. Now, as soon as it’s dropped, even before 
they’ve made application for it, then they’re complaining. And 
that’s why I said it was a Copt and I have no intention of 
apologizing. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, you are misleading the House as to 
what you said yesterday. You said, and I  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1059 
 

quote ... you said, and I quote .... (inaudible interjection) ... You 
said ... Would the member from Weyburn just keep his mind out 
of this, Mr. Chairman. We’re doing fine over here. I don’t need his 
help, and the minister doesn’t need his help either. He has messed 
up enough departments already to stay in the Department of 
Education. We’ll get to you later. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday you said, that’s the whole reason that we 
haven’t moved. That’s not fair. No one in the city of Saskatoon 
said that that was the whole reason for not proceeding with a 
secondary sewage treatment plant. 
 
What I’m saying to you today, and what the people of Saskatoon 
have told you and your government and the Minister of Finance ... 
And I know you don’t have the grants in your department, but you 
are a member of the Executive Council ... (inaudible interjection) 
... I know. But you cannot then turn around and say to the city of 
Saskatoon, it’s a Copt on your part. 
 
When the other members in the Executive Council cut some 50-
million dollars over the last five years out of assistance for the City 
of Saskatoon ... And I am saying to you that that is not a fair 
statement for you to make. It’s not a fair statement for you to make 
as the minister responsible for the environment. 
 
It is your job to go into the Executive Council, to fight for your 
programs, and to see to it that sufficient funds are provided to the 
cities -- and I’m talking now about the city of Saskatoon -- so that 
we can proceed the secondary plant, a sewage treatment plant. 
 
And I’m saying to you that, again, you owe an apology to the city 
of Saskatoon for your irresponsible statements and see to it that 
you became an active member and a forceful member in the 
Executive Council to defend your budget and your program so that 
we in Saskatoon don’t have to suffer because of the irresponsible 
statements made and decisions made by members in the Executive 
Council. That’s your responsibility, to defend your programs and 
the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I answered the same question just a moment 
ago and I don’t see that I can change that answer. Some of the 
comments that were made in the city of Saskatoon. It says: 
 

Saskatoon has been holding extensive talks with the provincial 
government on the kind of sewage system that should be 
installed, Ald. Pat Lorje told the meeting. 

 
Now to be told in some high-handed fashion by some 
bureaucrat in Regina that there will be no funds, it just boggles 
the mind. 

 
There’s only one 10 per cent grant that had changed. And she goes 
on to say that because of those standards they weren’t able to 
follow. Then there are comments by others. I don’t think I should 
read them all into the record. Everybody’s had the newspapers. 
We can all read them. 
 
I don’t believe that those comments really cover the detailed work 
that our department has done with the city  

of Saskatoon, and the number of times we have encouraged the 
city of Saskatoon -- the department has encouraged the city of 
Saskatoon -- starting back as far as the time that the department 
was first formed, and right up to the present. So we’ve been 
encouraging them over a period of time, under the time when you 
were government, and under the time that we have been 
government. We still haven’t had the movement. 
 
So, you know, to say that we’ve changed the rules and regulations 
... Somebody had better have some regulations for what sewage 
emissions can be, otherwise downstream there’s going to be a very 
serious outcry. Those regulations have been in place for some 
time. We’re just asking for the city of Saskatoon to comply. I 
believe that we have treated them entirely fairly, and it’s their 
move. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, would you not admit that cutting 
grants in other areas by your government to the tune, as I said, 
accumulated cuts over the last four or five years of $50 million, 
will you not admit that that will have an effect on the decisions 
made by the city of Saskatoon to which programs they can 
proceed with and which programs they cannot proceed with. And 
in this particular case, the last straw was probably the 10 per cent 
grant. Will you not admit that those cuts by your government over 
the last four or five years, and the final straw, the 10 per cent 
grant, probably had a dramatic effect on the decisions of the city of 
Saskatoon? Will you not admit that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- The hon. member is reading a bunch of figures 
and making calculations and telling me these are the millions of 
dollars that were cut from the city of Saskatoon. I don’t always 
accept the figures that you read out like that, and the calculations 
that you make. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I believe it would be more important when it comes to the 
Minister of Urban Affairs who has all of the facts at his fingertips 
and has his staff there, that’s the time you address those grant 
figures. I don’t have them before me today. I’m not going to admit 
to anything at this point, because until I have the figures and have 
the department to defend those figures, I don’t believe that it’s my 
job to do so. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, you are reneging then on what you 
said yesterday, that you would bear responsibility for the decisions 
made by the Executive Council. I heard you say that yesterday. As 
a member of the Executive Council, you said, I bear that 
responsibility. 
 
What I’m saying to you is that if you isolate yourself from 
decisions that are made by the Executive Council, you’re either 
very naive of the whole procedure or the effect that those 
decisions of the Executive Council have on your department. 
 
What I’m saying to you is that if the Executive Council makes 
decisions to cut in all other areas for the city of Saskatoon, and 
they have to provide emergency services in other areas, what 
you’re saying to them is, to the city of Saskatoon: you make the 
decisions as to which items you  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1060 
 

will have to cut, because were not going to provide you sufficient 
funds, you know, to do all of them. So you set up the priority. 
 
And that’s exactly what they did. And then you come along and 
say, now were also going to cut the 10 per cent grant. And what 
I’m saying is, that was the last straw. And if the minister doesn’t 
want to accept responsibility for the Executive Council or defend 
his department, I suppose that’s his decision, and the people will 
have to make their decisions in the years to come. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave that now, and I want to go to 
another area. A number of studies, Mr. Minister have been done 
on acid rain. And there have been some concerns expressed for 
northern Saskatchewan and the affects that the tar sands are having 
on northern Saskatchewan, particularly on the lakes. I’m not so 
concerned about the forests because I think that they will probably 
survive, unless the sulphur nitrate contents increase dramatically. 
But I am concerned about the lakes, and I am concerned about the 
fish in the lakes. 
 
Could the minister tell me what studies his department has done, 
or what studies he had commissioned to do in northern 
Saskatchewan on the effects of the tar sands, the emission of acid 
rain -- and I know the term “acid rain” isn’t the appropriate term 
but everybody uses that. So I think the minister knows what I’m 
talking about. The effects of acid rain on northern Saskatchewan. 
Where are we at, at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised by my staff that we have been 
involved with LRTAP, which is ...LRTAP. It’s a long range 
transportation of air pollutants. It’s a group that involves the 
provinces of western Canada. We’ve worked with them in detailed 
studies. 
 
We’ve also had monitoring equipment throughout the area in the 
northern part of Saskatchewan that would be most susceptible to 
acid rain damage. The indications that our monitoring shows -- 
and we monitor air, rain, and snow -- and the monitoring at this 
point reveals that we have really have no problem as yet. 
 
I’m not saying that there couldn’t be a problem. There is the 
possibility of a problem, but at this time our testing shows that it 
hasn’t happened yet. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, could you answer 
for me: does Larry Lechner still work for your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Yes, he’s sitting right here behind me. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Okay, thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I want 
to refer to some of the studies that he himself did on acid rain, and 
maybe we can get some answers there. 
 
Are you saying that those are the only studies you did on northern 
Saskatchewan as far as acid rain is concerned? My understanding 
is that you have been involved in some other studies, concerning 
the Tar Sands particularly. Are there any other studies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that the department did a  

different kind of study, and it’s called the Sensitivity of 
Saskatchewan Surface Waters to Acidic Inputs, and this was done 
by Larry Lechner and Gary Howard. It was released in February. 
 
There was a lot of news at the time that it was released, and it was 
the news media, basically, that sort of connected this with the Tar 
Sands. But the study itself did not deal directly with the Tar Sands. 
It dealt with the area in the pre-Cambrian shield that would have 
been opposite the Tar Sands area, and it showed that they would 
be susceptible if the pollutants were allowed to come across. But 
at this time we’re not registering that. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, could the minister tell me what the 
pH .. On the pH scale, what were you measuring as far as the rain 
and the snow is concerned in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that the monitoring levels that 
they’re finding at this time run between 5 and 5.6. And 5.7 is 
considered neutral as far as acidic is concerned. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Since when is 5.7 considered as neutral? My 
understanding, and certainly I have to take the advice of your 
experts, but my understanding is that the scale runs from zero to 
14, and 7 is considered as the neutral. How can 5.7 be the neutral? 
In fact, there are some experts that say that if you are at t he 5.5 
level, you should really start being concerned. And I’m just 
asking, when did the experts make the decision that 5.7 is neutral? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I think that I have to correct my previous 
statement to the hon. member -- 5.7 is considered average for 
rainfall, and that’s considered neutral for rainfall; 7 is the neutral 
level. Sorry, I was off on that. I was talking to two people at the 
same time and I guess I drew the wrong conclusion. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- In the Lechner-Howard study, they indicate that I 
think thousands of lakes up north are not only in t he moderate 
sensitivity, but in the high sensitivity areas. 
 
Can the minister tell me, was there any indication in that study that 
we should be concerned about those lakes becoming dead lakes 
like we have presently in Ontario? Or are we ... I am told by some 
of the experts who -- fishermen up there -- that the fishing up north 
is adversely being affected by the acid rain coming from the Tar 
Sands. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that there is no affect on fishing 
from acid rain in northern Saskatchewan. There may be other 
things that are affecting fishing. I wouldn’t say that the fishing 
isn’t down. Maybe there’s been too many fishermen; a variety of 
things could affect that. But it would not be from acid rain because 
there is no indication in the lake levels as they’ve been measured, 
that it has changed. So you know, we have many people who go 
fishing and if you don’t catch fish you could blame it on acid rain, 
but you know there really is no fact to it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, let’s jump to the other side of  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1061 
 

the province. Have you done monitoring at all on the Hudson Bay 
smelting firm, or whatever you call it, there in Flin Flon? Has 
there any monitoring been done there and could you tell me what 
the pH there was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that the smelting is done actually 
in Manitoba, but we do do some of the monitoring on the 
Saskatchewan side. And there’s no indication in the rain that we’re 
having any problem, but in the snow it measured 4.8, which would 
show there was some change there. But it didn’t show in the rain. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- All right, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that answer. 
But 4,8 is getting, I think, enough to get a little concerned about it, 
particularly here in Saskatchewan and particularly since it’s 
northern Canada and the pre-Cambrian shield is very, very 
sensitive to any pollution. And I think we all know that ... not so 
much the forestry; I’m not talking about that. But I am talking 
about the pre-Cambrian shield and it is very sensitive. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister -- again, Mr. Lechner made a statement 
some time ago, and he’s quoted as saying, and I will read it so I 
make sure I do it right. It says: 
 

Mr. Lechner, director of the departments air pollution control 
branch stated that with the focus of federal research efforts in 
the province in eastern Canada, there is a danger that research 
expertise in the field of federal government will not be available 
to address western concerns. 

 
(1600) 
 
I have two questions. One, has the federal expertise not come to 
Saskatchewan or been available to Saskatchewan because of 
concerns of eastern Canada? And I know that pollution is much 
more severe in eastern Canada. Secondly, what were those 
concerns that Mr. Lechner was talking about, if they weren’t the 
concerns of acid rain in northern Saskatchewan? Thirdly, have you 
had discussions with the federal minister or the federal department 
on getting that expertise to look at problems here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- The concerns that were indicated in the report, 
I’m advised were made a meeting in 1980. And since that time the 
operation of that committee has expanded, and we do have some 
federal funding being made available for research here. And the 
federal committee has indeed put some of it’s expertise here in 
Saskatchewan. I don’t have the details right here at my fingertips 
of how much has been spent, but there is some. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one question, Mr. 
Minister. On Monday I requested information regarding the 
revenue realized from the transfer from SGI on the assessment to 
license plates that was transferred to your department. And I note 
on page 960 of Hansard that you had indicated that I would 
receive it yesterday. And I was simply asking, Mr. Minister, if you 
could provide me with that information today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I would like to send this across to the  

hon. member. The figure that’s indicated here is $835,000. But I 
want to advise you the revenue does not come to my department, 
it goes right into the general treasury of government. So we only 
use the amount of money we need. But that particular revenue 
goes to the general fund. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I was wondering, on 
the federal funding, whether you could provide me as to how 
much federal funding has been -- and it doesn’t have to be now -- 
how much federal funding has been provided over the last three or 
four years, and for what purposes and what studies that federal 
funding was spent on. Could you provide that for me? It doesn’t 
have to be today, as long as I get it during the sitting of this 
session. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- My staff say yes, they will get that information 
and we’ll provide it to you. I don’t know just how long it will take 
us but soon. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 
to just very briefly, I hope briefly, turn to the area of coal. And I 
know you don’t ... this doesn’t directly relate to your department, 
but the use of coal does and the pollution of coal. 
 
I am told -- and I may be wrong in this area and I hope that your 
members will correct me on it -- I believe that Saskatchewan coal 
burns fairly cleanly compared to coal that is imported from 
Ontario and Pennsylvania. In fact, it’s about eight times as clean, 
I’m told. 
 
Can the minister tell me if you have had any discussions at all with 
the Department of Energy in Saskatchewan in the area of trying to 
get the federal government and the Ontario government to import 
more coal from Saskatchewan from Saskatchewan, for two 
reasons: (1) so that the acid rain will be reduced in Canada, and 
consequently -- and I think we’re all concerned about the acid rain 
in Canada; and secondly, to provide much more employment for 
our people in the Bienfait and Estevan area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that we do have low-sulphur coal 
in the southern part of the province, but it takes very specialized 
equipment in power plants in order to burn that coal. We do ship 
coal at this time to the head of the lakes, and it’s burned in that 
power plant. Before they would use it in the main Ontario power 
plants they would have to make major modifications. 
 
There’s ongoing negotiation between Saskatchewan and Ontario 
to try and increase the amount of coal that we do ship. And if they 
decide to remodel those plants to bring them into a position where 
they could burn that coal, I’m sure it would be beneficial to them 
and beneficial too us in providing more export and more jobs. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I appreciate those comments. I do 
hope that you can use your influence here with the federal 
department to convince them that maybe grants should be made 
available to the Ontario people there in order to convert those 
plants. Because, you know, to Saskatchewan alone, and to -- well 
not Saskatchewan, but western Canada -- it could mean an 
increase of over $1 billion a year if we would no longer be 
importing coal  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1062 
 

from the United States and be bringing the coal from western 
Canada to eastern Canada. 
 
I know that there are transportation costs involved and they would 
have to be subsidized. But if it means thousands and thousands of 
jobs then, for Saskatchewan and Alberta and partly B.C., it may be 
worthwhile to look at that. I will pursue this in more detail with 
the Minister of Energy when her estimates come up, so I will leave 
that for now. 
 
I want to turn now, Mr. Minister, to reclamation of contaminated 
oil. My first question to you, sir, is: have you and the Department 
of Energy resolved the problem as to who is responsible in this 
particular area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I believe that that area falls under the 
Department of Energy, and so I guess we’ll have to refer you to 
the Minister of Energy when her estimates come. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, we do have a problem here. We have 
a problem here, Mr. Minister, because the Department of Energy 
doesn’t agree with you. And I know . . . This is why I asked before 
whether or not you had resolved that problem. Because a Mr. 
Gossard . . . I want to read part of a . . . This is in regards to the 
Kinder Brothers, as you probably well know. It says: 
 

“The Kinder Brothers, who established Star Valley in 
November, 1985, six miles northwest of Kisbey, say oil 
companies in the Weyburn-Estevan area are burning 
contaminated oil in pits without burning permits, (and that’s 
your department) and also claim those permits are too easy to 
get. 

 
However, Jerry Gossard, director of the petroleum development 
branch of the department of energy and mines, says, 
“regulations at this point are satisfactory.” 

 
Mr. Gossard said his department has nothing to do with burning 
permits, which are under the jurisdiction of the air pollution 
control branch of the department of the environment. 

 
However, (this name will sound familiar to you), Larry 
Lechner, director of the air pollution control branch, said at first 
that the permits are under the jurisdiction of the department of 
energy and mines. 

 
Later he said both departments are responsible for burning 
permits, but energy and mines handles most requests unless 
there is a problem. 

 
Now that’s why I had asked the question whether or not you’ve 
resolved the differences as to who is responsible for issuing those 
permits. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I think when tomorrow’s Hansard comes out, 
I would ask the member to read what he asked the first time. You 
were talking about the reclamation of contaminated oil and, you 
know, that’s a different subject. 
 
So the burning side of it, it’s under The Air Pollution  

Control Act. But we have an agreement with the Department of 
Energy and Mines that they police that, because they work with 
most of the issues within the oil field and it becomes a bit of a 
confusion. The only time that it comes back to us is if there is a 
major concern raised by anyone. Then we deal with it. But on the 
ongoing basis for small burns of diesel fuel or gas or whatever 
they have to burn off, or oils, that is handled by the Department of 
Energy, but it is through agreement with the Department of the 
Environment. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, who has to accept the ultimate 
responsibility? Some department has to. I am told that the 
disposition reports are not always issued or made. Now if that is 
true, then how can you, as the Department of the Environment, 
monitor the situation to make sure that the contaminated oil, for 
example, is not burned off unduly and polluting the air? Now am I 
correct on that, or is that a false impression that was left by the 
media? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I am advised that there are no written 
approvals given. But the Department of Energy and Mines have 
offices throughout the oil fields. And when there’s a company 
wishing to burn in a given area, they seek permission from that 
office. That office in turn advises the Department of Environment. 
You asked who’s ultimately responsible. It falls squarely in the 
Department of Environment, and I guess I’m responsible. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Isn’t there a concern on your part through that . . . I 
think the Department of Energy has a conflict of interest here, 
obviously. Therefore we’ve got to have, we must have the 
Department of the Environment fully informed as to when these 
burnings take place, and how much is burned. I can fully 
understand why the Department of Energy is not responsible for 
this, but how can you monitor it if no disposition reports are 
made? And secondly, how do you know that you are being 
informed every time that oil is being burned? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- The Department of Energy and the 
Department of Environment have been co-operative on this type 
of relationship for a long time, I think, ever since the Department 
of Environment was first formed. Two departments working 
closely together, I suppose we must trust one another to give 
accurate information back and forth. That, I think, is the least we 
could expect. But I believe if I were not working, likely the letters 
would fall on your desk. And we’d certainly be informed. 
 
So, you know, there are two ways of controlling. If our 
departments are not doing their job, then 
somebody is going to complain either to me or to someone else in 
the government -- in the government or the opposition. So we do 
have that kind of control. 
 
We would not have enough staff to monitor all over the province 
of Saskatchewan in every energy field. We just don’t have that 
kind of staff out there. The Department of Environment does have 
staff in some places, but not everywhere. Energy, of course, would 
have people involved where there are major oilfields. So it seems 
proper that they do the monitoring for us and report to us  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1063 
 

on a regular basis. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I can understand you 
don’t have people to go out to every oil pit that there is to see 
whether or not they are meeting your regulations. But if you at 
least had them . . . forced them to present you with a disposition 
report, you would then know when the burning had taken place, 
how much was burnt, and where it was being burnt. 
 
And I don’t ask you to have a person at every pit; that is asking too 
much. But certainly if that was done, then maybe your regulations 
would be lighter and wouldn’t be quite so lax, and we wouldn’t 
have the complaints that we have right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- We did get notification from the Department 
of Energy by telephone of the location, the approximate amount of 
the spill that occurred, and when the burn will occur. So it’s just a 
handwritten note that’s made, and it’s kept for a period of time. 
But after the burn is complete and the problem is taken care of, 
then it’s not maintained over a long period of time. It’s maintained 
on the short term but not on the long term. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I certainly have to 
take your word for that, that that is being done. But I think if I 
were the minister responsible for the Environment, I would want 
to have those reports in my possession just as long as I possibly 
could, so that when a critic on this side of the House says to you, 
look, I don’t believe that you had that report from the Department 
of Energy; you could say, Mr. Critic, here they are; which one did 
you want? If I were you, I would keep those disposition reports, 
and I would have them more than just handwritten. 
 
I think maybe the fear that is out there is unjust, but we have no 
way of proving that they are not just in what they are being critical 
of. So I make that suggestion that maybe, for at least a year or two, 
keep those on file and then if you wish to destroy them, all right, 
fine, destroy them. But I think for your own protection . . .  
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to have y our opinion on whether or not 
you think it is . . . as the Minister of the Environment -- I’m not 
asking you an individual, but I’m asking you as the Minister of the 
Environment -- whose responsibility it is to protect the 
environment of Saskatchewan. Where do you stand on the burning 
of contaminated oil as opposed to reclaiming it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Well,. It depends on what the contaminant is. I 
think if you look at the smoke and the fire that come out of most 
refineries, you realize that we have a burning going on in every 
refinery. When we speak of contaminated oil, in most cases on an 
oil field, the contaminated oil, in most cases on an oil field, the 
contaminant is earth. So when you burn the oil, the earth is left. So 
you know, we have still just basically the burning of oil. And I’m 
not saying that’s good. But the quantifies that we burn are not that 
significant. If there were a major spill of oil, the company would 
be most anxious to reclaim it. If it’s enough to be financially a 
viable reclamation, then they would reclaim it. But smaller 
quantities, I believe the burning process has worked satisfactorily 
up to this time. 

Now I know the complaint that you’ve had was from a company 
who has a reclaiming operation. And naturally they’re interested in 
business, and I can’t blame them for that. But on small quantities I 
would think that that reclamation is likely not thoroughly justified, 
dollars and cents wise, for the company. Even for the person 
who’s doing the reclaiming, the company that would do the 
reclaiming, the earth handling likely would not be that profitable 
an operation. 
 
So I think you have to look at it realistically on the quantities 
involved and what the contaminant is. When it comes to more 
serious types of contaminants, like PCBs (polychlorinated 
biphenyls) and so on, that we do have in oil at SaskPower, we go 
the other route and indeed have an operation to take the PCB 
contaminants out and to make the oil reusable. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I can appreciate your answer, but . . . 
I really don’t want to ask this question, but I’m going to anyway. 
Could you tell me, approximately, since . . . But you don’t keep 
records, so I don’t know if you can or not. Can you tell me 
approximately the amount of oil, contaminated oil, that was burnt 
last year? I didn’t think you could. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I couldn’t give the hon. member the gallonage 
that would have been burnt in the last year. The staff member that 
works in that area advises me that, on average, would it be in the 
neighbourhood of one barrel of oil that’s involved in any one burn. 
So it is small quantity. There’s be quite a bit of smoke, but it 
would last a short time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I just give notice that next year I will 
be asking that same question again. And I hope that you will be 
able to keep records of the amounts -- and I’m not asking a precise 
amount, obviously -- but of the amounts that are burnt of 
contaminated oil. And I hope in next year’s estimates, if you are 
still the minister, that you can provide those answers for me. 
 
Mr. Minister, I recognize that, as you said, that the Kinder 
Brothers are concerned about their business, and therefore they 
have a concern here. But I do think you also have some 
responsibility -- I mean your government. You gave them 
$100,000 from Sedco; I believe $100,000 was given from Sedco 
and that the former minister, the now member from Weyburn, is 
reported to have said that he would give them 100 per cent 
support. Now how can you justify the former member saying that, 
the former minister, that he would give them 100 per cent support 
and now I have you saying that, well, you can understand that they 
are a business but, you know, we have to do what we have to do in 
our area. 
 
But what I’m asking you: is there any way that you can satisfy 
your department by not polluting the atmosphere, and also not 
making a dishonest individual out of the former minister of 
Energy and Mines, by changing y our policy and maybe 
reclaiming more of the contaminated oil rather than burning it off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- As I indicated to the hon. member, I  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1064 
 

doubt if it would be a viable objective to reclaim small quantities 
of oil in the neighbourhood of one barrel. You know, to send a 
truck and a person or whatever it takes to go out and gather it up 
and then take it to a plant for reclaiming would be a very 
expensive process for that quantity of oil. Maybe when oil gets 
high-priced again they could do it. 
 
I don’t believe I have to support the former minister of Energy. I 
think he’s done a good job of any department he’s been in. He’s 
doing a good job of the department he’s in now, and so I think his 
record will stand on its own. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, there is one area that you and I will 
certainly have to disagree. He reined the Department of Energy 
and he ruined the Department of Agriculture and now he’s 
wrecked the Department of Education and that will be borne out. 
The Department of Education is borne out by many educators in 
this province. The sooner we get rid of him in Education, the 
happier I’ll be as an educator, and so will the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do want to . . .I’m not talking about the one barrel 
procedures. But the Kinder Brothers have been in this business for 
a number of years in the province of Alberta. I think they know 
their business and they know which spills are profitable and which 
are not. All I’m asking from you, and I will be asking the same 
thing from the Minister of Energy: is there any way in which you 
can change your policy to some extent to make sure that, if you 
can assist their operation, that we will do so? And that might mean 
that you’ve got to put some pressure on some of the oil companies, 
because it’s much easier for them to burn it, and it’s cheaper for 
them to burn it rather than having them reclaim the oil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I believe that the responsibility for directing 
business to any one reclamation company would fall with the oil 
company involved with the spill. There are a number of 
companies in the province who do that type of work. I think it 
would be wrong for my department or the Department of Energy 
to be the one that would direct business to any given firm. So it 
would be better if they were to seek the business from the oil 
companies. If they’re doing good work for them, they’ll likely 
achieve the increase in business that they’re looking for. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, that has not stopped your government 
from directing particular business to particular companies in this 
province without tendering or whatever. That’s not the point, Mr. 
Minister. The point is that any reclamation, any reclaiming 
business -- I’m not just simply saying the Kinder Brothers; in this 
particular case the Kinder Brothers, but any reclamation -- I think 
it’s preferred to reclaim the oil rather than to burn it. And I would 
think that as the Minister of Environment you would support that 
position. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have one further question in this area, and that is in 
regards to surface rights of farmers. And in meeting with surface 
rights people, they are very concerned of the pollution that’s 
taking place of their  

lands in the oilfields. Have you had any meetings with surface 
right individuals in correcting their concerns about the polluting of 
their farm lands by oil companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- We’ve had some meetings, but not extensive. I 
believe most of that has been handled by the Department of 
Energy and Mines. If the people are having a concern, I believe 
that they should register that concern with us and then we can take 
a look at it. But really we haven’t had a great public outcry on that 
subject. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I don’t think you will hear a public 
outcry, but when you do meet with surface rights people that’s one 
of the things they always have on their agenda, is the destruction 
of farm land beyond the area that is needed for the producing of 
the oil. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another area, and that’s asbestos, 
and that will be the last area that I want to deal with. Can you tell 
me, Mr. Minister, are you aware or can you tell me the number of 
buildings in Saskatchewan, have you done any investigation as to 
the number of buildings that still have asbestos in them -- that still 
contain asbestos? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that our department doesn’t have 
any registry of buildings or any court of the numbers of buildings 
that would have asbestos. 
 
We deal with the disposal of asbestos that is taken out of 
buildings, but really that would not fall under our department to 
have a registry that would keep track of the number of buildings 
that have the asbestos insulation. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I can appreciate that. I assumed that would come 
under the Department of Labour, possibly. It has been changed -- 
is it Labour, possibly? Well, all right. Let me . . . I will have to 
track that down as to which department we ask that question on. 
 
Okay, would you tell me, Mr. Minister, on the methods of 
removing asbestos, I know that . . .maybe I should backtrack just a 
bit. The former minister of Labour, the hon. Lorne McLaren, set 
up a committee on the . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. Order. I’ve asked members not to refer 
to other members by their name -- by their seat or position. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, this was not a slip of the tongue 
because how would I refer to a former minister of Labour? There 
are a number of them -- there are a number of them. The former 
minister of Labour -- which one? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The member from Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Well, all right, the present member from Yorkton. 
All right? My apology, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to identify which 
minister of Labour it was. Okay? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The former member from Yorkton is fair 
enough. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1065 
 

Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, I offer you my apologies. I didn’t 
mean to abuse the rules. 
 
All right, the former Minister of Labour, the present minister of 
Yorkton, set up a review committee to study asbestos. Could you 
tell me how many of those conclusions that were brought in in that 
study has your department implemented now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that that would still be under the 
department of Labour. The occupational health and safety division 
of Labour would still handle that subject. It hasn’t been transferred 
to us. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- All right. I can appreciate that. Mr. Minister, you do 
monitor the removal of asbestos, do you not? Does that come 
under your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- No. The monitoring of the actual removal 
would still be done under the occupational health and safety. The 
only area that we would get involved in is to be sure that the 
disposal of the product, the end product, is done properly. And we 
do give directions on what is required, how deep it needs to be 
buried in a landfill area, that sort of things. But we aren’t on sight 
to see that the removal is done properly. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you’re telling me then 
that if I want to have the information as far as asbestos is 
concerned, I need to ask those at the Department of Labour, safety 
and health committee. That would come under there. Is that 
correct? 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell me on the disposal of asbestos, could 
you give me the guide-lines? For example, what are the guide-
lines for the disposal, who enforces these guide-lines, and when 
and how is disposal done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Our department would supervise to be sure 
that it was handled properly if there are large quantities. We 
require it to be double-bagged in 6mL polyethylene bags, and that 
it must be removed to a landfill and covered to a depth of at least 
two feet. And it’s to be covered with a product that will not 
damage the bags in the process. I think we have an extra copy. I 
could send one across. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, am I also correct in saying then that 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and the removal of asbestos 
in school buildings and gymnasiums comes under the Department 
of Labour, and you have nothing to do in that regard, so any 
information I want, I can get estimates under the department of 
Labour. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Yes, I believe that would be correct. The only 
area we handle is the actual disposal site. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. That is all the questions 
that I have. I will now turn it over to my colleague from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Yes. Mr. Minister I want to go back to PCBs. 
And I want to thank you for sending some of the  

information over that I had earlier requested. In terms of the 
number of PCB spills that have happened in the last 12 months, 
you’ve indicated that 44 such spills have occurred between July 1, 
‘86 and July of ‘87. I’m wondering if you could give me the 
names of the companies or the municipalities that were involved 
in those spills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that that request would take a 
considerable amount of research to pick it out, but they would be 
willing to do it; but I don’t know if we could do it immediate. It 
would be done soon, though. 
 
Most of the spills that occur would likely be with Sask Power 
because they’re the largest user of PCB-contaminated oil. So you 
could expect that that would likely be the main cause at this time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Then am I to presume if most of the spills were 
created by Sask Power, that Sask Power is storing the material? 
And the other thing I’d like to ... if I could, Mr. Minister, I would 
like the names of those companies and municipalities at some 
stage in the next couple of weeks, that were involved in the PCB 
spills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Yes, my staff will provide that information as 
soon as we can. It will take some time to go back and pick it out of 
the records, but we will provide you with that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- But, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you’ve had 
any discussions with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and 
municipalities as to a time-table for the phasing out of PCB-filled 
equipment. Have you had those discussions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that through the Canadian 
Council of Resource and Environment Ministers that there has 
been ongoing discussions on the phase-out.. There is a time-frame, 
but it’s a long and sort of uncertain end to it. It’s as the 
transformers and other equipment that the power companies have 
used, as they come to the end of their useful life, then they are 
replaced. I don’t think that anyone really has a time frame they 
could put on that. Much of the equipment that uses PCB-
contaminated oil is very, very expensive equipment. Some of it is 
long life, some of it is short. As it’s replaced, it’s replaced with 
other equipment, but the time frame would be fairly long. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I noted in a document that you 
sent over that there had been a conference held between the 
federal Minister of Environment and the various provincial 
Ministers of the Environment. This meeting had taken place in 
May of 1985. One of the things that this document commits itself 
to is evaluating different options and timetables for the phase-out 
of remaining PCB-filled equipment. When you say you can’t put a 
timetable on it, I’m wondering why there would be a commitment 
to some sort of timetable when you’re now telling me that there 
can’t possibly be a commitment? 
 
Going back to my earlier question, I’m wondering what sort of 
discussions you’ve had with the Sask Power Corporation to talk 
about the phase-out of that equipment? 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1066 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: -- The meeting that you spoke of was the 
Canadian Council of Resource and Environment Ministers, and 
they meet on an ongoing basis once or more per year. The 
discussions they entered into indicated that there is need for a 
phase-out period. It’s an ongoing discussion, but they really have 
never arrived at a time when that final decision should be made, 
whether it should be the year 2000 or what year. 
 
I might tell the hon. member that I haven’t gone to my first 
meeting of that organization. The last one they had that would 
have dealt with something like this was during the election. I was 
not the Minister of the Environment at that time but I do 
anticipate, if time allows, to go this year. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I’m wondering what sort of 
resources the Department of the Environment has put in to 
providing the public with information on PCBs. That’s one 
question. 
 
The second question is: what sort of information have you 
provided for fire-fighters and other workers who might be in an 
emergency situation where they have to do deal with a PCB spill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- The development of the material that I sent 
across to you, the pamphlets and the larger booklet, was part of the 
funding that we provide to the Canadian Council of Environment 
and Resource Ministers. So those were developed under that 
format, and I believe our contribution in that year was in the 
$4,000 range. Now these brochures are available to the public ... 
that’s the main contribution that we make to advising people, but 
the Power Corporation itself is in the training program, I believe, 
make them very well aware of the need to be extremely careful in 
the handling of PCB-contaminated oil. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, what sort of procedures do fire 
departments undertake in order to handle a fire where PCB-
contaminated equipment mat be involved? I’d be interested in 
knowing that. And I’m wondering, in light of the fact that we do 
not have a list of temporary or temporary storage sites, how would 
the fire departments in this province know whether or not there 
was PCB-contaminated equipment stored in a particular facility. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’m advised that as I t relates to firemen, they 
are municipal employees, and it’s part of their training. There also, 
part of the training in most fire departments is the identification of 
dangerous goods storage sites. So in their training they would be 
given many of those locations. 
 
Now almost every place that you see a transformer is a possibility 
of a contamination of PCBs. So I would think that any time that 
firemen come across a fire, in almost every circumstance there 
would be a transformer of some kind. They would have to be 
extremely cautious about that subject. We don’t keep a list 
because it would be so extensive that it would be meaningless, I 
think. But if each city and each fire department in its training does 
that  

work, they probably covered it as well as could be expected at this 
time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, the Department of the 
Environment is responsible for PCBs, I understand. You have 
jurisdiction over the handling and storage and that sort of thing. 
Your department has undertaken an action plan with other federal 
. . . or with the federal minister and with the provincial ministers, 
and you tell me that firemen are municipal employees, and that’s 
correct; that somehow, someone has to get the list of storage sites 
and give it to them in their training. Who’s supposed to get that list 
— the municipality, the fire department — and where are they 
supposed to get the list from? Because they certainly don’t have 
jurisdiction over PCBs in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The statement that you make that we’re 
responsible for PCBs is not entirely right; it’s partially right. We 
assist in the disposal of contaminated oils, like moving them out of 
the province for burning or for reprocessing; like hiring a firm to 
do the reprocessing. We monitor the methods of handling, but 
we’re not directly responsible. PCBs are handled under the 
Dangerous Goods Act, which is a federal Act which we fully 
support. So in that respect we do have some responsibility. 
 
Now when you deal with the fire side of it, in cities like Saskatoon 
or Regina there are fire stations and fire districts that each station 
covers. And in the training that the firemen undertake when 
they’re hired and when they go into a district, they are given very 
careful training on the actual location of many of these areas 
where dangerous goods are stored. So in their work they, on an 
ongoing basis, monitor and study to find out where these things 
are, because it’s very important to them in their work. 
 
Our department has been very peripherally involved in training of 
firemen and people who work with fire. But it’s on a limited basis, 
and mostly the people that are involved are the rural fire 
departments, where they don’t have quite as sophisticated training 
programs as the large cities. But we are doing some of that work, 
and the program is ongoing. We hope to get better at it. It’s still 
fairly new. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, who’s responsible for the 
protection of the environment in this province, and therefore 
safeguards the people of this province from PCB contamination, 
as an example? Who is responsible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Department of Environment takes that 
responsibility , and we take it very seriously, but we cannot be all 
things to all people. People have to protect themselves up to a 
point . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the hon. member has a 
question, he might like to stand and ask it. I haven’t heard him 
asking any yet. 
 
We monitor, as closely as possible, the handling of PCB-
contaminated oils. The power corporation is also a government-
owned corporation which is responsible for its own actions. But if 
they are doing things with transformers that are beyond their 
jurisdiction, of course, we step in and make suggestions for doing 
it differently. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1067 
 

We inspect the sites where the goods are stored and see that the 
permanent storage sites are properly developed and properly cared 
for. So we take it very seriously. 
 
But for the hon. member to indicate to the House, and to me, that 
we’re responsible for every action of every individual, I think, is a 
little bit unrealistic. It would be most difficult to do. But we do 
take it very seriously, and we do the best that I think any 
department could expected to do under the circumstances. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, obviously you’re not responsible 
for the action of every individual in this province. However, I do 
think you’re responsible for the public safety of this province, and 
I do think that you do have some responsibility when it comes to 
the environment in this province and protecting the environment 
from PCB contamination. 
 
I also think you have some responsibility when we have 
emergency workers going into situations where they could 
endanger their lives, not only by fire but by the possibility of some 
sort of chemical contamination. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think my point in this is that we have a situation in 
Saskatchewan where we have a number of temporary storage sites 
around the province, which you can’t tell me where they’re 
located. We have a situation where we could have a fire, and you 
know what happens to PCBs when we have a fire -- and not at 
high temperatures; and you know what happens to the health and 
safety of those workers if we put workers in those kind of 
situations. So I’m wondering what sort of action plan you’re 
prepared to develop in order that the people of this province and, 
in particular, emergency workers in this province have access to 
information when they’re going into a dangerous situation? 
 
I’m interested in knowing what your action plan is, to not only 
protect the environment but also protect those emergency workers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- We have some responsibilities for the 
handling of dangerous goods. In the case of the actual workers, I 
guess the responsibility there would fall under the Department of 
Labour, and that particular part we would not have jurisdiction 
over. 
 
I believe our record stands very clear and very strong in 
Saskatchewan as it relates to accidents involving PCB-
contaminated oils. We haven’t had any serious accidents where 
people have had serious problems from PCBs. We have had some 
spills which have been collected and disposed of. 
 
Federal Pioneer had a major spill a number of years ago -- a very 
costly spill for Federal Pioneer, but it was our department that 
supervised the clean-up of that spill. And many, many tons of 
earth were removed and taken out of the area so that the area was 
clean again -- so that we can still live beside it without 
contamination. Any time there is a spill our department goes 
immediately to see that it is cleaned up properly. 
 
When you say that you don’t know where every little storage site 
is, almost every power pole in rural  

Saskatchewan over the years had a transformer with PCBs. You 
couldn’t begin to identify them all. It’s up to the company that 
owns the equipment to keep track of those items. And when a 
company like the Power Corporation is responsible, I think that 
they take their job very seriously. And they do a good job of it. 
 
So gradually we’re moving into a position where those 
transformers are being replaced -- sometimes because they’ve 
come to the end of their life, other times because there’s a larger 
transformer needed. And when one is removed and a new one is 
put up, they are not filled with PCB-contaminated oil. They were 
filled with other types of oils. 
 
So I think we’ve done a good job. And our department, I believe, 
is doing an excellent job of policing any time when there is a spill. 
So we’re quite confident that people can rest comfortable that their 
environment has been in good hands for a long period of time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, this report of the PCB Action Plan 
talks about improving co-ordination of existing emergency 
response capabilities and evaluating existing training programs 
related to spill response, as well as the handling and storage of 
PCBs. I’d be interested in knowing how your department, and 
how you, have responded to this particular recommendation of the 
ministers of Environment across this country. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I can advise the hon. member that we have a 
spill line that operates on a 24-hour basis, and that spill line is 
there to pick up any calls dealing with the spills of PCBs. Our staff 
have been trained to respond and what to do in the case of a spill, 
and they can respond on very short notice. We do have some 
regional offices around the province -- six regional offices that put 
some of our people in a position to respond to almost every corner 
of the province in a reasonably short period of time. And I think 
they’ve done a good job with that. They do respond quickly, and 
they’re trained to know what to do when they arrive at the site. 
 
So that’s the process that’s been put in place, and I think that’s 
exactly what was required from this action that was taken at the 
meeting of... 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. Being 5 o’clock the committee is 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed at 5 p.m. 
 
 


