


















































October 27, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 October 27, 1987 
 
 

3567 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, 
when we arose at 5, I asked you whether the superintendent who is 
supervising the administration of this Act was aware of the fact 
that First Investors had submitted a prospectus for filing. I was not 
asking you whether first the superintendent kept in touch with all 
of the prospectuses under The Securities Act which may have 
been submitted for filing. I was pointing out that there were three, 
and three only, companies registered under this Act. I asked you 
and I ask you now: was the superintendent aware of basic financial 
information about First Investors such as that they had submitted a 
prospectus for filing in several provinces? Was he aware of that 
fact or not aware of that fact? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I indicated to you before the supper break, 
Leader of the Opposition, that, no, he was not aware that they had 
filed preliminary prospectuses in some jurisdictions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 
will not attempt to find out what he was aware of during the 
course of the administration of the Act, of The Investment 
Contracts Act, which he and you were charged with seeing was 
proper. And I first ask what information you had then and what 
information you have now . . . Did all the investments made by 
First Investors — and Ill confine myself to First Investors; 
whatever I say could almost equally be said of Associated — did 
all of the investments comply with section 22 of The Investment 
Contracts Act, i.e. were they all in securities permitted under the 
Canadian and British Insurance Companies Act of Canada? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — To the Leader of the Opposition, section 
22 lists the various securities or the assets that can be secured. We 
relied on the primary jurisdiction, as did all other provinces rely on 
the primary jurisdiction, which in this case is Alberta. I think you 
recognize and you know exactly how extra-provincial 
corporations, financial corporations, are dealt with, that we rely on 
the primary jurisdiction to make sure that the requirements under 
the Act — Alberta's similar to outs, B.C.'s is similar to ours — that 
those regulations are in fact being upheld. And we relied on 
Alberta to do the auditing of the investments and the security that 
they held against those investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, have 
you since found out that this company was in compliance or not in 
compliance, or haven't you found out? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can indicate that the type of assets held 
by the company were in compliance with the requirement of the 
Act; however it was the dispute that  

arose between the external audit and the company as to the 
evaluation of those assets that brought this matter to a head. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So you're telling me that so far as you're 
concerned this could happen again, that another company could 
have the same package of assets and be fully in compliance with 
section 22. I hope you're not telling me that, but that's what you 
just told me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you just told me 
that the assets of this company, so far as you were aware, 
complied with the Act and that we're merely talking about 
valuation. And you're suggesting somehow that valuation isn't part 
of the Act, that the Canadian and British Insurance Companies Act 
permits any mortgage, however much in arrears it is. I sort of 
challenge that, but you're telling me that. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, I asked you whether the assets complied 
and you said, yes, they did as to form; the only issue was 
valuation. I say to you, Madam Minister, that valuation is part of 
the Canadian and British Insurance Companies Act, and if they 
don't have the value then they don't comply with that Act. You're 
telling me otherwise. I simply don't believe you. But I must go on 
because we can't be here all night. 
 
I want to ask you this, Madam Minister. Section 23 . . . I don't 
believe that you've complied with section 22. Section 23 says there 
cannot be dealings where any director of the company directly or 
indirectly had a pecuniary interest. Do you say that the dealings 
between First Investors and other members of the Principal Group 
violated that provision or did not violate that provision? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We weren't aware, Leader of the 
Opposition, of any self dealing amongst the principals involved. 
The question has arisen, however, since the bankruptcy of the two 
companies. The Code inquiry which is on right now will be 
establishing that very fact. We had in indication from the primary 
jurisdiction that the company was in violation with that particular 
section. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Madam Minister, I'm not asking whether 
you had an indication from anyone else, I'm asking whether you 
enforced this Act? And take it you are not able to say whether or 
not that section of the Act was violated, and that no subsequent 
investigation by you or your staff has indicated whether that 
provision of the Act was complied with. But I suggest to you, 
Madam Minister, that section 22 was not complied with and I 
think when the facts are in, as I suspect you have them now, 
section 23 was not complied with. 
 
Now let's move to section 25. Did you or your staff receive 
quarterly statements as provided for by the provisions of section 
25 or the Act which you were charged with enforcing? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would indicate that the compliance to 
this Act with regards to the two companies is the very same that it 
has been since these companies started business in the province of 
Saskatchewan, namely, that as an extra-provincially licensed 
company we, as you did, as other governments have, relied on the  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3568 
 
 

primary jurisdiction. And as far as we know, the company since 
1954 has complied with regulations. 
 
(1915) 
 
And we relied upon, as I say, as your government did when you 
were in power, as the Liberal government did when they were in 
power, relied on the primary incorporating jurisdiction to make 
sure that regulations were adhered to. I might say that this is a 
tragedy, a tragedy not only for investors who lost part of their 
savings and investments, but it's a tragedy that a company that has 
served its investors well over the course of the last 30 or so years 
really had to go into bankruptcy. It's a tragedy not only for the 
company but also for the investors. 
 
But you know and you know well, how extra-provincially licensed 
companies are handled. The Government of Saskatchewan has 
always relied upon the primary jurisdiction — Alberta — for the 
enforcement, the auditing of the assets, making sure that the assets 
listed had the value as stated. And I really can't say more than that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, in 
case you've forgotten the question, it was: were the quarterly 
statements filed? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — And as I answered you, it was an 
extra-provincially licensed company, and we assume that the 
quarterly statements were filed with the primary jurisdiction; we 
were given no indication that they were in violation with any of 
the requirements. Alberta's Act is almost word for word to the 
Saskatchewan Act; the B.C. Act is almost word for word to the 
Saskatchewan Act. And you know well that in the case of 
extra-provincially licensed institutions, governments always rely 
on the incorporating jurisdiction to maintain enforcement of the 
regulations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I don't 
want to get into an argument about what previous governments 
allegedly did because I simply flatly deny your allegations that 
people blithely relied upon foreign jurisdictions or Alberta 
jurisdictions with respect to The Securities Act; I flatly deny that. 
 
But coming back to this Act now in this year 1987, which you are 
charged with administering, I take it your answer is, you did not 
receive the quarterly statements. Now if I've got that wrong, tell 
me. But I have assumed that you did not receive the quarterly 
statements in compliance with section 25. If you have them on 
file, simply tell me; if you haven't, tell me that, and I'll go on to 
section 26. There aren't many sections left that you had to comply 
with and, so far, I don’t think you've hit many. 
 
Not later than 90 days after the expiration of its fiscal year, every 
licence issuer shall file with the superintendent a balance sheet and 
profit and loss statement . . . 
 
I ask you, Madam Minister: was that section complied with? Was 
it complied with for the 1985 year and if so, when was the 
financial statement filed? 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can inform the member than in 1978 
when The Investment Contracts Act came into play, audited 
financial statements were filed with the department from 1980 up 
until we had received their 1985 audited annual report. 
 
The 1986 audited annual report was not submitted because it was 
during this period that the dispute arose between the external 
auditor and the company. So we didn't get one for 1986. I believe 
they had sent an unsigned statement which was not acceptable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I take it that you got one for 1985. Is it 
the one which was dated May 9, 1986 from Deloitte Haskins & 
Sells, addressed to the shareholders of First Investors Corporation? 
Is it the one you got showing that the company was insolvent, and 
you still licensed it? Is this the financial statement you got which 
showed that the net worth of the company — not net worth, 
capital deficiency — as was clearly stated, was $4.1 million? Is 
this the financial statement you got early in 1986, and still 
registered the company? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Had you been in the House this afternoon 
your colleague has already asked that question. You, as a lawyer, 
are taking one sentence out of a full report. 
 
Now the 1985 audited statement, audited by Deloitte Haskins, 
indicate that they are in dispute as to the valuation put on by the 
company of certain properties. And they clearly state that, that in 
their opinion that those properties, the value of those properties 
was not a temporary aberration as claimed by the company, and 
they felt as auditors that that should be written down. 
 
However, if you read the whole statement, the statement also 
shows that offsetting loans by shareholders and other investments 
reported were undervalued. And there is no statement, there is no 
statement in that report that concludes that the companies were 
insolvent — no statements. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, that 
is simply and flatly not the case — simply and flatly not the case. 
Madam Minister, here is Deloitte Haskins & Sells. They have put 
their balance sheet here and the balance sheet shows capital 
deficiency, not assets but capital deficiency. There is no way, 
Madam Minister . . . no way, Madam Minister, that a company 
with a capital deficiency can be anything but insolvent, and is 
simply not true for you to say otherwise. And you can't find one 
accountant anywhere who will say that a company with a capital 
deficiency is not insolvent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — You say, Madam Minister, that there is 
an argument about valuation of the assets, and there is indeed. But 
the argument is whether this company is insolvent to the extent of 
$ million or $14 million. Madam Minister, this is what it is. I 
invite you to read the note. 
 
But Madam Minister, I leave that because that's a matter of public 
. . . or I was going to say it's a matter of public  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3569 
 
 

record. It is not a matter of public record. I want to raise the other 
issue, Madam Minister, and it's this. You had or should have had 
the records in your department that would have indicated to 
anybody who might have wanted to buy a certificate that this 
company was in good shape or was not in good shape. 
 
Is it not true, Madam Minister, that you denied, you and your staff 
denied the public and me and members of this caucus access to the 
financial statements filed with your department? Is that not true, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would indicate to you that the 
department had no requests for information on this particular . . . 
either company, for that matter, as to whether they were licensed 
in the province, whether they were solvent, whether they were 
insolvent, or whatever. 
 
Now you say that we denied you information. I find it rather 
strange that the information you requested came after the 
companies were put into bankruptcy, not before, and I think, too, 
as a lawyer you know full well that these were closely held 
companies, not public companies, therefore we are unable to give 
you that information. If it was a publicly held company, yes we 
could. A privately held company, no we can't. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Madam Minister, I don't accept that for 
30 seconds — not for 30 second that any company that files under 
The Investment Contracts Act, can keep its financial statements 
secret. I don't agree with that for 30 seconds . . . (inaudible 
interjection . . . All right, you be as sorry as you like, but you're not 
nearly as sorry as the thousands of people who lost money because 
you . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — . . . because you would not enforce this 
Act. You would not enforce section 22 and we've established that. 
You wouldn't enforce section 23 and we've established that. You 
are now telling me you didn't even get quarterly statements 
required by section 25. You tell e you didn't get the 26 statement 
in time, Madam Minister. And you freely admit that I asked for 
the financial statements and you declined to give them to me. I 
think you will freely admit that. 
 
(1930) 
 
I have it on paper so I would advise you not to deny it . . . 
(inaudible interjection . . . That's right. Let me ask you this. Would 
you give a list of the people who were registered to sell investment 
contracts under this Act, and are you saying that that was 
somehow privileged information? And do you deny that to the 
opposition and to lawyers who were acting on behalf of clients? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We do not provide lists of sales people. If 
you had asked whether a specific person was licensed, we could 
give you that information — whether he or she was duly licensed 
to conduct business in the province. But we do not provide lists 
either to the opposition, or to any organization for that matter, of 
people who are licensed under the department, under the  

various statutes of the department. We can give you their status, 
whether or not they are licensed, but not . . . We don't give out 
names. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 
would like you to agree to file all the financial information you 
had in your department with respect to First Investors. I believe 
the public are entitled to know what information you had gathered 
in as you were required to do pursuant to the Act. I think you will 
agree that it couldn't possibly do anybody any harm now since this 
company is in bankruptcy. 
 
Will you kindly file this information so that somebody in this 
House will have some idea of how you're performing duties 
pursuant to this Act? Is there any reason why you wouldn't do that, 
and can we expect it promptly? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I believe as a result of the court 
proceedings in Alberta, that all the financial information is now a 
matter of public record. I go back though, Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, that the treatment of this company is the same as it 
was under your administration, as it was under the Liberal 
administration, and as extra-provincially licensed companies are 
treated across the country. All jurisdictions depend upon the 
primary jurisdiction for the enforcement of regulations. 
 
Now when the Alberta regulator accepted the 1985 audited annual 
statement, we did too, and when the Alberta regulator accepted 
that 1985 audited statement, we assumed and B.C. assumed and 
the Maritimes assumed that the regulations thereto had been 
complied with. Now that is standard practice across the country, 
has been for ever and a day, and I'm sure will continue to do so. 
 
What you area saying is that each company should have their own 
external auditors come in, the primary jurisdiction come in, plus 
10 or 12 other jurisdictions come in and do an audit. That's exactly 
what you're saying. Now we will continue to rely on the primary 
jurisdiction for enforcement of regulations. 
 
It is unfortunate that this happened. We were given no advance 
notice, which is too bad. As I said before supper, I think an 
incident like this indicates the need for a sole regulator and not 10 
provinces and two territories. I think this points out the need for a 
national regulator to regulate across the country so they can know 
more or less what's going on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, 
obviously I failed to communicate the question, and I'm sorry. 
 
My question was: will you file in this House the financial 
statements which were filed with your department? I ask you 
again, will you file . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, 
the member for Souris-Cannington obviously doesn't understand 
the question, and he doesn't understand the thrust of it, and I would 
be . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You'd be very happy if I'd shut up, right? 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3570 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well he expresses it in a very cogent 
way. I couldn't improve upon it, so I will direct my attention to the 
member for Maple Creek, the minister, and ask her: will you file 
the financial statements that were filed with you? 
 
And that obviously has a twofold purpose: one, to see what the 
financial statements were — which may be able to be obtained 
from some other jurisdiction; I don't know — but also to find out 
what financial statements you received and ignored. 
 
Now my question is simple: will you file in this House the 
financial statements you received? They certainly couldn't possible 
hurt anybody, except perhaps you. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would indicate to the member that we 
said before supper that the last audited statement we got covered 
the year 1985. There was no 1986 statement filed because of the 
dispute with the external auditor and the company. All the 
financial statements are a matter of public record. The Code 
inquiry has them; the investor's committee has them; you have 
them — you're reading from them. That is the last financial 
statement that we had, was the 1985 one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Sorry, Mr. Chairman and Madam 
Minister. What I have is not the question I'm asking. I want to 
know what was on your file, not whether I got it from Alberta, but 
what was on your file as your staff year after year licensed this 
company.  
Now will you file the financial statements that were on your file so 
that we may know what information you had or did not have when 
you acted in a manner which caused thousands of Saskatchewan 
citizens to lose their life savings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I want to clarify something. Are you 
asking for the financial statements for the 35 years that this 
company was doing business in the province? You want the 
financial statements from each of those years? Or do you just want 
the latest, because the latest if the 1985 audited report which is a 
summary of 35 years of doing business in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I'd find 
it perfectly acceptable if she gave us, say the '83, '84, '85 annuals 
and quarterlies. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I'll send that information over to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 
now turn to section 30: 
 

The superintendent may at any time require any issues or 
salesman to submit for review any circulars, pamphlets, 
brochures, specimen contracts, application forms (etc.) used by 
the issuer or salesman . . . 

 
I ask you, Madam Minister, are you familiar with something 
called the Principal Group 31st Annual  

Review 1985 which I am reliably advised was used for soliciting 
sales in Saskatchewan? And I have no idea whether it was used in 
any other province. So I'm talking about what the superintendent 
in Saskatchewan did about this brochure. And I want to read a 
section from it, and this has been quoted to me by people who 
have lost money, saying they read it and relied on it. And I will 
read it — one provision — at page 16. 
 

The companies maintain with a Canadian chartered bank 
qualified assets in excess of 100 per cent of the cash surrender 
value of all certificates at all times. 

 
Now you are familiar with that representation. It's come up many 
times in the course of meetings and hearings; it was in this 
brochure. Your staff had the full right to call for a review of these 
brochures. Was it done? Did your staff detect this statement and is 
the statement true or anywhere near true? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The company filed with us the pro forma 
contracts, a specimen of the pro forma contracts, which clearly in 
bold print indicate that the investment contracts are not insured by 
Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
 
With regards to page 16, there again that is the very essence of the 
dispute that led to the insolvency of the two companies. According 
to the company . . . And they still argue today that 100 per cent of 
the assets were covered. It was the valuation of those assets that 
came into dispute. 
 
(1945) 
 
But as far as we know, the company was complying in setting 
aside assets to cover the contracts, and in early '86 it was the 
valuation of those assets that were disputed by the external auditor 
and supported by the independent auditor that the Alberta 
regulator sent in to evaluate the assets. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 
Minister, if you don't think that that is misleading for an average 
investor, to say that it maintains qualified assets in excess of 100 
per cent with a Canadian chartered bank, if you don't think that 
would mislead the average investor, then I think you believe 
they're very highly sophisticated. 
 
They believed that the money was in the bank' that's what they 
were led to believe, and it wasn't true. And when read with some 
of the other provisions of this brochure, it makes it clear that, at 
least, the reliance upon real estate investments was denied. 
 
Madam Minister, there is no point in us arguing this because in 
your judgement you say the Act does not apply in Saskatchewan. 
But, yes, it says that the superintendent should do this and he 
should do that; he should require compliance with section 20, but 
that doesn't count because we're relying upon Alberta. And 
propagating the myth, for example — and I can't recall what 
happened under The Investment Contracts Act; I never had the 
administration of that — but I can very much assure this House 
and the people of Saskatchewan  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3571 
 
 

that when it comes to The Securities Act, if a financial statement 
was required, it was filed in Saskatchewan; and we were not 
relying upon financial statements filed in Toronto or in Edmonton 
in order to comply with The Securities Act. That's a bizarre,, a 
bizarre position. 
 
I'm not suggesting for one moment that you should necessarily 
have sent your own auditors in. but to suggest that they should not 
have filed the financial statements with you, which the Act clearly 
required, strikes me as being a negligence on your part, 
particularly in the last several years when everybody who had their 
eyes open knew that financial organizations in western Canada 
were in difficulty. 
 
Madam Minister, you watched a trust company in Saskatchewan 
go down the chute because it had too much money in real estate. 
You watched any number of other financial agencies in Alberta 
get into difficulty because they had too much money in western 
real estate. And you said, it's no concern of mine; I don't even need 
. . . don't even need quarterly financial statements. I don't need 
annual financial statements in time. And if I get an annual 
financial statement which shows the company is insolvent, and the 
company says they don't agree with it, you don't feel that that's any 
grounds to cause you to do a little more investigating. And as a 
result of that attitude, hundreds, thousands of Saskatchewan 
people have lost their money, lost, in many cases, their life 
savings. 
 
And I say to you that did you did not have your staff comply with 
section 22,l and I don't believe with we, and certainly, from your 
words, not 25 o 26. And in so far as section 30 is concerned, you 
didn't trouble your head about that except for the form of the 
contract. And because of this totally lackadaisical view . . . totally 
lackadaisical view, hundreds and thousands of Saskatchewan 
people have lot their money. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, I am not saying that initially there is 
anything terribly wrong with relying upon the issuing jurisdiction 
in the case of Alberta. But at minimum you should have received 
financial statements regularly, and had somebody at least look at 
them, and certainly in the last several years when you knew that 
financial organizations in western Canada were in trouble you 
should have perused those financial statements with a good deal of 
care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Once you'd been through the Pioneer 
Trust fiasco, a fiasco caused exactly this way — exactly this way, 
or organization which represented its financial statements to be 
sound, but they were not sound because they've over valued their 
real estate — we have now got a dead ringer for that. 
 
Are you trying to tell this House you didn't know about Pioneer 
Trust, or are you trying to tell this House that even knowing about 
Pioneer Trust, and knowing how the people of Saskatchewan lost 
tens of millions on that, you still ignored it, you still didn't bother 
to look, you still relied totally on Alberta, without even a look? 
 
Madam Minister, I don't need to recount to you just how  

many people have suffered because you failed to exercise even 
minimum prudence, but I don't think there's any use us dragging 
this out. You didn't require financial statements; when they came, 
you didn't review them. And when you did review them, you 
preferred to take the opinion of the company against the opinion of 
the chartered accountants. The companies are broke, they're 
bankrupt; thousands of Saskatchewan have lost their money 
because of the negligent way in which you have discharged your 
duties or indeed failed to discharge your duties under this Act; 
And on your shoulders, Madam Minister, rests the loss of these 
thousands of people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Once, once you were aware, once you 
were aware, Madam Minister, of the events of Northland Bank 
and Canadian Commercial Bank and North West Trust and 
Fidelity Trust and on and on, you had a clear duty to see that this 
wasn't another of them — a clear duty, a duty which you did not 
discharge and which you try to say, oh well, that wasn't my 
problem. True, the Saskatchewan legislature had passed this Act; 
true, it said that I was to do all these things, but why should I, why 
should I do that? Why should I do that? And the answer was, it 
was no longer safe to rely upon the issuing jurisdiction. 
 
After all, there are only three of these companies. We're not 
talking about massive staff. A financial statement of one of these 
companies can be reviewed in half an hour or an hour. Questions 
could be lined up. You could send off to Alberta to get answers to 
the questions. It's a day's work to check this out. You didn't do it, 
and many, many hundreds of Saskatchewan people are paying for 
it. And, Madam Minister, this is a situation where — 
notwithstanding what the Minister of Finance says — I believe it 
will be shown that your government was grossly negligent. And 
when it is shown, when you're prepared to admit it, then your 
government should undertake to see that some or all of the loss 
suffered by these people is made up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — That's the hard fact. It is very clear that 
your negligence led to this — not their bad decisions, but yours — 
and under those circumstances it's clear to me at least that you 
should help them with the loss suffered by these people is made 
up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would indicate to the member that we 
take our responsibilities very seriously. Our audit section has gone 
from two auditors to 10 auditors. And those 10 auditors go out and 
audit approximately 250 provincially incorporated companies 
doing business in the province. 
 
Now we can not audit the 500 or so other companies who are 
incorporated in other jurisdictions and doing business in this 
province. But we take our responsibility very, very serious 
because other jurisdictions rely upon our capacity to audit the 250 
provincially incorporated companies. 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3572 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I've 
heard you say this . . . What's about this 250 incorporated 
companies? We're not talking about what companies are 
incorporated, we're talking about companies that sell their 
securities to the public. 
 
Now let's not confuse that with Joe's grocery. The issue is how 
many companies sell their securities to the public under The 
Investment Contracts Act. They're three. Under the Securities Act 
at any one time there are probably 50 — and I doubt that — 
except for ones which are listed on the stock exchange where you 
don't have to trouble your head about it. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, dealing with only three companies, three 
companies who are taking in what are essentially deposits, do you 
still maintain that you don't have the auditing capacity? None of 
them could have spared a day or two for these three companies 
who were taking in, to your full knowledge, tens and hundreds of 
thousands of dollars of the savings of Saskatchewan people each 
year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — There are approximately 250 firms in the 
province that we have responsibility to go and audit. We have 
eight loan companies, four trust companies, nine insurance 
companies, and 200 or more credit unions that we audit. And 
because we take that responsibility very seriously, we have 
increased the audit division from two auditors to 10 auditors. 
 
Now you can harp back to the fact that we didn't do this and we 
didn't do that. We have treated the two companies in the same 
manner as they have always been treated. Your administration 
relied on the Government of Alberta for the enforcement of 
regulations pertaining to the investment contracts — and so did 
we. And we continue. . . As I said, we have approximately 500 
companies doing business in the province that are incorporated in 
another jurisdiction and that are licensed as extra-provincial 
corporations doing business here. 
 
We rely on the regulators in Alberta. We rely on the regulators in 
Ontario. We rely on the regulators in British Columbia and 
Manitoba if that's where the primary incorporating jurisdiction is. 
We rely on those regulators in those other provinces to ensure that 
the proper steps are being taken, that regulations are being 
compiled with. We have done that, I suppose, since 1905 and we 
will continue to do so. 
 
I think it is extremely unfortunate that not once prior to the 
collapse — of which we had two days notice — did an investor 
come to us and say, look it, I wanted to buy this contract and the 
guy said, well don't worry, it's guaranteed. But good heavens, look 
at this form. It says here it's not guaranteed by CDIC (Canada 
Deposit Insurance Corporation) insurance. It is unfortunate people 
are very trusting. It is very unfortunate that they lost part of their 
savings, because they will be getting some back. Not as much as 
they would have hoped for, but as I said, Alberta being the 
primary incorporating jurisdiction, we relied on them. We will 
continue to rely on the primary jurisdiction. Those companies that 
are registered here, we will make sure that they are  

conforming to regulations as put forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, 
all I can say is that I do not accept that as an appropriate standard 
of conduct, when you had any number of warning signals that 
companies of this kind in western Canada were in trouble. If you 
didn't have any, you should have had it from Pioneer Trust. You 
still did nothing. 
 
What may have been done 30 years ago under very different 
circumstances, when no trust company and no investment contract 
company had ever gone broke in recent years, may be one thing. 
When you had clear knowledge that things were in difficulties 
with the financial companies in western Canada, and you did 
nothing, then the burden rests on your shoulders and not on 
anybody in Alberta. It was your responsibility to protect 
Saskatchewan people. You didn't do so, and on your shoulders 
must rest the burden. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, just very, very quick questions. I 
hope you can answer them very quickly. I want to turn to a 
company that you have primary responsibility over, and that was 
Pioneer Trust. 
 
Could you tell the Assembly, when was your department first 
alerted to the financial difficulties that Pioneer Trust was having, 
and who informed you so. 
 
Mrs. Duncan: — We had no jurisdiction over Pioneer Trust. 
Pioneer Trust was a federally incorporated trust company, and the 
federal Superintendent of Insurance did the auditing and whatever 
for Pioneer Trust. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, would you please answer the 
question for me When was your department, the Department of 
Consumer and Corporate Affairs, when were they first informed 
about the financial difficulties of Pioneer Trust, and by whom? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — In answer to your question, member from 
Saskatoon South, I believe — and this we'll have to confirm; we 
don't have that information here — but we believe that problems 
were first brought forward to the department when the member 
from Quill Lakes was the minister. But we will confirm that. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, if we have to, we will go 
through this in some length. I was hoping we could do it in 10 
minutes, but if that's the way you want to deal with it I'll refer you 
to a good friend of yours and good friend of the Deputy Premier, 
Will Klein. If we have to go through the whole article we'll go 
through it, and if it takes a couple of hours, we'll do it. 
 
It is very clearly indicated in that article, Madam Minister, that 
your department, the Department of Consumer and Corporate 
Affairs, was informed in July by the federal Department of 
Insurance and it was confirmed this morning in public accounts by 
the Finance officials. Is  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3573 
 
 

that not true, Madam Minister? 
 
An Hon. Member: — July of what . . . 
 
Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, in July of '83? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I believe that the federal Superintendent 
of Insurance was monitoring Pioneer Trust as early as 1980 or '81. 
Now . . . that's correct. We . . . you know . . . 
 
Because they were headquartered here in the province, the federal 
Superintendent of Insurance would advise this government, or the 
Government of Saskatchewan, on a confidential basis if they are 
monitoring any institution which is headquartered in 
Saskatchewan. Okay. But it's our understanding that the 
Government of Saskatchewan was informed as early as 1980 or 
'81 that they were monitoring Pioneer Trust. And then after that, I 
think we were . . . I know when I was minister, we would be 
alerted about every three months. They would sort of give us a 
little update on the status. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, you say that you were alerted. 
What were you alerted about? I mean you were alerted; now what 
were you alerted about? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We don't have that information with us. I 
mean, that is not under the year under review, what we are going 
in this budget. We will provide you with that information, the type 
of things that the federal Superintendent of Insurance informed us. 
But I don't want to give ;you specifics without having them in 
black and white. But I will get that to you., as to the first . . . when 
we first were notified — okay? —- and what we were notified 
about. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Were there none . . . The officials that are present 
here today, were none of those in your department in 1983, July of 
1983, and they are not aware of what the department was being 
alerted about? You used a term, that we were being alerted about 
Pioneer Trust. I didn't use the term, you did. My question to you 
simply was: when were you informed about the financial 
difficulties about Pioneer Trust By whom? 
 
I have already confirmed that it was done by the federal 
Department of Insurance. Okay. They informed you, and they 
informed you somewhere around July or just previous to that. You 
were informed about the financial difficulties about Pioneer Trust.  
 
Now, Madam Minister, I want to know now when you got that 
information, when your department got that information, who did 
they alert about the financial difficulties of Pioneer Trust. Who in 
government did they alert to that difficulty that Pioneer Trust was 
having? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — They would have alerted the 
Saskatchewan Superintendent of Insurance. And the 
Superintendent of Insurance from 1983 is not here, so I can't give 
you . . . These people weren't in that particular branch at that time 
so they don't have knowledge of what the federal Superintendent 
of Insurance informed the Superintendent of Insurance here about. 
The present Superintendent of Insurance was the Rentalsman in 
1983. 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — I just don't believe it. I just don't believe that you 
wouldn't expect that there would be some questions, either last 
year or this year, about Pioneer Trust. I wasn't in this House but 
I've read about it, and you people have gone through Pioneer 
Trust. Surely those people who are now in your department should 
have informed themselves about the happenings of Pioneer Trust. 
And all I'm asking you again, Madam Minister: when your 
department was informed, who did they alert in government? Who 
did they alert that Pioneer Trust was having some financial 
difficulties. Surely they can answer that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I've answered that. I said the federal 
Superintendent of Insurance alerted the Saskatchewan 
Superintendent of Insurance that they were monitoring Pioneer 
Trust. They were monitoring Pioneer Trust as early as 1980 and 
'91. I know when Mr. Sandberg was minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, he would inform us that they'd had a call. 
 
I know that once I became minister, if the federal Superintendent 
of Insurance phoned to say that they'd given Pioneer Trust a 
restricted licence, or they would only extend it for 90 days at a 
time, we were always informed on that. But that was about it. And 
they kept us informed, believe about, you know, every three 
months, whether they were going to extend the licence, whether 
they were going to put ore restrictions on them, and that type of 
thing.  
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, from what you are saying then, 
that the Premier and the Minister of Finance and all the Executive 
Council knew in . . . Madam Minister, you just said to me that Mr. 
Sandberg knew about it, you knew about it. Mr. Sandberg was part 
of Executive Council; you were part of the Executive Council. 
Don't tell me that you didn't alert the other cabinet colleagues 
about the difficulties that Pioneer Trust was having. 
 
So that you're telling me that the Executive Council knew about 
the financial difficulties with Pioneer Trust; because you said that 
their licence only extended a few days and that you were aware of 
it, that the federal Department of Insurance was monitoring it. Mr. 
Sandberg was aware of it, and I assume because of the minister of 
Finance involved, therefore the minister of Finance knew it. And 
yet you did absolutely nothing to prevent the roll-over of $4 
million which subsequently was lost. 
 
And yet you’re telling this House right now that in 1982 you were 
already aware that there were difficulties with Pioneer Trust; 
because you said that their licence only extended a few days and 
that you were aware of it, that the federal Department of Insurance 
was monitoring it. Mr. Sandberg was aware of it and I assume 
because the minister of Finance involved, therefore the minister of 
Finance knew it. And yet you did absolutely nothing to prevent the 
roll-over of $4 million which subsequently was lost.  
 
Madam Minister, you continue to show your incompetence this 
evening and I guess you've done it over a number of days in this 
House. Would you be just a little bit honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan and tell them who knew, and when did you know 
that the Pioneer  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3574 
 
 

Trust was in financial difficulties? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — You know . . . I don't know. I can't believe 
sometimes that you're a teacher because I said very clearly, as 
early as 1980 or 1981 the Superintendent of Insurance was 
informed that the federal Superintendent of Insurance was 
monitoring Pioneer Trust, was monitoring Pioneer Trust. Now I, 
as minister, would get an update and . . . You know, your attitude 
is the minute a company gets in trouble, go close them down. But 
as I understand it, the federal Superintendent of Insurance worked 
very closely with Pioneer Trust about 1980 until the eventual 
collapse or closure of Pioneer Trust, to get it back on its feet in a 
financially viable position. 
 
As to the specifics of what the superintendent was informed, I told 
you that the present Superintendent of Insurance was not there. I'm 
not going to hazard a guess as to what we were told. I want to give 
you the specific correct information, and I will provide that to you 
very quickly. Okay? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, my understanding is that there 
was a report given to your department by the federal Department 
of Insurance. Would you be prepared to . . . somewhere around 
July or previous to July of 1993. Would you be prepared to table 
that report in the House? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The only thing the department . . . We 
didn't receive a specific report. We received interim letters 
informing us of the negotiations that were going on between the 
federal Superintendent of Insurance, his auditors, and the trust 
company in question. I will have a look at those. I don't know 
about the confidentiality between the provincial regulator and the 
federal regulator, so I'd have to look at them first. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — When you do have a look, if they're not 
confidential would you table them in the House? Would you table 
them in the House? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — If it doesn't violate any rules of 
confidentiality between the two regulators, yes. I would be 
prepared. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only have one 
question and I don't think it should take long to answer. 
 
Madam Minister, in July of 1983 your department provided a 
report on the Pioneer Trust situation. It provided a report based on 
what was provided to the department by the federal Department of 
Insurance. Based on that report, the Premier undertook to meet 
with one Will Klein, the president, I believe that he was, of 
Pioneer Trust to discuss the problems of Pioneer Trust. Will you 
table that report of your department — it has nothing to do with 
confidentiality — in this Assembly so that we can know what your 
department knew which promoted the Premier to feel the need to 
meet with Mr. Klein. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — My department didn't prepare a  

report for the Premier. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. for the minister who gave it to the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, my department didn't prepare a report 
for any minister on the status of Pioneer Trust. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, I have a document here dated 
April 25, 1984, a confidential document sent to you from W. G. 
Johnson, the chairman of the Securities Commission. It's a 
discussion of the financial services industries, "The Way Ahead." 
And in this document he talks about the blurring of the barriers 
between the banks, the trust companies, the insurance companies, 
and the securities. And he has this to say in the document: 
 

Consumers are being encouraged to sort out their financial 
affairs and in so doing to arrange most of their borrowing and 
investment needs under one roof. The changes are coming so 
fast that the legislation will be slow to keep up. Officially, the 
deregulation of financial services now taking place in the . . . 
(United States) has barely begun in Canada. Experts are saying 
that the fact (that) we don't have deregulation is irrelevant 
because the financial services industry are doing it anyway. The 
blurring of boundaries in Canada has gained its own momentum 
and deregulation will follow after the fact. 

 
The document goes on to say: 
 

The process of deregulation should not degenerate into anarchy 
and a return to the monopolies of the 19th Century but it could 
be a means of transferring effective and efficient services onto 
the consumer. 

 
And in the conclusion, Mr. Johnson says to you: 
 

What is needed it not an advisory committee but a task 
orientated work force whose mandate is to ask and answer the 
relevant questions and as expeditiously as possible to put 
together recommendations for legislative and regulatory 
modifications in order to encourage the effective and efficient 
development of the financial services industry. 

 
In the covering letter, Mr. Johnson says: 
 

In the final paragraph I am suggesting that a rather intensive 
review be undertaken of the financial services industry. I have 
discussed that matter in other letters which I have written to 
you. Perhaps we could discuss this at your convenience. 

 
This is a topic that's . . . the topic of the regulation of financial 
services that's been going on in your department since 1984. I 
would like to know whether you did have discussions with Mr. 
Johnson and what you are doing now with his recommendations 
about moving quickly on more regulation of the industry. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would indicate to you that people  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3575 
 
 

from my department meet with other jurisdictions on a regular 
basis, in particular to look at the financial services sector. I think 
we all agree that there is a lot of dynamic changes taking place. 
 
It's also been discussed at several of the conferences that I have 
been. Provinces have put up proposals and they're being evaluated 
right now, the different proposals by different provinces, as to the 
regulation of the financial services sector. We don't have a firm 
legislative program in place yet, but I think that is the direction 
that we'll be moving. 
 
I said to your leader — I don't know if you were in the house at the 
time — I think there is a real need across the country to either 
harmonize all regulations or else have one regulatory body for the 
whole of the country. You find it's very difficult when you have 10 
set of rules and 10 sets of requirements, and we are trying, as all 
provincial bodies, to either move to harmonization of all our 
financial laws, or laws pertaining to financial services or financial 
institutions, or looking at the need of having one primary 
regulator. Okay? But we . . . As yet we don't have . . . We haven't 
done all the evaluation on the various proposals, but we are 
looking at bringing in some regulation in that area. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, the reason I wanted you to know 
that I had this document, and wanted to bring this to your 
attention, is because your government and you yourself have 
constantly promoted the idea of deregulation when you talk about 
the value of one network, having one national group, or one group 
having jurisdiction over a company as somehow better than what 
we have now. 
 
We obviously see, when the jurisdiction controlling Principal 
Trust was in Alberta, that we had no protection in Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan investors got hurt. You didn't follow our provincial 
regulations, and having regulations some place else didn't do us 
any good either. So we've got a situation here where your 
government promotes a policy of deregulation. Financial services 
industries are becoming more complex, more complicated, more 
blurred. The mandate is on the governments of the provinces and 
the Government of Canada to make sure that these are regulated 
and controlled properly in the market-place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And if you don't take this issue seriously from now 
on and start working — doing the work of your department — 
more people are going to be hurt in this province, I'm very much 
afraid. 
 
Now I have some other questions I wanted to ask you specifically 
in connection with the deregulation, because of the comments you 
made in Hansard in 1985, June 4th. You are praising — and this is 
again to show you what I'm talking about, my concern — the 
freedom of the market-place. You are praising education rather 
than legislation. You want to see the government: 
 

. . . be lean and efficient and effective and productive, and to 
this end we have worked very  

hard to reorganize and to streamline any of our operations. (And 
your) . . . move to a preventive approach, based on sound 
education and information programs, is certainly the most 
cost-effective way and provides long-term solutions to many 
problems. 

 
I've already pointed out how that information brochure on 
investments didn't give anybody much help because they said to 
consult your financial institutions and the financial institutions just 
led them down the garden path. 
 
But I want to question you about a couple of other examples of the 
kind of education work that your department has been spending its 
money on and you've been spending your time promoting, when 
you haven't been taking time to regulate the investment contract 
companies properly, and you haven't been doing other work. 
You've been putting more emphasis into education — into 
brochures like this that must have cost quite a lot of money, "The 
Marketplace; The Future." And people can pick this up at your 
resource centres. And this is what you want them to find out 
about. Are you ready for your future? Some questions to ask in the 
following quiz. Do you own a computer? Do you use a computer 
for household budgets, or filing, or for your work? Do you use a 
video cassette recorder? 
 
After people have answered these questions, it's supposed to 
indicate to them whether their readiness for the future., according 
to the following chart. If they answered 15 questions "yes," you're 
really there, living in the future, making use of the technology 
available. Isn't that wonderful. If you got 11 to 14 questions "yes," 
you're getting ready for a take-off into your future. In just a short 
time, and probably with just a little more money, you will really be 
there. 
 
When we talk about a little more money, we're talking about your 
government that's got people living on $123 a month for food, 
clothing, personal expenses, transportation, and bus. And this is 
what they pick up to help them. This is the consumers' education 
from the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
Let me give you another example — a media quiz. It came out in 
the Consumer Times, "Consumer Education for the Year 2000." 
What do you want people to know? 
 
And you've used a whole page to ask this quiz, things like this; it's 
a media quiz on television and radio stations. Who said this? "One 
of these days, Alice, pow, right in the kisser." The answer: the 
honeymooners. Isn't that great information for people who've got 
problems like where they're going to invest their money, to have 
you spending your money on this kind of thing. 
 
A total waste of money. Absolutely ridiculous. I was appalled 
when I went down to your resource centre and picked up this kind 
of stuff. Taxpayers' money is going out on this. It absolutely has 
noting to do with what kind of information that people need from 
your department. 
 
The Consumer Times for the summer of 1987 included in a 
two-page part of it a survey being done for the Canadian  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3576 
 
 

Automobile Association. Your government and your department 
is using taxpayers' money to do a survey for the Canadian 
Automobile Association. I would like to know why you have put 
money into doing a survey for a private company. The information 
here asks for things like what kind of vehicle people have, a 
description of their vehicle, the model of their car, what kind of 
transmission they have, what method of rust protection they use, 
how satisfied they are with the services that they're getting at their 
independent garages. 
 
It seems to me that this kind of information is the kind of 
information that could be used by a used car dealer or a gas 
station. But I don't know how it could be of use to the individual 
consumers. Can you explain why you're using the taxpayers' 
money to do a survey for a private company? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The Canadian Automobile Association is 
a non-profit organization, for the member's information. That's one 
way of increasing consumer awareness. The number one 
complaint that the department receives has to do with automobiles. 
 
Ms. Smart: — How much does this production of the Consumer 
Times cost you per year? How much of the budget is used for 
this? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I don't have the specific information on 
that. I've got the total of our printing costs. This particular 
publication, which goes to mailing lists of approximately 10,000, 
is printed by the Saskatchewan Government Printing Company. 
Okay? 
 
Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, I have standard questions that I'd 
like to get answered that other departments have been presented 
with. I don't want to take the time to ask them to you orally. Will 
you answer them if I send them over? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Sure. 
 
Ms. Smart: — All right. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a few 
questions that I would like to address to the minister tonight and, if 
I could, I would like to go back specifically to the Principal Trust 
matter. 
 
The minister and other ministers in the House have constantly 
said, in respect of this matter, that they were entitled to rely upon 
the word and the advice of the incorporating jurisdiction and that 
being, in this case, the province of Alberta. And that has been 
essentially the total line of defence in terms of what went wrong 
with these particular companies. 
 
Madam Minister, could I just confirm this point. When you say 
that you are entitled to rely upon the advice that may come from 
the incorporating jurisdiction, are you required to rely upon that 
advice, or are you able to use your own provincial jurisdiction in 
the matter? Is it a permissive kind of policy or a mandatory kind of 
policy? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — It's your standard practice across Canada 
to rely on the incorporating jurisdiction to see that those 
regulations are upheld. It's the standard practice and has been the 
standard practice since time began. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, the minister says it is the 
standard practice. But could I have a precise answer to the very 
specific point? 
 
While it may be the standard practice, there are occasions with 
respect to every practice where there are exceptions.; I want to 
know very clearly, in the case of this practice are you required to 
rely upon the incorporating jurisdiction, or is it just a matter of you 
being entitled to rely on that jurisdiction if you wish to rely upon 
that jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — It's not a requirement, it's just . . . As I 
said, it's standard practice that has evolved over many, many 
years. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Madam Minister, in respect of the whole series 
of events that has unfolded in connection with Principal Trust, as 
you look back on that series of events today is there nothing in that 
pattern of revelations, with respect to the two companies that ran 
into difficulty, that would cause you any alarm? As you look back 
on those events, are you quite sanguine and satisfied in the way 
that this whole matter unfolded? Is there nothing about that 
situation that with the benefit of hindsight you would now say 
should have sounded some alarm bells along the way? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well, I suppose hindsight is always 20/20. 
I think what this really highlights is what, I feel, is the need for a 
federal regulator rather than 10 jurisdictions and two territories 
having their own rules and whatever. 
 
I believe that there's a great need either to harmonize all laws 
pertaining to financial institutions across the country or to have 
one regulator — to oversee these type of functions. And that has 
been talked at at a number of meetings that I have been to with my 
federal and provincial colleagues. I think you understand the green 
paper that Barbara McDougall filed or tabled in Ottawa a number 
of years ago really indicates the dynamic change that has taken 
place in the whole area of financial services. And I think coupled 
with an incident such as this, plus with what's happened to a few 
of our western based financial institutions, I think it really points 
to the need to have one regulator. We have always maintained that 
there should be a central data bank where information is shared 
amongst jurisdictions. 
 
As you are aware, Saskatchewan only had two days notice of the 
impending cancellation of the licences in Alberta. And I find that, 
quite frankly, unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I would like to 
ask you a couple of things about the operations of the companies 
in question with respect to the Principal Trust affair in other parts 
of the country, which activities may or may not have come to the 
knowledge of the Government of Saskatchewan. And it's my  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3577 
 
 

understanding, according to information that I have received, and 
indeed the flow of questions in this House, that the companies 
attempted to acquire the authority to do business in other 
provinces such as the province of Ontario,, and they were not 
successful in obtaining the authority to conduct their business in 
other provinces. 
 
I would like to know, if the Saskatchewan government was aware 
of that, at what time did the Saskatchewan government become 
aware of the difficulties these companies were facing in terms of 
their ability to do business in the province of Ontario. What 
information came to the attention of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and was there anything in that information that 
would sound some alarm bells with respect to those companies in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We do know now that the company filed 
a preliminary prospectus with the Ontario Securities Commission, 
and the company withdrew that preliminary prospectus. They 
weren't refused the right to do business in the province, but I 
understand now that the Ontario Securities Commission had 
requested additional information, and at that point the company 
withdrew their preliminary prospectus. But we couldn't have been 
aware of that at the time. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Could you indicate, Madam Minister, when 
exactly that information would have come to the knowledge of the 
Government of Saskatchewan? Is it only in the last number of 
weeks, or would that have been some months ago, or a couple of 
years ago? When exactly did you learn that the companies in 
question here had not been successful in establishing themselves 
in Ontario, and the reasons why they were not so successful? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We found out after we had cancelled their 
licences to do business in the province. We found out in July. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Madam Minister, do I take it from your remarks 
this evening that you would now quite readily admit that the 
procedure being followed by the Government of Saskatchewan, 
while it may be "standard" practice, has obviously been a flawed 
procedure in respect to the Principal Trust companies, flawed 
obviously because many hundreds of Saskatchewan people have 
been put in some pretty severe financial jeopardy? 
 
I would take it from your comments tonight that while in a sense 
you defend the process, you none the less acknowledge the flaws 
and the defects in that process. And can the people of 
Saskatchewan be absolutely assured now after this event and the 
Pioneer Trust event of a few years ago, and the other failures of 
other financial institutions across western Canada, can the people 
of Saskatchewan now be absolutely assured that whatever process 
has been pursued in the past, with all of its obvious flaws and 
defects for which the people of Saskatchewan are now paying in a 
very dear manner, that that process will not be allowed by your 
government to fail yet again' that when a company is licensed to 
do business in Saskatchewan, that the Government of 
Saskatchewan not blindly rubber-stamping somebody else's word 
but exercising their own judgement and their  

own responsibility, licenses that company to do business in 
Saskatchewan and stands behind that company, not because 
somebody else said it was okay, but because the Government of 
Saskatchewan has in fact done its homework and satisfied itself in 
its own right that it's okay? 
 
Can the people of Saskatchewan have that absolute assurance that 
what has sadly happened in this case will not be allowed to happen 
again within this province? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well, I can't give you a commitment like 
that. I mean, 'd be hard pressed to say that there is never going to 
be a collapse of another company either here or wherever. 
 
I can tell you that there is a meeting of the western ministers being 
held November 16 to discuss this very issue, the need for 
harmonization or the need for more sharing of information or 
perhaps the need for a national regulator. 
 
But when I say that the standard practice has served this province 
very well over the past 40, 50, 60 years, and to say well, no, we're 
going to throw it out — I would be hesitant to throw anything out 
unless we have a better mechanism to replace it with. And at this 
point, we don't. But that's under discussion on November 16. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Madam Minister, you obviously cannot 
guarantee that no other company will ever again run into 
difficulty. No government could ever offer that guarantee. But I 
think what the people of Saskatchewan would be anxious to hear 
is that in so far as the Government of Saskatchewan has legislative 
and regulatory authority, that that authority is going to be 
exercised conscientiously and that we're not in future simply going 
to rubber-stamp a company's operations in Saskatchewan because 
some other jurisdiction somewhere else told us it was okay. I think 
that is the kind of assurance that the people of Saskatchewan 
would be anxious to receive, that we'll put the rubber stamp away, 
and that we will be a bit more cautious and a bit more prudent in 
exercising our own governmental responsibility here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, one other point I wish to raise with you, and it 
may well fit very nicely with the ministerial discussions that you 
have just referred to involving a number of Canadian provinces. 
The Premier of Alberta has stated publicly that if it is found in the 
investigation that is going on in the province of Alberta with 
respect to the Principal Trust affair that his government has in 
some way been negligent in the discharging of its responsibility, 
that his government will be prepared to offer some kind of 
reimbursement or compensation for those who have been injured 
by that — perhaps yet to be found, but perhaps may be found — 
negligent compensation on the part of the Government of Alberta. 
 
Will your government be taking the very strong stand that the 
Government of Alberta owes a duty in this matter beyond the 
borders of the province of Alberta? Will you make it clear to your 
counterparts in Alberta that if there is to be a compensation 
package forthcoming by that province that it must extend to those 
people who have  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3578 
 
 

been injured in Saskatchewan. 
 
(2045) 
 
And I refer you, Madam Minister, to some of your earlier answers 
tonight where you have commented — at least obliquely — upon 
some of the conduct of the regulatory agencies in the province of 
Alberta indicating that you found some of that conduct, I believe 
your word was "unacceptable." It seems to me that you and 
Saskatchewan have a very good case to insist that the province of 
Alberta discharge its obligations, and that those obligations do 
indeed extend beyond the boundaries of that one province 
especially to include the people who have been victimized in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The Minister of Finance has written a 
letter to his counterpart in Alberta requesting that very same thing, 
that if it's found . . . if they're found negligent, we would expect 
the depositor or investors in Saskatchewan would be reimbursed 
by the Government of Alberta — not only in Saskatchewan but 
the investors right across Canada would be reimbursed. We looked 
after the depositor of Pioneer Trust, and we'd expect that same 
courtesy for Saskatchewan people in this event.  
  
Mr. Goodale: — Madam Minister, I think you said that meeting 
you referred to, the ministerial meeting, was coming up on 
November 16. Could I have your assurance this evening that this 
particular mater of the obligations of the Government of Alberta 
will be specifically raised by you at that meeting to ensure that at 
every level within the Government of Alberta they understand the 
expectations of the Government of Saskatchewan with respect to 
reimbursement. 
 
And would you also make the point, Madam Minister, that 
reimbursement may well be appropriate and justified whether or 
not the Government of Alberta is technically found to be 
"negligent" in this matter, that as a matter of public policy — and I 
refer here to the conduct of the Saskatchewan government in 
relation to Pioneer — that as a matter of public policy, the 
Government of Alberta may well have a broader duty that is not 
triggered solely by a technical finding of negligence. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can give you the assurance that we will 
be following up on the Minister of Finance's letter and pursuing 
that option very vigorously. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 10 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Madam Minister, I wonder if you've 
got a mandate for the gaming commission yet. I know you've 
appointed the people, but I'd like to have the guide-lines that 
they're going to follow, if you could give me a copy of the 
mandate that they've been given from your department. And I also 
want to know — and you could tell me this now — whether 
they've been told specifically to pay attention to the 
recommendations in the bingo inquiry. 
 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Their mandate is covered by the lottery 
licensing provisions and they're meeting tomorrow — the first 
meeting of the whole board — and the bingo inquiry 
recommendations is one of their priorities to deal with them and 
make recommendations on how the recommendations can be 
implemented. I'll send you over that. 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Item 11 agreed to. 
 
Vote 4 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 

 
Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 4 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions on supplementary for '88, page 
5? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to 
thank my officials for their presence this afternoon and this 
evening. And I would like to thank the opposition for their 
straightforward questions and the expedient way in which we 
conducted the estimates of this department. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, I would also like to thank your 
officials for being here this afternoon and this evening, and wish 
them well in the work ahead to protect the consumers of this 
province. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Highways and Transportation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 16 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's my 
pleasure at this time to introduce my officials. To my immediate 
right is the deputy minister, Mr. Jack Sutherland; behind Mr. 
Sutherland is Mr. Myron Herasymuik, the executive director of 
operations division; directly behind me is Mr. Paul Fitzel, 
executive director of support services division; to Mr. 
Herasymuik's right is Mr. Bob Cocks, the director of operation 
services branch; and to my left is Bill McLaren, chairman of the 
Highway Traffic Board. 
 
In addition we have Jack Upshall, director of communications 
branch, and Mr. Bernie Churko, the director of the transportation 
systems branch, seated in the back of the Chamber to provide 
additional support. 
 
Mr. Chairman, at this time I would like to just recognize  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3579 
 
 

an honour that we bestowed upon my deputy minister late this 
afternoon. This afternoon our deputy minister, Jack Sutherland, 
was presented with the Lieutenant Governor's medal of the 
Institute of Public Administration of Canada. The Lieutenant 
Governor, Mr. Johnson, did make that presentation. I want you to 
know that Jack Sutherland has served with the department for 34 
years. He was certainly very deserving of this recognition and it 
was just a very, very pleasant event, Mr. Chairman. 
 
In attendance at the ceremony was a number of Mr. Sutherland's 
family — and seated in the gallery. I would like to recognize those 
individuals and especially Mr. Sutherland's father who is 95 years 
young who was in attendance at this afternoon's award 
presentation. 
 
So if the rest of the Chamber would join with me in welcoming 
these people to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, we too would like to congratulate the 
deputy minister on the award that he received today and welcome 
his family to the gallery here this evening. 
 
We on this side of the House would like to expedite these 
estimates as much as possible. There are some difficult questions 
that we would like to see answered. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Item 1 agreed. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And item 1 is not agreed yet. We need a few 
more minutes on that. We can't expedite it quite that quickly. And 
I'll try and make my remarks short and concise and I hope that the 
minister would comply in the same regard. 
 
I'd like to start off, Mr. Minister, by asking a few questions about 
road construction, condition of roads in northern Saskatchewan, 
and specifically, first off on Highway 102 and Highway 905, that 
the roads in northern Saskatchewan, like this, have been virtually 
overlooked by the Highways budget. Highway 102 and 905 
represent some 400 kilometres of coiling, hilly, gravelled road 
which have been a death-trap for many drivers. 
 
Over a seven-year period our figures indicate that there have been 
185 collisions on that stretch of road. There have been 19 
fatalities, were registered on the stretch of road. And again in 
1986, on Highway 102 there were some 33 accidents resulting in 
seven people being injured and one more fatality. 
 
In addition, the traffic volume on certain control sections of this 
road have increased substantially., For instance, on the control 
section 102-025 in 1984, the average annual daily traffic count 
was 425. In the 1986, this jumped to some 675, about a 60 per cent 
increase in the traffic over that road. In comparison, Highway 32, 
control section 03 had an average annual traffic figure of 485 and 
495 for 1984 and 1986 respectively — only a 2 per cent increase. 
This part of the road has received some resurfacing of 20.15 
kilometres, an estimated cost of $1.4 million. 
 
I'd ask the minister if this is reasonable, and whether or  

not you have given some consideration to this particular section of 
road in northern Saskatchewan. It may have some heavier traffic 
with further development in northern Saskatchewan. I'm 
wondering what your plans are for Highway 102 and 905 in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I think the hon. member for his question. 
He is quite right that the annual or daily vehicle traffic per day has 
increased significantly over the last few years. The work that we 
have done in the short term and the immediate past has been 
basically spot improvements. I will concede that this is one of the 
roads within Saskatchewan that could use an upgrading. The road 
does requires some upgrading and repair. 
 
What I would provide for the member is a list of the works that 
have been recently completed on the roads, the maintenance 
expenditures. And I would also give the member the commitment 
that within our annual review of all of the roads within 
Saskatchewan, that that particular stretch of road will receive 
consideration. 
 
I think it is interesting to note that with the developments in the 
North, with the industries that have been attracted and the growing 
economic diversity of the province of Saskatchewan, that these 
demands are becoming more and more every day. 
 
As well, you will know that tourism within Saskatchewan has 
expanded greatly in the past few years and this is placing a fair bit 
of burden on some of those roads in the North. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I appreciate that. I'm glad that there will be 
some consideration given to that road. The other road I want to 
refer to does not exist yet, but is on the other side of the province. 
For quite some tie people from the community of La Loche and 
from the La Loche Indian Band and people from the surrounding 
area have wanted a road from La Loche to Fort McMurray. 
 
I think there have been presentations made to you. Mr. Minister, 
about a proposed road, an all weather road, from La Loche to Fort 
McMurray. I'm wondering if the minister has taken into 
consideration the presentations that have been made to him, and 
what the current status of that proposed road is. Can we well, in 
fact, expect the department to have that road in their construction 
plans for next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'm advised, Mr. Chairman, that we have 
undertaken a fair degree of study with respect to the proposed road 
from La Loche to Fort McMurray. There has been an economic 
analysis done of the proposal. We have entered discussions with 
the province of Alberta with respect to the proposed road, and 
those discussions have been fairly lengthy, I will admit. 
 
I can tell you that in the near future we will be looking at a 
proposal to construct the road from La Loche to Black Point, 
which would be a start. We are in consultation with the New 
Careers Corporation, and there is a proposal that we are seriously 
looking at that may well, in fact, see construction on that part of 
the road from La Loche to  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3580 
 
 

Black Point to start in the near future. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Have there been preliminary surveys done on 
that stretch of road already? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'm advised that the department will be 
starting some preliminary field work as early as next week on the 
road. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I'm sorry, I didn't catch that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'm advised that as early as next week the 
department will be conducting some preliminary field work. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — One thing that I would ask the minister to keep 
in consideration when the work is being done on the road. There's 
a very old and historic trail there called the Methy Portage or the 
Methy Trail, and it was used in the early days and has a great deal 
of sentimental and historic value to the people that live in that 
area. I would ask the minister that you give consideration to that 
when there are preliminary surveys being done, and when the 
actual road construction commences that there is not destruction of 
that trail that does exist there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I thank you for that information, and you 
may rest assured that we will keep that information in mind when 
any studies or survey work is done. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Moving back over to the other side of the 
province in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, there's an issue 
at Cumberland House which people find important to themselves, 
and that is there is no bridge at Cumberland House. They still have 
to use the ferry across the water body to get into Cumberland 
House. 
 
I'm wondering what stage your department is at in terms of 
planning for a bridge to be constructed? I would think it would be 
similar to the bridge that's at Nipawin but would not be nearly so 
costly to construct because the grade levels are not as extreme as 
what they are at Nipawin. And I would like to ask the Minister if 
you have plans for bridge construction to replace the ferry at 
Cumberland House in the near future, preferably in the next 
construction year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Just for the hon. member's information, I 
do understand that SaskPower, in their dealings with the residents 
of Cumberland House, have a package before the which is 
currently under mediation. And I do understand that within that 
package there is a proposal for a bridge. I'm just not sure when that 
package will be accepted or rejected, but it is before a mediator 
right at this present tine. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Another question that I have, Mr. Minister, 
concerns a walkway on Muskoday bridge. 
 
On October 16, 1986, there was a letter from a member of 
Executive Council at that tie to Chief Everette Bear and the band 
council of Muskoday Reserve. He says in this letter that he is 
pleased to advise that: 
 

. . . due to my discussion with you and my  

conversations with Mr. Saxinger, who will represent a portion 
of your reserve, we'll be proceeding towards the construction of 
a walkway in relation to your bridge. This is to confirm that we 
have had engineering assessments done within the last year, and 
I will therefore be directing the necessary expenditure to 
finalize the engineering requirements in co-operation with 
yourself and the council. 

 
I'd like to know, Mr. Minister, whether or not the current 
administration, of who this member of the Executive Council no 
longer belongs, whether it's your intention to still proceed with a 
walkway for the Muskoday band members across that bridge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised that in past 
years there have been discussion respecting the proposed 
walkway. I do also understand that studies have been done. 
 
Respecting any commitments that have been mace, I was not privy 
or party to them, but I would certainly agree to review your 
correspondence and to direct my officials to bring forward all the 
information respecting this walkway and take a personal look at it 
myself. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I would hope you would do that. If you 
want a copy of the letter, you can certainly have a copy of the 
letter. It was constructed by Sid Dutchak that this would be 
constructed. It's a safety feature for the bridge. There has been a 
major accident on the bridge, and if someone was walking on it, 
they quite conceivably could have been seriously injured or a 
fatality could have occurred because there is not a walkway. 
 
The band certainly took the commitment during an election 
campaign from a member of cabinet — a member of Executive 
Council — that in fact they would receive their walkway. So I 
appreciate that you will consider this and we'll be sending you a 
copy of the letter in the very near future. 
 
The other question I have is concerning the department's assets, 
and whether or not you insure, take out general insurance on the 
department's assets. And if you do, who do you place that 
insurance with? Who is the underwriter of the insurance, and in 
what amount is your insurance on Highways assets, if you do in 
fact take out general insurance on them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'm advised that the general underwriter 
for the insurance is Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and the 
agent is Thompson Insurance Services in Naicam, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to move very 
briefly to one other policy area with respect to transportation in 
Saskatchewan, and that has to do with certain rail transportation 
matters which I'm sure are of concern and interest to the Minister 
of Highways and Transportation. 
 
I want to refer the minister very specifically to the deep concern 
that has been expressed very publicly and very loudly by the 
community of Melville with respect to the  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3581 
 
 

recent decision by CN rail to transfer a very large number of jobs 
out of that community to other locations in Canada, a decision that 
has been seriously and adversely affected that historic railway 
community. 
 
I know that the minister must share the concern of the people of 
Melville about this development. The minister must also know 
that the community is particularly agitated because the 
Saskatchewan representative on the CN board of directors does 
not seem to be prepared to communicate with the community, to 
respond to their representations. They have had the opportunity to 
communicate with other CN board members from other parts of 
the country, and there has been a flow of communication in that 
direction but for some strange reason the member of the CN board 
from the province of Saskatchewan seems unwilling or 
unprepared to communicate with that community to carry their 
case, to explain what is going on and indeed to lobby on their 
behalf. 
 
And I simply want to satisfy myself that: number one, the minister 
is acutely aware of this situation, both the concern in Melville with 
respect to the job losses, and secondly, their agitation about the 
failure of the CN board member from Saskatchewan to pay any 
particular attention to their concerns — and if I could have the 
minister's assurance on those two points, of his awareness of these 
matters. 
 
Would he also indicate in his response to me that he will 
personally undertake to make representations to the Canadian 
National Railways on behalf of Melville in their opposition to 
these jobs transfers that are going to hurt their community? And 
will he also personally take it upon himself to request — if he can't 
order, at least request — the member of the CN board representing 
Saskatchewan to respond to the inquiries that that CN board 
member has received from the city of Melville and other interested 
parties in that community? Will he request that that CN board 
member, in fact, travel to Melville to meet with the people who are 
concerned about these job losses and to take up their cause on their 
behalf and on behalf of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Certainly I am very aware of the situation in Melville. It certainly 
is very distressing to those in Melville to see this type of action 
take place. 
 
(2115) 
 
I want to at this time commend my seat-mate who is not with us 
this evening, but the Minister of Human Resources and Social 
Services, who is the sitting member for Melville. That particular 
member has done an excellent job of lobbying CN, of being out at 
virtually every meeting that there has been in his city on this 
subject, and has made very strong representation as a member for 
the constituency of Melville, Just two weeks ago there was a 
meeting in Melville. I directed my deputy minister to attend the 
meeting; the member for Melville, as well, was there. 
 
So I can tell you that we are very much aware of the problem. We 
have made our representations in a firm and  

strong manner, I might add. I have had correspondence with the 
minister in charge. I do know that the Premier of the province has 
taken a personal interest in the situation, and as well has made 
written representation to senior officials, and senior officials in 
both government and CN. 
 
With respect to a certain individual on the board of directors of 
CN, I am not aware that there is this very pressing problem with 
the individual. But I can commit to you that I will take notice of 
that. Certainly, if there appears to be a problem I would have no 
hesitation in writing or making a telephone call to the individual 
and expressing to him the problem that you have expressed here in 
the legislature. 
 
Other than that, I can simply tell you that we will continue to 
monitor the situation. You can rest assured that members on this 
side of the House, including the Premier, including myself, and 
including the member from Melville, are continuing to make 
strong representation on behalf of the citizens of Melville. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Just one final point, Mr. Minister. In respect of 
the CN board member from the province of Saskatchewan, I 
wonder in your pursuit of this matter if you could confirm that the 
individual in question is one Mr. Alf Bentley, who in another 
incarnation is also a fund raiser for the Progressive Conservative 
Party. 
 
Hopefully you could all get your heads together and sing from the 
same song sheet, and save Melville from the very serious 
economic predicament that it is facing because of the withdrawal 
of those jobs from that community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: —Well I once again would just reiterate that 
if this problem has surfaced in the legislature and if you, 
personally, have a problem with Mr. With and if there's others 
who feel the same way, I'll have no hesitation in making those 
representations known to him. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate your answer on the 
insurance that's placed for the Department of Highways. The one 
thing that you failed to give me was the dollar amount of the 
insurance coverage that's taken out. And if you have that handy, 
I'd appreciate it. If not, you could possibly send that over to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — If you're asking the limits of liability, the 
limits of liability are $200,000 for any single accident. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I'm also asking, Mr. Minister, what the amount 
of insurance is that you take out on physical assets in the event of 
loss or damage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I don't know that I have the information 
precisely that you're asking. The licensed vehicles that we operate 
are all self-insured, if you like, or they only have the basic plate 
insurance. Other than that there's the unlicensed equipment, the 
camp equipment, I would take it, and the motor scrapers and the 
things like that that do not carry licence plates. 
 
I take it you're wanting the value of that equipment that it is 
insured for, and I'm sorry I do not have that information, but I'm 
sure that we could get that for you. 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3582 
 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Does the department own buildings or physical 
structures which are required to have insurance or that you, in fact, 
take out insurance on, or are all of your buildings now supplied by 
the property management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Property management corporation. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, during the last provincial election, 
the member of parliament for The Battlefords-Meadow Lake, who 
assisted me in taking early retirement, made an announcement in 
The Battlefords that the Yellowhead highway, Highway 16 would, 
in fact, come in to part of the Trans-Canada Highway system, and 
it would be a federally, provincially cost shared route, and there 
would be participation from provinces and the federal government 
in terms of improvements, four-laning, bridge construction along 
that route. 
 
They announced that some $50 million would be spent in the four 
western provinces and they're asking for $50 million to be 
contributed from the provinces as well. And I would assume that 
the Department of Highways at this time has made the 
commitment for their share of the $50 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, we most certainly have. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Part of the construction there, some major works 
that need to take place, in fact the projects to be undertaken during 
this agreement between 1987 and 1990, there are a couple of 
underpasses: there's a CPR underpass near Lloydminster and a 
CNR underpass just east of Borden. And I'm wondering whether 
or not the Department of Highways has applied to the Canadian 
Transport Commission to, in fact, widen or to make changes to 
those underpasses as they exist now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I am advised that we have made 
application for the CPR underpass at Lloydminster and that is 
pending approval. We have made application and it has 
subsequently been approved for the CNR underpass at Borden. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Also for the work plan between the years 1987 
and 1990 it's stated that there be the replacement of six bridges at 
Dafoe, Maidstone, Springside, Wynyard, Foam Lake, and 
Yorkton, and the dollar amount that's been estimated for that 
particular expenditure is $1 million. And I find this a little bit 
astounding. Can the minister explain to me how you can build six 
bridges for $1 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Certainly you would be correct in stating 
that bridges for the most part are very, very expensive projects to 
undertake. These particular bridges that we speak of that were in 
the agreement are smaller, rural type bridges. 
 
I'll just give you an example: the one at Orcadia is 40 feet long by 
40 foot wide. It is a relatively small bridge, that what we would 
propose to do would b e to replace it with a culvert type of a 
structure and that cost would be in the  

neighbourhood of $160,000 for that bridge. So these are smaller, 
minor, rural type bridges that will, for the most part, be replaced 
by a culvert type of a structure. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I'm still anxious to see how you do all six 
for the million dollars, but we'll see how it turns out in future 
years. 
 
Another thing that concerns me about the Yellowhead highway, 
Highway 16, is at the junction of Highway 16 and what they refer 
to as Battleford Road. Battleford Road is actually the old No. 4 
highway. As you come across the old bridges you come in 
perpendicular to Highway 16. It's a very dangerous intersection 
and has been controversial for many years. I think that Eiling 
Kramer, who was Minister of Highways for several years, in fact 
ran into some controversy about putting his own stop sign up at 
the particular intersection. Since that time the traffic has increased 
by a substantial amount and community groups are concerned 
about the danger of the intersection. and I believe that the city of 
North Battleford, at least, has contacted you or your department to 
come up with some remedy to make this a safer intersection. 
 
And I suppose there are a couple of alternatives. One would be to 
install traffic lights with advanced warning flashers. But the 
preferred course of action to find a remedy, I would think, would 
be to cut down the grade of Highway 16 and bridge the gap with 
an overpass for Battleford Road. And of course, with that there 
would have to be access roads built to allow people travelling 
through the area to get off of Highway 16 and utilize the services 
that are quite concentrated at that intersection. And I'm wondering 
if the minister has considered, in consultation with his department, 
the possibility of cutting down the grade of Highway 16 at that 
particular point and putting an overpass there for Battleford Road 
so the residents can get back and forth from North Battleford to 
Battleford and vice versa. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Certainly I share the member's concern 
with respect to a less than safe intersection. I am advised that 
departmental officials are aware that improvements to that 
intersection would be desirable. With respect to your suggestion of 
an overpass, that is an alternative. I might add it is a very costly 
alternative. I wouldn't rule it out completely, but I will commit to 
the member that my officials will continue to look at the 
intersection. We are presently doing a study, as a matter of fact, to 
look at the various alternatives. 
 
I do know that the city of North Battleford has made 
representation requesting a meeting with myself. And although I 
have not been able to accommodate the in the last short while, I 
would endeavour to do so, and you may rest assured that we will 
take a very serious look at making whatever improvements we can 
to that intersection. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I'm pleased to know that you're going to be 
meeting with the city of North Battleford. I'm sure you would 
want me there at the same time, and if you'd inform me of the date 
of the meeting, I will make it a point of attending the meeting with 
you. 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3583 
 
 

Another thing that concerns me a bit is the increased traffic 
pending some rail lines being cut out in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I notice in a press clipping from September 16, 
1987 from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix that an Alberta individual 
wants to start a rail firm in Saskatchewan similar to one that he 
started in the province of Alberta. And I'm wondering whether this 
individual has made application, or do you have any knowledge of 
this through your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'm advised that the individual of whom 
you speak has not make any formal request or application to the 
department or to my office. I am aware that the individual has 
spoken with the MLA for Rosthern, I believe, and has discussed a 
proposal with hi. However, I myself have not had a look at it, nor 
has the individual made any formal request to the department. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Has your department, Mr. Minister, done any 
studies in regard to the varying flows of transportation within the 
province of Saskatchewan pending closure of various rail lines in 
the province, and the increased traffic over a number of roads, and 
whether or not it would be advantageous to in fact has a small 
railway company operating in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, in fact the department has done a 
great deal of work, as a matter of fact, with respect to rail line 
abandonments, and the effects on our roads in Saskatchewan, and 
some alternatives. 
 
I as minister have a deep concern about more and more rail lines 
being abandoned, and the impact, not only on farmers first and 
foremost, but certainly on our roads here in Saskatchewan. 
 
(2130) 
 
I am also advised that, I think it was two years ago, the department 
did a very thorough analysis and made representation to the 
McDonough inquiry or the McDonough commission, and that 
study that we completed is a public document. I would send one of 
those over to you. If we don't have any here tonight, I'll certainly 
put one in your mail box, and I think it will show that there's been 
a fair bit of effort put forth by this administration with respect to 
alternatives and rail line abandonments, and the whole subject. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I would appreciate getting a copy of that 
submission, Mr. Minister. And I will in fact look at it with some 
degree of interest. 
 
The department . . . And I would have to commend the 
department. It's looking at new techniques of road construction, 
and one of the things that I found surprising came to my attention 
through an article in the print media, was the fact that styrofoam is 
being used to counter road frost in the province of Saskatchewan. 
I'm wondering if there are other techniques, other fabrics, that the 
department utilize in road construction to counteract moisture 
problems, and frost, and heaving problems. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I'm advised that a fair bit of research 
and experimental activities have taken place.  

Not only has styrofoam been a textile or a product that we have 
experimented with, but I also understand that some form of a 
plastic mat has been used. I wouldn't want to go into much more 
detail; I may reveal my ignorance about some of these very 
technical items. But what I would do for the . member is extend an 
invitation for you to come to our research laboratory at any time 
you may desire, and I would be happy to direct some of the boys 
to take you around and show you some of the very new and very 
interesting concepts in road technology. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — In terms of plastic mats, is there a private 
company in the province of Saskatchewan or an individual who 
has a contract for providing those mats, sewing them together, and 
assembling them for the contractor to in fact put down on the 
road-bed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes. I'm advised that when we use these 
plastic mats that we order the material through Supply and 
Services and then the individual contractor — whatever private 
contractor has been the successful tendered on whatever contract 
you're speaking of — he in turn would hire individuals to sew the 
mat together. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Is there one specific contractor or . . . 
Contractor's the wrong word. Is there one specific company or 
individual in the province who has the contract to sew those mats 
together? And if so,, could you tell me who it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No, there is no one contractor that has the 
contact. Once again it would be up to the individual tendered or 
contractor to sub-contract if you like, to whoever he may find to 
do this job. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So each individual piece of road that requires 
such a process would be a separate contact. I see you nod your 
head in the affirmative. 
 
I'd like to deal with some individual sections of road now, 
specifically Highway No. 5, the highway from Humboldt to 
Saskatoon. It's been labelled as a deadly strip of highway by a 
group that's made representation to you. Indeed, in one section 
there have been 42 accidents involving 22 injured people and four 
deaths. In 1985, there were 47 accidents, 31 injuries, and one 
death on that stretch of road. 
 
The daily traffic has also increased substantially on most sections 
of that road. And given these facts, it is not reasonable that the 
Highway 5 rebuilding committee be honoured in their proposal 
that they put forth to you to have the shoulders widened and some 
reconstruction on that road, to in fact improve the safety. 
 
I'm wondering what work has been planned for the section of 
highway this year and, if none, will it be in the nest year's 
estimates, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'm certainly very familiar with that 
highway, and I can remember driving on that highway a number 
of times in my university days on my way to Saskatoon. I will 
certainly concede that it is a narrow highway that can be very 
dangerous. 
 
You speak of the accident rates, and certainly there has  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3584 
 
 

been a fair number of accidents on the highway. If you were to 
compare that to some other highways in Saskatchewan, there are 
others that would have an equal or higher accident rate, but I 
certainly do not argue that that road is a narrow road that should be 
looked at. I have had representation made to me by the Highway 
No. 5 rebuilding committee; I had a meeting with them a few 
months ago. I could also tell you that there was no work, no 
significant work undertaken in this current fiscal year. 
 
With respect to committing to you this evening for that highway to 
be on next year's program, I'm afraid that that would be premature. 
I could not make that commitment this evening to you; however, I 
will keep it in mind in our annual review of our priorities. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Another highway that you're very familiar with, 
Mr. Minister, is Highway 41. And I'm sure it's been an issue that's 
plagued you and given you some unrest for a number of months 
and maybe a few years.  
 
The final decision has finally been made, I understand, as to what 
route Highway 41 is going to take. And I understand that this 
highway runs through or adjacent to some property that's owned 
either by you or your family. And I'm wondering whether or not 
you absented yourself so that there was no conflict of interest, that 
you absented yourself from decisions in regard to Highway 41, or 
do you feel, Mr. Minister, that there is some conflict of interest 
because the route for Highway 41 now comes to a point where it 
does run adjacent to or through land owned by yourself or your 
family? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well I'd say to the hon. member that you 
certainly are correct, that that highway has caused me some grief, 
if you like. It was probably one of the most difficult decisions that 
I have had to make as minister. You are correct that one of the 
routes does run adjacent to some property that my father has an 
interest in and has had for a long, long time. 
 
I should advise the hon. member that we received a tremendous 
amount of representation on the particular routing of that highway. 
If you were to add the up I believe the figures would show that of 
the 1,600 names and letters and petitions and briefs and 
representations that were made to my office, 1,400 of those 
recommended that the highway go straight west from 3 and 6, 
which is adjacent to some property that my father has an interest 
in. 
 
I can tell you that the perception of conflict was something that . . . 
that frightened me. But I believe that the people in north-east 
Saskatchewan have been and will be the judge, and I have no 
problem with the decisions that has been made, and I do think the 
people throughout north-east Saskatchewan are very happy with 
that decision. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Can you tell us, on that particular road, is there 
specific criteria that the department used? Is it your 
recommendation or is it recommendation of the department? How 
did you determine that that's the route the road should actually 
take? Who made the decision, and what criteria were used in 
arriving at that decision, Mr. Minister? 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I should perhaps clarify the decision. 
Firstly, the decision has not officially been made. The 
recommendation of the Department of Highways and 
Transportation has been put forth to the Department of the 
Environment. Now that Department of Environment will be 
reviewing the decision and may confirm or reject it. I would 
suspect they will accept it, but technically the decision has not 
been made because it has to have a review process through the 
Department of the Environment. 
 
With respect to the Department of Highways and Transportation, 
an environmental impact assessment was done. We have a 
document that's probably that thick that has assessed it by every 
imaginable means. And road costs were taken into consideration, 
safety was taken into consideration, convenience of the travelling 
public was taken into consideration, and on and on. So it was a 
very thorough analysis done by the Department of Highways. I 
give a great deal of credit to the district engineer in Prince Albert 
district, Mr. Stu Armstrong, who together with some of his 
associates have done a tremendous pile of work on . . . work and 
study on this environmental impact assessment. So it was those 
gentlemen who put forth the recommendation. It was myself who 
accepted the recommendation and have forwarded that to the 
Minister of the Environment. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, another road, Highway 304. 
All the members of this Assembly who formerly came from 
Meadow Lake got together and decided unanimously that that's a 
goat's trail going through there, and I'm sure you've heard that 
from other members of this legislature. The road runs through, 
well actually Makwa and Morin Creek. Between the junction of 
High 4 into Loon Lake, the road is in terrible, terrible condition. 
 
(2145) 
 
And we would like to know, all those members that formerly 
came from Meadow Lake, in that area, whether or not you're 
going to do something about that road. It's in terrible, terrible 
shape; likely one of the worst in the province maybe outside of 
Highway 40 between Hafford and Blaine Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I thank the hon. member for that 
representation on Highway No. 304. I can tell you with a great 
deal of sincerity that the current member for Meadow Lake has 
been very, very forthright and very convincing in his arguments 
with respect to the upgrading of Highway No. 304. 
 
The member from Meadow lake, for whom I have a great deal of 
respect, as a matter of fact made representations to me some time 
ago and invited me to go up and physically inspect Highway No. 
304. It was my pleasure, it was my pleasure one afternoon to 
spend a good deal of time in meeting with the constituents from 
the Meadow Lake constituency. It was my pleasure to inspect the 
route. We had a nice coffee party and I can tell the member that 
we are giving very serious consideration to the complete 
upgrading of Highway No. 304. 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3585 
 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, Highway No. 368 runs between 
Melfort and St. Brieux — controversial issue. I notice in the 
construction plan there is some work proposed along that road and 
I'm wondering if you can tell me in the last two construction 
seasons what work has actually been done on Highway 368. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — You will take note of our 1986-87 project 
array document that Highway No. 368 was scheduled for a rebuild 
or an upgrade from south of the village of St. Brieux to Pathlow. 
That was a total of 19.8 kilometres. I have not been out to St. 
Brieux in the last short while, but I do understand through the 
grape-vine that that contract, a grading contract, is virtually 
complete at this time, or will be very shortly. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, moving off of specific roads for a 
minute, the Canadian Transport Commission held hearings in 
Regina some time ago, and there was a brief presented by the 
Saskatchewan Trucking Association. I'm wondering whether or 
not the minister has any intentions of implementing legislation to 
carry out any of the recommendations that were in the 
Saskatchewan Trucking Association brief to the Roads and 
Transportation Association of Canada. I should say that's who the 
brief was presented to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — With respect to the recommendation or the 
suggestions put forth by the Saskatchewan Trucking Association 
and the Canadian Trucking Association for that matter, those are 
currently under review. We, as a council of ministers — of 
highways ministers from across the country of Canada — met in 
Saskatoon just a few weeks ago at the RTAC (Roads and 
Transportation Association of Canada) conference and at that time 
the subject was discussed by ministers all across the country. I can 
tell you, however, that all of the recommendations . . . or the 
recommendations were not accepted at that tie. Quite frankly, 
some of the ministers needed to be briefed a little bit more on the 
subjects. They wanted a little more time to study it. So it would be 
premature for me to say whether or not these, those proposals as 
put forward by the Saskatchewan Trucking Association, will or 
will not be accepted. 
 
In February of 1988, the council of ministers from across Canada 
will be meeting again and at that time the subject will receive 
further discussion. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, going back to specific highways in 
Saskatchewan. Highway 11 between Saskatoon and Prince Albert, 
there has been some acquisition of land by the department along 
that route, but yet there is no construction plan for the road, or at 
least I didn't see anything in the proposed construction for this 
specific year. Can the minister tell me: is this normal that there's 
acquisition of land before there's actually any plan for a road being 
built along such a route? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, it is normal in some circumstances. 
Highway No. 11 is a very, very busy highway in Saskatchewan. I 
would think that it would have one of the very highest traffic 
counts of most highways in the province. If you look not too far 
down the road you will know that we're going to have to likely do 
some four-laning of that highway and I guess that will  

come at . . . whenever budget levels will permit. But when you 
look into the future and you know that you've got a busy highway, 
and there is likely to be four-laning of it in the not too distant 
future, you would then go to some of the residents that you know, 
that you know may well be expanding an operation. 
 
I would not want to see some farmer, for instance, put up a 
brand-new house, or a brand-new machine shed, or a brand-new 
cattle or livestock facility, if knowing full well you were going to 
likely do some four-laning or other words in the not too distant 
future. So yes, indeed, it is rather normal in those types of 
situations to go ahead and purchase property with the full 
knowledge that construction may not take place in a year or even 
two. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I understand that your depots and 
storage sheds and things like that now come through property 
management corporation, but prior to the property management 
corporation coming into place, the Department of Highways had a 
lease on a Highways shop at Rosetown with a local individual. 
 
Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, what the dollar value per year of 
that least is, or was, that was paid by the department to the 
individual, how long was the term of the lease, and who the actual 
individual was who owned the Highways shop at Rosetown. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I understand that the old Highway 
building in Rosetown was owned by the department. The new 
Highway building is owned by an individual or individuals or a 
corporation. I do not have with me the terms of the lease, or the 
names of the individual, or the length of the lease. I do understand 
though that property management corporation would have that 
information, and I would think that they would certainly share that 
with you. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Okay. Well we will bring that up with the 
property management corporation. I understand they're in 
estimates tomorrow. 
 
Going back to the sewing of the fabric for Highways projects 
where there's a problem with seepage, could the minister confirm 
that either an Andrew Robson or Robson Seeds Limited, a 
company I believe in Melfort, have or had a contract to sew the 
fabric to prevent seepage on a highway project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I'm certainly aware of that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You're confirming that in fact they do now have 
a contract to do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I believe so. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Item 1 agreed. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — No, item 1 is not agreed to quite yet, but we're 
getting through it very rapidly, I thought. And if the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you going to ask him about Highway 
21 in my riding? 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3586 
 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Well the member from Meadow Lake wants me 
to ask about more highways in his riding. I don't think I can do 
that this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of projects which seem to 
overlap each year. And when I look at the construction projects for 
the '86-87 year and you look at the projects for the '87-88 year, 
many, many seem to overlap. I'd like you to explain some of those 
for us this evening, because I certainly don't want the department 
or the minister to be taking credit for roads that are being done that 
aren't actually being done in the province. 
 
And first off, I'd like to look at the 1987-88 grading projects. 
You'll notice on Highway No. 1, there's 6.3 kilometres east to 4.9 
kilometres west of Gull Lake, a distance of 11.14 kilometres. And 
then in the '86-87, which was the previous year, on Highway No. 
1, east to west of Gull Lake, 10.78 kilometres, and that was for 
grading in both of those particular years. Does that mean that there 
were two separate sections of grading performed, or in fact that's 
the same work being set down in two different years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I would confirm to the member that 
. . . Well firstly, I should say that there are two separate contracts 
on that particular stretch of highway. However, it has been the 
practice and I would suspect always will be the practice of the 
Department of Highways and Transportation to schedule its 
contracts of its tenders throughout the year and some of the later 
contracts that are let naturally could not be fully complete in that 
fiscal year, so they are carried over into the next fiscal year and 
certainly it would appear that that particular road is on the list on 
two separate fiscal years. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — For the same section of road? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, it’s certainly the same section of 
road.  
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well the thing that concerns me is that it seems 
to be happening with a great deal of regularity, Mr. Minister. The 
same that I've just described to you applied, I'm sure to east of 
Robsart to east junction Highway 21. There's 23.5 kilometres in 
'87-88 grading, and you go to the '86-87 and there was 23.53 so I 
assume that's the same section of road. 
 
Highway 16, Marshall, east of, same thing applies there. Lone 
Rock access, same applies. Junction of Highway No. 3 to north of 
Meridian Bridge, I think the same thing applies. Highway 18 in 
the vicinity of Oungre, same thing applies. Zenon Park north 
access, Prelate to Leader, Lucky Lake to junction of Highway 342, 
Loreburn easterly, Big Sandy cut-off. Well and there's another 
one, the Big Sandy Lake cut-off. People are amazed at how slow 
the work is proceeding there, Mr. Minister. 
 
The same thing applies to Highway 334, Avonlea easterly; 
Highway 335, junction of Highway No. 23 westerly; Highway No. 
361, Alida westerly; Highway No. 368, south of St. Brieux to 
Pathlow. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well how many more? 
 

(2200) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well just wait. There's more. 
 
Then let's go to the surfacing. Highway No. 3 north junction to 
Highway No. 26, east of junction to Highway 21, is a repeat; 
Paradise Hill access road is a repeat; resurfacing from west of 
Canora to Buchanan is a repeat; Highway No. 13, east of Robsart 
to junction, east junction of Highway No. 21 is a repeat; 
resurfacing of four sections from Springside to Insinger — I think 
that's a repeat; Zenon Park north access road construction north of 
Spruce Lake to St. Walburg; the Cloan grid road northerly; east of 
Cabri. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, here's one that troubles me a great deal because I 
have to travel over it quite often, is Highway No. 40; resurfacing 
from Blaine Lake to Hafford was in last year and nothing was 
done. In fact, I was amazed that there were signs there, "Road 
under construction," for a period of time, but nothing was 
happening; there was no equipment around. The biggest 
construction that happened there was the extra help you had to hire 
to get people to go out and pound the red flags in the road. The 
road's in terrible condition. 
 
An Hon. Member: Where was that? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well between Hafford and Krydor, and Krydor 
to Blaine Lake. 
 
Highway 41 is a repeat; junction of No. 20 east of Wakaw; 
Highway No. 42, Lucky Lake to junction of Highway No. 342 is a 
repeat; Highway 55 from junction of 123 easterly appears to be a 
repeat, may not be; resurfacing from Smeaton to Foxford; north of 
Big River to south of junction to Highway No. 924; Avonlea 
easterly; Corinne westerly; junction of Highway No. 23 westerly, 
on Highway 335, repeat; Briercrest to junction of Highway No. 
39, and that's on Highway 339. 
 
I'm wondering if the minister can give a comparison, really, in the 
construction projects for '86-87, which are repeated in the '87-88 
construction projects? I don't think there's ever been a year when 
there's been more repeats. And if there has been a year when 
there's been more repeats of those construction projects, I'd like 
the minister to tell me when it was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins — For the hon. member's information this 
practice, if you like — and there's certainly nothing devious about 
the practice — but this type of practice has been going on for 20 
years, and I would be hard pressed to figure out a way in which 
you could avoid such a practice. 
 
Now the hon. member has asked when there was a higher 
carry-over, in fact was what you were asking — when there was a 
higher carry-over than there was last year? I can tell you that in the 
years gone by, in years prior to 1982 there were higher carry-overs 
or there were more repeats. 
 
Maybe just to clarify the situation for the hon. member, now I'll 
give you an example. If you look at Highway 16, Marshall to east 
of 11 on the '86-87 program,  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3587 
 
 

you looked at a 20 kilometre section. If you look on the next year, 
it's a 14.59 kilometres section. In fact what happened is there was 
two contracts and we were simply listing on the following year's 
project array the amount that was carried over and included in 
there if you like — a new contract that was let in the current fiscal 
year. So there's nothing devious about the practice; it's certainly 
something that has gone on for more than 20 years. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I'd like the minister to clarify for us some of the 
details regarding the road and transportation agreement between 
Weyerhaeuser (Canada Ltd.) and the province of Saskatchewan. I 
believe your deputy minister has been quoted as saying the 
department in 1987-88 will spend $6 million in capital 
expenditures on northern forestry roads for Weyerhaeuser. 
 
The information supplied by your office, Mr. Minister, seemed to 
indicate that the amount agreed to was $1,840,000. Now which is 
the correct figure? And if I'm wrong in quoting the deputy 
minister, I apologize for that, but I believe the quote was from the 
deputy minister was about 6 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I apologize to the member if there was 
confusion between information you received from my office and 
information you received from the deputy minister. I can tell you 
that with respect to capital amounts, $6 million would be a very 
good approximation. It would be slightly less than that figure, but 
in the neighbourhood of $6 million. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well people in the province, Mr. Minister, aren't 
very happy seeing $6 million of their tax money go into roads for 
Weyerhaeuser, which I think in my interpretation of the agreement 
are all exclusively for Weyerhaeuser and the companies associated 
with them for their use, when roads like Highway No. 40, 
Highway No. 304, and highways like that continue to deteriorate 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Irregardless of what the figure is, I'm happy that you confirmed it 
would be around the $6 million mark. Who's doing the work? Is 
Weyerhaeuser responsible for letting the contracts? Is 
Weyerhaeuser doing the work themselves through a construction 
arm, or does the Department of Highways have some involvement 
in the construction of those roads, or are you paying the tab for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — In response to the hon. member's question 
then, I should firstly let you know that not all of the improvements 
are just simply and solely for the benefit of Weyerhaeuser 
corporation. I'd give you a good example. Within the city of Prince 
Albert you do have a $2 million interchange at the connecting of 
Highway No. 55 and Highway No. 3, and I think it would be fair 
to recognize that that interchange was a safety hazard, if you like, 
and that that will certainly benefit more than the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation. 
 
With respect to the other works undertaken, the maintenance 
activities have been undertaken by the Weyerhaeuser corporation 
themselves. Other projects such as the upgrading of the Shell 
River bridge, naturally, would be undertaken by the department 
themselves. 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, what I mean about the closed 
access to the roads. If I or any other Saskatchewan resident wants 
to travel over the actual roads that are being constructed for 
Weyerhaeuser's usage, can we just get in our automobile and drive 
over those roads, or do we not need permission of Weyerhaeuser 
to, in fact, utilize those roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No. I do not believe that there are any 
roads that are closed to the public, if you like. I am advised by the 
minister of parks and renewable resources that in the past there 
were some rules or some restrictions with respect to stopping 
some of the passenger traffic and recording and documenting their 
names and addresses and points of destination. I believe that this is 
still in effect, and quite frankly, nothing has really changed. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I'd like to talk somewhat about the 
. . . a little summary of the expenditures in the Highways 
department. When one includes the '86-87 supplementary 
estimates, the total expenditure for Highways and Transportation 
in 1986-87 comes to $224,317,870. And in the '87-88, the total 
budget is down by some $3.4 million less if you just look at the 
figures that are there. In terms of the individual components, this 
translates into an actual $8.6 million decrease in capital 
construction budget and a $1.4 million decline in the highway 
maintenance budget between '86-87 and '87-88. 
 
However there are other expenditure items in '87-88 that must be 
taken into consideration — first off are the payments to the 
property management corporation. This is an $8.23 million 
payment, and it's really a bookkeeping procedure, something that 
has never had to be paid before by the Department of Highways 
and Transportation, and it's money that normally would be spent 
on road construction and road maintenance in the province. So the 
payments out of the '87-88 Highways budget for capital 
construction and maintenance of roads for Weyerhaeuser — again 
this 6 million or so is going into roads not normally used by the 
public in the province, whether or not Weyerhaeuser has he right 
to restrict access or not — and when both of these expenditures are 
removed from the funds that could go into roads and construction 
and maintenance in the province, the Highways budget in effect 
has a total drop in expenditures from 1986-87 to this current fiscal 
year of some $18.9 million. 
 
Does the minister acknowledge that, the things I've mentioned, the 
money to Weyerhaeuser, the money to property management 
corporation? A detailed analysis of the budget is that there's $18.9 
million less in this year's Highways budget than there was in the 
previous fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I don't think I'd be ready, at this time 
anyway, to concede that that is the case. The payments to the 
property management corporation certainly are new; certainly it's 
something that has not taken place before, but I can tell you that 
those payments to the property management corporation have not 
had any affect on our capital budget. And quite frankly, I don't 
think that it would be fair or reasonable to say that the  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3588 
 
 

Highway budget has been cut by $18 million, because I can tell 
you, our Highway budget, with respect to capital expenditures, is 
very similar to what it was last year. Our Highway budget, with 
respect to maintenance, is within dollars, or within just a few 
dollars, a few hundred dollars, of what it was last year. So I would 
not be willing to concede that $8 million from the property 
management corporation in any way has had an effect upon our 
capital budget. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I maintain, Mr. Minister, that it does, that 
there is a reduction in the Highways budget. In fact, our analysis 
of the estimates for the Department of Highways is that the exact 
figure is $18,984,870 less than what there was in the previous 
fiscal year. And that doesn't take into consideration, Mr. Minister, 
the few million dollars that used to be spent in northern 
Saskatchewan through the department of northern Saskatchewan 
when they constructed their own roads in the North. And I think 
that it's a little wonder, when there are reductions like that in the 
actual operating budget for construction and for maintenance, that 
the roads in the province are deteriorating. 
 
And no matter what you say in the legislature here tonight, I don't 
think there's any way you can convince people in this province 
who have to travel over highway system that the roads are in good 
condition. I think it's generally accepted by many, many people — 
in fact, anyone who has to travel over the roads — is that our 
roads are deteriorating, and unless there's extra funding put into 
our highway system for construction and for maintenance, it's 
going to be very, very costly in the long term, Mr. Minister. 
 
(2215) 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, whether or not there is some kind of 
priority system that you have for establishing roads. It appears to 
me that there isn't a basis for doing that, and I would think that you 
must use traffic count. Like, if traffic count is a factor, are you 
actually putting money into roads that have increased traffic 
counts, or have you got some other way of priorizing the roads 
that you maintain and the roads that you construct within the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — There are a number of factors that we take 
into consideration when we are priorizing roads to be rebuilt or 
resurfaced here in Saskatchewan. I certainly will admit to you that 
traffic counts are one of the key players, or one of the key factors 
in our considerations. They do play an important role in 
determining where our priorities should lie. I can also tell you 
though that traffic patterns are important in such things as growth 
in industries in various parts of Saskatchewan, whether it be 
mining or whether it be manufacturing or whether it be in the 
tourism industry. Those types of factors certainly do as well come 
into consideration. 
 
In addition to that, there are some very objective measures that we 
study, and that is in particular the riding quality of our highways. 
We have a machine that travels up and down the roads that 
measures, in a very objective manner, what the riding quality or 
condition of that  

highway is, and we do certainly take those types of things into 
consideration as well. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Could I borrow that for a weekend? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, the member from Meadow Lake has 
requested that we fetch that machine up to his constituency, and I 
would certainly make that commitment to him. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I thought when you're talking about riding 
quality, I thought you meant constituency and that would have 
some bearing on the riding quality, because, for instance, if you 
look at a breakdown of the ridings as to who holds the ridings and 
who doesn't, it's quite amazing, for example, constituency of 
Turtleford . . . Turtleford, this is '87-88, $3.3 million in that 
constituency; Kelsey-Tisdale, that side of the House, $4.3 million 
from Highways; Cut Knife-Lloyd, 3.6 million; Canora, 2.4 
million; Thunder Creek, 2.3 million; Bengough-Milestone, 3.7 
million; Athabasca, nothing; Cumberland, 375,000; P.A.-Duck 
Lake, nothing; Wilkie, nothing. I don't know what happened to the 
member from Wilkie; I don't know what he's done, but there 
seems to be nothing in that riding. Quill Lakes on this side, 
nothing, Assiniboia-Gravelbourg — the poor member from 
independence — Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, nothing. 
 
So it seems to me that there are other criteria that are being used in 
an increasing way to determine which roads are going to be 
serviced and which roads aren't going to get service in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I could go through the entire 
breakdown, constituency by constituency, Mr. Minister, and I 
think that traffic count and those factors of rideability or the ride 
factor certainly don't play the role that they should play in 
determining what roads should be improved in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, everyone who drives Saskatchewan's highways and 
roads is aware of their general disrepair, and since the current 
administration took office, Saskatchewan drivers have witnessed a 
steady decline in our road system. First there was the auctioning 
off of some $40 million of the province's highway equipment to 
the private sector for a bargain basement price of somewhere 
between 5- to $6 million, and by anyone's estimation it's a classical 
case of fiscal mismanagement by the administration that sits there 
with you today. 
 
And I might point out something that's very important, is that that 
construction equipment did a very small portion of the work that 
was done in the province of Saskatchewan. Most of the work was 
done by private contractors. That equipment gave us a window on 
the industry; when there was a contractor that couldn't fulfil their 
contract, that equipment was utilized, and it also helped construct 
roads when bids came in just far too high. When the market was 
on the side of the contractors and there wasn't the money there to 
do the road, we could usually do it with that highway equipment 
for a cheaper price. 
 
Now whether the road builders can build roads more cheaply is 
questionable; but however, what road builders  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3589 
 
 

are concerned about is that there isn't any construction being done 
to keep their machines and their companies in business unless 
they're very good friends of the administration opposite. 
 
And I see the Deputy Premier agrees with those statements. But 
what are the consequences? We've got roads in just a terrible state 
of repair in the province of Saskatchewan. I have a number of 
documents here that I would have liked to have gone through this 
evening, but I see we're well past the normal time of adjournment. 
We have problems wondering where all the money is going from 
the communications branch under subvote 7. Each year the 
estimate isn't met. You're way over in the expenditures in the 
communications branch for the years that I have documented here.  
 
I think that instead of some of the things that you've been 
advertising, you might well look at putting a little more emphasis 
back on seat belts in the province. I seed that the usage of seat 
belts is declining in the province of Saskatchewan. And I think it 
was a very good program, very controversial, and many of the 
members opposite that were here at the time that that legislation 
came in were in fact opposed to the seat belt legislation, but it has 
saved a great many lives in our fine province, and I think that we 
should have some emphasis on sound advertising like that rather 
than some of the areas where you've been spending your 
advertising dollars. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don't want to unduly keep you any longer this 
evening. What I would like to ask is one further question, and that 
has to do with access roads to malls. I have a particular problem 
that I'd like you to deal with with someone in your department. It's 
a problem with mall access to one of the malls in the city of North 
Battleford, and I'm wondering whether or not you can tell me who 
I could contact in your department, and if you give me your 
assurance that whoever the contact is in the department, or 
yourself if you wish, will contact the people at the mall and 
discuss these problems with them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I thank the member for his question, and I 
would confess that I am not totally aware of the situation of which 
you speak. However, because the hon. member has acted in such a 
co-operative fashion here this evening, I would be more than 
pleased to direct hi to Myron Herasymuik, our director of 
operations here in head office in Regina. And at your convenience, 
Mr. Member, we would set up a meeting to review the situation 
with you, and to provide you with any advice or assistance that we 
can right from head office. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I thank you for that, Mr. Minister. As I 
mentioned, a good number of people are concerned about the 
highway system in the province. They're concerned about the 
transportation deregulation as well, which we didn't really get into 
here this evening, but I'm sure we'll have many other opportunities 
to do that. 
 
I would like to thank the minister for his co-operation this evening, 
and the co-operation of the members opposite who sometimes 
heckle me. I don't know why they would do that. And I would like 
to tell the member from Meadow Lake that I'll likely never ask 
any questions about his roads in his constituency again. 
 

I would, seriously, like to thank the officials from the department. 
I believe that the officials do a very good job under trying 
circumstances and budgetary restraint in the province, and I would 
like to thank you for your co-operation and taking time to be here 
this evening. My apologies to keeping you a little bit late. 
 
And again my congratulations to Mr. Sutherland for the years that 
he's spent with the department and the award that you received 
today. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
  

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Highways and Transportation 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 17 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 17 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 16 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 
Capital Expenditure — Vote 17 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 17 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 16 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions on '88 supplements? 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 17 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions on '88 supplements, capital 
expenditure? 
 
I'd like to thank the officials for their time here tonight and the 
answers.  
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 
member from North Battleford this evening for the  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3590 
 
 

questions that he put forth and I think, more importantly, the spirit 
and the manner in which those questions were given. 
 
I would also like to thank very much my officials for coming this 
evening. I do know that they have prepared for these estimates 
over a good number of months, and they certainly have worked 
very, very hard over the past year, and it's just been my delight to 
be your minister and to have worked with you over the past year, 
and I look forward to a good and long-lasting relationship with 
you all. Thank you, Mr. Chairman . 
 
(2230) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral to Bills to Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have four or five Bills here 
that are considered to be non-controversial, so with leave of the 
Assembly I'll move to put them in Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee. I therefore move, seconded by the Minister of Health, 
by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for the second reading of Bill No. 29 An Act to 
amend The Legal Profession Act, be discharged, and the Bill 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for the second reading of Bill No. 38, An Act to 
amend The Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 1982, be discharged, 
and the Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 
That the order for second reading of Bill No. 39, An Act to amend 
The Law Reform Commission Act, be discharged, and the Bill 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 40, An Act to 
facilitate Economic and Social Development in Rural Areas, be 
discharged, and the Bill referred to the Standing Committee on  

Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 53, An Act to 
amend The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Act, 
be discharged and the Bill referred to the Standing Committee 
on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 54, An Act to 
amend The Vital Statistics Act, be discharged, and the Bill 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Extended Sitting Hours 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, it has been agreed between 
House leaders that we don't have nearly enough work to fill our 
day, so that we have decided that we should extend sitting hours. 
 
So I move, seconded by the Minister of Health, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That notwithstanding rule (3), this Assembly shall on 
Wednesday, October 28, tomorrow, meet from 10 o'clock a.m. 
until 5 o'clock p.m. with a recess of two hours at 12 noon; and 
on Thursday, October 29, and Friday, October 30, 1987, meet 
from 10 o'clock a.m. until 10 o'clock p.m., and there shall be a 
recess of two hours at 12 o'clock p.m. and 5 o'clock p.m., and 
the oral question period of 25 minutes under rule 35(2) shall be 
at 2 o'clock p.m. of each day; and 

 
That this Assembly shall on Saturday, October 31, 1987, meet 
at 10 o'clock a.m. until 1 o'clock p.m., and that the order of 
business shall be the same as on Friday; and 

 
That this Assembly shall on Tuesday, November 3, Wednesday, 
November 4 and Thursday, November 5, 1987, meet from 10 
o'clock a.m. until 10 o'clock p.m., and there shall be a recess of 
two hours at 12 o'clock p.m. and 5 o'clock p.m., and that oral 
question period of 25 minutes under rule 35(2) be at 2 o'clock 
p.m. each day. 

 
I move, seconded by the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:39 p.m. 
 


