













































August 31, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 31, 1987 

 

2163 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 

Assembly, a young lady who was taking university in 

Saskatoon last year to become a therapist. She went on a 

working holiday for three months – she had a working visa 

arranged by the university. She just came back last Saturday, 

and she’s going back next week to take university again. She’s 

accompanied by her mother, Stella Waldbillig. Would you 

please help me welcome these two ladies to this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that 

I welcome to our Assembly, and to our province, a number of 

people in the Speaker’s gallery from the United States that are 

visiting our province. They’re from Illinois and Iowa, 

Wisconsin and other states in the area. 

 

I welcome you here. I hope you enjoy the debate in the 

legislature. I hope you enjoy your stay in Saskatchewan and 

take part of many of the fine things that we have to offer and 

come back and see us again fairly soon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Possible Potash Embargo 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to, Mr. 

Speaker, direct a question to the Minister of Energy and Mines 

or the Minister of Economic Development and Trade, 

whichever opt to answer the question. 

 

The basic essence of my question, Madam Minister, is that 

there has been a considerable amount of uncertainty created by 

your government’s failure to clearly and effectively deal with 

the problem that has been created in respect to the dumping of 

potash in the United States . . . And has been indicated before 

it’s ten days since the decision; it’s over seven months since the 

initial application was put forward, and I want to ask you, 

Madam Minister, then: can you outline to the people of 

Saskatchewan today what in fact . . . the plans of your 

government in dealing with this here very serious problem? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, if there’s been any 

uncertainty, it has certainly been around for some time. And 

with all due respect to the hon. member from Quill Lakes, I 

would say that the uncertainty has come in terms of the world 

markets and the pressure that that has put on the Saskatchewan 

industry. 

As I indicated to the members on Friday, notice was given that 

there would be a Bill this week. And the member knows full 

well that when that is given first reading in the House, then he 

will have access to the legislation, and the details will be 

known, Mr. Speaker, I believe that that is customary how 

legislation is treated in this House. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplement, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. 

Madam Minister, I want to ask you: have you, in fact, discussed 

this problem with the industry, because the Premier, down in 

New Brunswick, indicated the possibility of an embargo. The 

industry was contacted over the weekend; they opposed the 

institution of an embargo and indicated that they hadn’t been, in 

fact, consulted. So what I’m asking you: during the seven 

months, pending this decision, did you meet with the industry? 

Did you work out some contingency plans? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I and others in the 

Department of Energy and Mines, along with my colleague the 

Minister of Economic Development and Trade, have over the 

last seven or eight months met several times with various 

potash producers to talk about some of the problems and the 

pressures that they were facing. In terms of the problem, I’d 

indicated earlier the issue of demand and supply; the pressures 

coming on to the industry were being felt greatly; we ran the 

potential of losing jobs, seeing mine closures, and we felt that 

indeed consultation had to take place. 

 

Consultation has taken place in regards to the actions that this 

government will be taking this week. We have talked to the 

industry. We have asked for input in terms of how the industry 

might handle this and how the government might handle it. So 

the consultation has taken place, contrary to what the member 

from Quill Lakes has alluded to. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — It’s not what I’m saying, it’s what the industry 

is saying, Madam Minister. I want to ask you, that there’s a 

considerable amount of confusion being left in the . . . as to 

what this government is doing. The Premier in New Brunswick 

is talking about an embargo. I want to ask you: is this a 

consideration? And how is it, in fact, going to protect the 3,800 

workers in the potash industry? Is that your plan, for a complete 

and total embargo? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to confusion, 

I firmly believe the only confusion that rests around here lies 

with the members opposite and perhaps with some of the media 

down east. I believe that perhaps some of the interpretation that 

was taken was taken with a great deal of liberty as to the 

Premier’s remarks on the embargo, and I can tell you that at this 

point in time it is not our intent to put an embargo on. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, I think that one of the best areas to deal with, in order 

to get this here ruling turned around, is with the agricultural 

community in United States. To get it turned around is to deal 

with the lobby, the agricultural lobbyist.  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2164 

 

And down in . . . farm leaders recently have been contacted in 

the state of Iowa, Indiana, Minnesota, Illinois, and throughout 

United States, and they were not in fact made of aware of it. 

 

What I want to ask you, Madam Minister: are you in fact taking 

a look at contacting the farmers, the lobby groups in United 

States who are dependent upon potash? I ask you: who in fact is 

handling this on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, 

and why have you failed to get a message to the farming 

community in United States? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Quill Lakes refers to this action pertaining to the ruling only. I 

want the House, and particularly the member from Quill Lakes, 

to understand very clearly that the action being proposed by the 

government this week is not in direct relationship to the ruling. 

 

The problem has been growing for some time – I would suggest 

back to perhaps early 1986. What we’ve had is a problem of 

demand and supply. The ruling or the anti-dumping action that 

you’ve seen come out of the U.S.A. is only a symptom of a 

much larger problem. So the intent, Mr. Speaker, in dealing 

with the legislation, is to deal with the problem at large, not to 

zero in on what the member has referred to. 

 

In terms of his question: have we contacted people in the United 

States? Yes, we are in contact with the Department of 

Commerce and other people. However, the member should be 

aware this is not an action of government against government; 

this was industry and companies. In our consultation with the 

companies earlier this year, they, in meeting with their 

customers, including the fertilizer industry within the United 

States, were going to be making those contacts. However, I can 

tell the member that we have going to increase the activities in 

co-operation with the industry to ensure that perhaps the voice 

is made much louder in the future. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A new 

question to the Minister of Energy, Mines and renewable 

resources. The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix reports on Saturday, on 

the business page, that the producers of potash are only meeting 

with you, Madam Minister, and other officials of the 

government presumably, today and tomorrow to discuss the 

details of this Bill. Is that in fact a correct report? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I can inform the member 

from Riversdale that we have been meeting with the various 

companies, but I was not at liberty to give the details of the Bill 

to them. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if I might, a supplementary. 

What I’m asking the minister, just so that we understand each 

other: is it correct to say that the first time that the industry, 

including union leaders or others associated with the business, 

that the first time that they’re seeing any legislation is today and 

tomorrow, as reported  

by the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix; is that the position of the 

government? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they have not seen the 

legislation. They will see it after it is tabled in this House, and 

after the opposition has had a chance to look at it. I can tell the 

member, I have met over the last seven, eight, nine months with 

various industry people over the difficulties that the potash 

industry was having. I have not had the opportunity to meet 

with the union officials, and I believe one of the union officials 

today has not given his consent whether he wishes to meet with 

me or not, and will be letting me know early tomorrow 

morning. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary. The 

minister says that she will be undertaking a consultative process 

with the industry and with the other members in the industry. If 

that is the case, surely the minister will be explaining some of 

the key essentials, if not even the details of the legislation to the 

industry and others; if that’s the case, why won’t the minister 

tell the member from Quill Lakes and this Legislative Assembly 

the details of what’s being proposed in the legislation? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I’m not about to bend the rules for the 

member from Quill Lakes or from the esteemed next leader of 

the NDP party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mortgage Filed Against Gainers Inc. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. On October 

27 in this House I asked if it could be possible that Sedco had a 

mortgage filed against the Gainers property in the city of North 

Battleford for, in fact, more than the $3 million that it had been 

acknowledged that it would cost to build the plant. After 

questioning, Mr. Speaker, the member outside the House, and I 

quote. He said: 

 

The allegation by the member for North Battleford, I 

suspect, I truly suspect is probably a misstatement or 

probably a bold-faced lie, and not surprising coming from 

that member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have today a press release from December 11, 

1985, by the provincial government, and it says: 

 

Gainer’s Inc., rapidly expanding meat packing business 

based in Edmonton, will build a $3 million bacon 

processing, curing, and packaging plant in Saskatchewan, 

with construction to begin in January and be completed by 

the spring of 1986. 

 

And I also have today, Mr. Speaker, a copy of the title for the 

Gainers property in North Battleford in which, on October 7, 

’86, there was a mortgage filed against that property by Sedco 

in the amount $6,222,734. And my question to the minister is: 

can he confirm these are the facts, and if not, we’d like to hear 

his interpretation? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I welcome the question from the 

member for North Battleford. On the initial observation of  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2165 

 

the first news release that he talks about was a time before he 

was elected to this Assembly. But he knows full well because 

he, and as I believe his seat mate, attended the official opening 

of the Gainers plant in North Battleford. And at that point in 

time if he wished to be, what I would say, forthright with the 

people and with this Assembly, he could read the news release 

of that day which says: 

 

A new $7 million Gainers bacon plant was officially 

opened today. 

 

He might also read the newspapers from North Battleford. If he 

doesn’t read our press releases, I would assume he reads his 

local newspaper from his own community. And on Thursday, 

March 26, 1987, the headline, the first part of the story says: 

 

Official opening of a new $7 million Gainers meat 

processing plan took place today. 

 

That’s from the News-Optimist. If he wants to go the Telegraph, 

if that’s the one he prefers to read and not the News-Optimist, 

exactly the same story goes. 

 

He was at that meeting. He was at the announcement, and he 

was there when we explained that in fact early announcement 

was to build a $3 million plant. As they got into the plant they 

saw . . . and we decided that we would go to a larger plant with 

a capacity of twice the size, which is a $7 million plant, not a $3 

million plant. That has been made clear, both at the meeting that 

you were at . . . At the opening that you were at, it was made 

clear to you by Gainers’ people as you toured the factory along 

with everyone else. 

 

So that’s why I say that what you are doing is selectively 

choosing press releases from before, to try to somehow mislead 

the province and mislead this Assembly as to what was going 

on. The second part of your question from the other day was to 

allege somehow that there was a subsidy paid for each pork 

belly that came into this province from outside of 

Saskatchewan. That is absolutely false. That is absolutely . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. That’s not the question 

he asked today. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 

that any of the answer had anything to do with what I had asked 

in this Assembly. The fact remains, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s 

$7 million or whether it’s $3 million, the mortgage document 

shows $6.2 million; the city of North Battleford threw in in 

excess of 125,000; they will get money under the industrial 

incentives program, plus maybe some subsidies we don’t even 

know about. Still, it remains that money we can trace comes to 

almost the $7 million. My question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister is: how much did Peter Pocklington and Gainers put 

into the bacon plant in North Battleford? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the hon. 

member that Peter Pocklington nor Gainers have received any 

money, any grants, from the Government of Saskatchewan 

through the industrial incentives program.  

That, in fact, does not apply until they have performed at least 

one year’s work with those employees. And if and when they 

complete one year’s work, all the money from any industrial 

incentive program will go to pay down any money advanced on 

the mortgage. There is a mortgage of approximately $6 million 

on the property — $7 million originally invested — $7.3 

million, I believe, invested in the plant. Peter Pocklington and 

Gainers have put 1.3, I think, 1.3 million initial investment. The 

rest of it has been by way of mortgage. Any moneys earned by 

Gainers from the Government of Saskatchewan by way of 

incentives will go completely to pay down the mortgage, and 

we will make sure that that money is assigned to pay down the 

mortgage. 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, the target keeps moving. It’s 

very difficult to get a straightforward answer from the minister. 

And I suppose that the fact still remains that there are large 

sums of money . . . and I would question the $1.3 million that 

Gainers has put in, or you say that Gainers has put into the 

operation. 

 

What we want to know, Mr. Speaker, is when will the minister 

release the documents, the details, and the conditions of Gainers 

operations in the province of Saskatchewan – not wanting 

anything that’s confidential from Sedco – when will you release 

the details of the contract so that people in the province of 

Saskatchewan can determine what the exact arrangements are 

with Gainers? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, you asked the same 

question, and I indicated that Gainers will receive some money 

from incentives based on performance like any other company; 

that’s a dimension with the Government of Saskatchewan. The 

balance of it is with Sedco, and it’s a mortgage with Sedco. 

 

As I indicated to you before, as I indicated a year ago and two 

years ago and people before me had indicated for the last 15 

years, is that Sedco (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation) does not make public the basis of how their 

mortgages are and etc., and nor should they, because it’s an 

investment thing. So when you talk about an agreement, the 

agreement was, (a) to negotiate a mortgage with Sedco; and 

number two, on the vacant plant that you have in the city of 

North Battleford to earn production incentives if they, in fact, 

hire these people for a full period of one year. That full period 

of one year has not yet arisen. They haven’t made it to that 

point yet. I think it was opened in February 1987, so it’s still 

some time yet before that comes, and if it does come it will be 

applied to it. 

 

What I say to the hon. member is this, is that you were at the 

news conference when that was opened; you toured the facility 

and you, in my view – and you don’t want to hear this – but 

you, in my view, led the idea there was $3 million plant was in 

fact . . . you knew full well it was a $7 million plant. You were 

at the meeting and you read the newspapers and . . . 

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2166 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Okay. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, in the operations of the plant, 

Mr. Speaker, at least initially, there were no pork bellies came 

from the province of Saskatchewan; they were all imported. 

And the minister tried to get into that whole issue in his first 

answer. But I would ask the minister on the record here today: 

does Gainers receive any subsidy for transporting pork bellies 

into the province of Saskatchewan? And if so, how much do 

they receive as a subsidy for pork belly? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I indicated before in my answer to your 

question, they are, in fact, importing pork bellies into the 

province of Saskatchewan. They are receiving absolutely no 

subsidy from the government or from anybody else for 

importing those pork bellies into our province; that’s where you 

were incorrect again, and I would hope you back down on that 

one as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Cuts in Grants to Urban Municipalities 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Urban Affairs. This morning I released the 

results of a survey of Saskatchewan cities, towns, and villages 

in which I had asked them about the impact on them of the 

latest provincial budget. 

 

Two hundred and forty-two urban municipalities responded and 

the results show that they have had to cut services or raise taxes 

or both, in order to cope with cuts in provincial government 

grants. The majority seem to have postponed capital works or 

have delayed equipment purchases in order to make up for your 

reduced financial support. 

 

And my question to the minister is: does he honestly believe 

that reduced economic activity in our cities, towns, and villages 

is good for the provincial economy? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I hardly think that, Mr. Speaker, the small 

cut that was made to the revenue sharing pool has any 

significant impact on the economic activity of the communities. 

 

And he’s referring to some kind of a survey that he made that 

by his own admission is not complete, and I would ask that he 

table that survey for all of us to have a look at. Because as he 

looks at the municipalities that did respond, clearly it doesn’t 

give a true indication of what happened right around the entire 

province. And I think that if he’s going to proceed with this line 

of questioning, that should be tabled so that we can have a look 

at it and just see how it compares in reality. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’d be 

pleased to table the results of our survey for the House. And the 

minister can choose to attack the survey, but I want to remind 

him that 242 city, towns, and villages  

responded, and many responded in great detail. 

 

And I ask the minister: what written surveys did he undertake of 

Saskatchewan’s municipalities to find out about the impact of 

his government’s action? And if he’s undertaken any surveys, 

can he table that with the House? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I guess, Mr. Speaker, the member of the 

opposition would choose to conduct a survey and maybe 

purport to be an expert in that field as well. I believe that if we 

were going to take a survey, we would employ a professional 

firm, ask the questions in a pertinent manner, and use the 

information accordingly. To gather our information, Mr. 

Speaker, I suppose the best explanation that I have is that in 

consultation with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), these decisions are arrived at. 

 

And I’m really sorry that the member opposite, who has some 

experience at a municipal level, has total disregard for an 

association like SUMA that’s been around for a long, long time. 

And I can tell you that since he has departed from the municipal 

scene, that when these cuts come along it appears now that the 

mayors and aldermen are prepared to have a look at the 

situation, unlike the years that when he served on council . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister earlier indicated that a 1 per cent cut in urban revenue 

sharing would have no great impact. But he forgot to mention 

that he completely cut the provincial capital fund of some $16 

million. 

 

The Minister of Finance is fond of saying that personal income 

taxes in Saskatchewan are the lowest in Canada, but your Local 

Government Finance Commission indicates that net property 

taxes are the third highest in Canada. It’s generally conceded 

that property taxes . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. I’m sure that the member knows that his preamble is 

getting a little long, and I would ask him to put his question. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — My question is, Mr. Speaker: is it not a 

regressive move on your part to shift the taxation burden from 

the province to the backs of property taxpayers in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, in 1979 and ’80 that 

government – or the opposition when they were in government 

in the good times – chose to cut the capital spending at that time 

when money was freely available. And now in a time of 

restraint, when we have asked the municipalities to do the same, 

and with their co-operation, Mr. Speaker, because as I visit with 

the various municipalities around the country, some were 

looking for relief in that because they didn’t have the money at 

the local level to contribute and take advantage  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2167 

 

of programs that the provincial government might have 

sponsored. 

 

Public Hearings into Rafferty-Alameda Project 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question today is to the Minister of the Environment, 

concerning the $136 million political boondoggle known as the 

Rafferty-Alameda project. 

 

Mr. Minister, last week you made an announcement in this 

House saying that you would extend the review period for the 

Department of the Environment concerning the 

Rafferty-Alameda project by 30 days. At the same time you 

explicitly excluded the public hearings. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that over 70 Saskatchewan 

citizens will tomorrow launch court action against you and your 

government in order to force you, through the courts, to extend 

a public review process which you have already admitted needs 

to be extended. I ask you, sir, to avoid, avoid spending 

needlessly the money of the people of Saskatchewan, will you 

agree now to extend the public hearings of the 

Rafferty-Alameda project? 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member should 

know, when I appoint a board of inquiry I don’t dictate to that 

board where they hold hearings, when they hold them, or how 

long they’re going to hold them. Rather, I give them an 

assignment to go out and hold hearings and find out all the 

problems that the people will express at those hearings – those 

that express in favour, those expressing in opposition. 

 

I didn’t dictate to them that they should finish in 20 days, or 30 

days, or 60 days, or 100 days. I simply appointed them as a 

board of inquiry. They have a job to do. When they complete 

that job, they’ll report to the department. But they were not 

under any time frame, and that’s why I didn’t include them in 

my extension for 60 days. 

 

They were never under a 30-day time frame; their time frame is 

until the job is done, and for that reason I think the member is 

out of order in asking for it to be extended, specifically on 

dates. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Quorum on Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief remarks 

on this motion. All members will know, of course, that we had a 

bit of an impasse relative to the question of quorum on 

committees when we were dealing with this matter earlier in 

this session. 

 

And to give you a little of the history of quorum on committees 

in this legislature, prior to 1981 quorum on committees was, in 

fact, 50 per cent plus one. The rules committee in 1981 

recommended that that requirement be reduced to one-third. 

The reason the rules committee  

recommended that, Mr. Speaker, was that from time to time 

there was a small degree of embarrassment suffered when a 

quorum couldn’t be mustered and, particularly, when 

committees were receiving evidence from outside witnesses. 

 

And so there appeared to be no real risk in reducing the quorum 

because of the significant imbalance between government and 

opposition in those days prior to the quorum being reduced. I 

think there was 17 members in opposition at that time, and the 

balance were here. So a reflection of the House in committee 

would still leave the government in control of committee with a 

reduced quorum. That was also the case after 1982 when there 

was significant imbalance in this House; I think there were 

eight or nine in opposition, and the balance in the government 

side of the House, so the question of quorum wasn’t a big 

problem to anyone. 

 

Today it’s a little different because the balance, of course, is 

more in line with what a true democracy should reflect, and so 

we’ve run into a problem with the quorum. A reflection of the 

House with a reduced quorum could, in fact, on a rare occasion 

with an absent member or something, leave the committee in 

control of the opposition if they had a quorum, and I think that’s 

not the desire of anyone in this House. 

 

Other jurisdictions have had similar problems, and they have 

addressed it in the same way that we propose to address the 

problem here today, and that is to have a quorum set at 50 per 

cent plus one, I believe, and to allow the committee to . . . allow 

the chairman of each committee to do business in that 

committee without having a quorum present. And a quorum 

must be present, of course, for votes or resolutions, etc. 

 

The other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, that do have similar rules 

relative to their committees are New Brunswick, 

Newfoundland, Ontario, and the House of Commons. And what 

we propose here today, Mr. Speaker, I believe is taken directly 

from the House of Commons, and so I will move this motion, 

Mr. Speaker, with that explanation. And I move it, seconded by 

the Minister of Justice: 

 

That Rule 90(1) be deleted and the following substituted 

therefore: 

 

90(1) A majority of the members of a select, special or 

standing committee shall constitute a quorum. 

 

90(2) The presence of a quorum shall be required 

whenever a vote, resolution or other decision is taken by a 

committee, provided that any committee, by resolution, 

may authorize the chairman to hold meetings to conduct 

hearings and receive evidence when a quorum is not 

present. 

 

and further, that Rule 90(2) be renumbered to read 90(3). 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that members of the rules committee 

of the day have had some discussion on this,  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2168 

 

and it is generally accepted that this is the way to go. So I 

move, seconded by the Minister of Justice, that motion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments to 

address to this. The government Deputy Premier is basically 

accurate. This has been worked on by agreement. I just want to 

make a couple of comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is now day 66, and none of the committees of this legislature 

have yet met. There are some pressures building up, and we 

have accepted this as a means of getting the work done, but we 

think this whole affair was unnecessary from the beginning. We 

think the former quorum would have worked. Our members are 

certainly going to show up at committee, and I would hope that 

government members would show up at committee. If they 

don’t, the Government Whip needs to do something with them. 

 

Mr. Minister, as I say, we felt the whole affair was unnecessary. 

But there are pressures building up and this seemed to be a 

reasonable compromise. On behalf of this caucus I issue a 

warning to the government members. It’s been clear from the 

beginning that this rule can be abused. It wasn’t the problem 

between ’82 and ’86 in Public Accounts but it was a problem in 

Crown Corporations. Just when the government would get in a 

bit of difficulty with a Crown corporation, the committee 

wouldn’t meet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to members opposite that if you abuse this 

rule, there’s going to be one unholy rumble about it. 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — We have had your assurance that that 

won’t happen, and if it does, we are going to be very, very 

angry. These committees need to work, they need to sit 

regularly, and, Mr. Speaker and members opposite, they do not 

need to have their work interrupted because government 

members don’t want to show up. 

 

In a way, Mr. Speaker, this represents a failure and a success. It 

represents a success in that this is . . . a lengthy impasse has 

now been negotiated and brought to an end. In a way it 

represents a failure. This is the only thing of significance that is 

likely to come out of the rules committee. 

 

It has been agreed by members that the rules committee cannot 

function in this sort of an atmosphere, and while we may meet 

once or twice to deal with some housekeeping rules, it has been 

agreed, Mr. Speaker, that the rules committee and any reform of 

the rules will have to wait another day. 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just to make it clear 

that, quite frankly, it was myself and the member from Regina 

Centre that negotiated this particular arrangement. I think it 

would be fair to say, and I think the member from Regina 

Centre would say the same thing, and that is that what we found 

in this rules committee  

was, I think, probably some personality clashes, number one, 

and probably a sense following the election of still some 

bitterness over the election, and the bitterness of politics. And 

that found us in a position where a rules committee which has 

traditionally, by this House, been members from all sides sitting 

down and trying to wrestle with this problem. 

 

I think it would be unfair for the member from Regina Centre to 

somehow suggest that we have not been trying to seek a resolve 

of this for some period of time . . . now have come to the 

resolve of it in a, I think, a gentleman and honest way. And I 

think this is the outcome of that negotiations. I don’t thank that 

one should stand up and in so doing try to point fingers and be 

critical of people. I think this was an existing problem. It’s a 

real problem that found some remedy and found some 

negotiation. And for that, I think the hon. member should have 

probably stated it and put it in that form. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we can have 

leave to go to public bills and orders, adjourned debates, to deal 

with item number one, which is the resolution or motion dealing 

with the membership of the various committees. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION 

 

Special Committee Appointed to Prepare Lists for Standing 

Committees 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of Mr. McLaren: 

 

That the first report of the special committee appointed to 

prepare lists of members to compose the standing 

committees of the Assembly be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 20 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I’ll begin, Mr. Minister, with 

some routine questions which are asked on all estimates, and I 

assume you have the information ready with you in written 

form. I would ask for the details of your members of your 

personal staff, their job titles, and their salaries. 

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2169 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, there are three 

individuals on my personal staff. The first is Brenda Syhlonyk, 

a ministerial assistant D, which is basically my personal 

secretary, the chief secretary in the office at a salary of 2,244 

per month; John Schmeiser, ministerial assistant 1, a salary of 

2,542 per month; Debbie McNabb, ministerial assistant, salary 

of 3,397 per month. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Okay, and that comprises all of the people 

in your office; in effect, I gather, one stenographer and two 

personal assistants. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well there are other people in my 

office. They are employees of the Department of Social 

Services. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, why don’t you give us 

your entire staff rather than chopping the dog’s tail off an inch 

at a time? Why don’t you give us your entire staff? It would be 

satisfactory, Mr. Minister, if you gave us this in writing. I don’t 

wish to embarrass the individuals by asking for it publicly. You 

may give us this in writing if you like, Mr. Minister. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we don’t have 

the Social Services material available at this time. We’ll send 

over the Human Resources, Labour, and Employment material 

at this time. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I’d ask you at 

this time whether the monthly salary of any of these people has 

increased in the last 12 months. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, John Schmeiser 

just started recently, replacing James Goliath. Debbie McNabb 

commenced employment with me on November 17, 1986 with 

a salary of 3,397 per month and has had no increase since. 

Brenda Syhlonyk, my personal secretary, received January 1986 

performance pay increase of 3.8 per cent from 2,098 per month 

to 2,179 per month. Effective July 1, 1986, Brenda Syhlonyk 

received a 3 per cent economic adjustment, to a total of 2,244 

per month. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — So that’s the total of 6 per cent? Those two 

are cumulative? What was the figure a year ago, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, a year ago she 

received 2,098 per month. This is a very experienced secretary 

who has served the past three ministers of Labour, and she 

received an increase that was consistent with other secretarial 

staff. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I would ask you as well for 

the details of any out-of-province trips you might have taken. 

Where was it to? How much did it cost, and what was the 

purpose of . . . and who accompanied you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, in last fiscal year 

I made the following trips as Minister of Labour, Human 

Resources, and all the other branches in that department: 

November 19 to 25, 1986, Vancouver, first ministers’ 

conference (women’s issues were on the  

agenda), cost $745.60; November 25, 1986, Quebec city, 

federal-provincial and territorial ministers of Labour 

(responsible for occupational health and welfare); with me on 

the trip were Phil Richards, deputy; James Goliath, ministerial 

assistant; cost $1,080. As far as I recall on the Vancouver trip, 

first ministers’ conference, I don’t believe anyone from my 

department attended with me. 

 

January 28 to 30, 1987, Ottawa, federal-provincial meeting on 

labour-market matters; assistant deputy minister Henry Kutarna 

accompanied me, $748 was the cost; Halifax, January 20 to 22, 

1987, federal-provincial meeting of aboriginal constitutional 

issues, deputy minister Phil Richards and ministerial assistant 

James Goliath – cost $1,277.80. Total $3,851.40. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, as well I would ask for the 

salary benefits and perks, of your deputy minister. Again, it’s 

something you may wish to give me in writing, Mr. Minister, so 

I leave that in your discretion. I ask you for that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the deputy minister is 

Phil Richards – salary of $6,546 per month, standard deputy 

benefits. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 

want, at this point in time, to raise with you something I think 

I’ve raised with your predecessor and with you on previous 

years. What I want to raise with you, Mr. Minister, is the 

downgrading of this department, and it continues relentlessly. 

 

Mr. Minister, this year, of the 14 subvotes you have, nine have 

fewer staff, three are unchanged, and two have more. And of the 

14 subvotes, nine have less money; one has more, and four are 

unchanged. 

 

Your department this year, Mr. Minister, has 21 per cent less 

money and 20 per cent less staff. Mr. Minister, I ask you what 

kind of priority you pretend to give to the working people 

whom you’re supposed to be serving when your department has 

been downgraded in the way it has? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, this is an 

example of government efficiency. We’ve amalgamated various 

branches, secretariats and departments into one large Human 

Resources, Labour and Employment department. And there are 

certain economies of scale here, and we are able to do without 

as many people; you don’t have as many policy and research 

people as you would have if you had five different departments 

or secretariats. 

 

Also the labour scene is quieter. There is a lot of activity in the 

construction area with the upgrader, the Weyerhaeuser project, 

the bacon plant, Vanguard trailer plants. There’s more 

construction, fewer strikes, fewer lock-outs, and we’ve been 

able to have a relatively stable labour scene without having 

quite as many government officials. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m sure that many 

working people wished you had attained those efficiencies in 

some other department. Mr. Minister, the  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2170 

 

overall level of spending in government is up, and has been 

each year. The staffing is down, but it is an imperceptibly small 

fall in staff. 

 

Mr. Minister, the fact is that when your government has decided 

to economize, when your government decides to spend less, it’s 

your department that they cut, and that clearly suggests, Mr. 

Minister, that working people are simply not a priority, nor are 

their problems. Mr. Minister, we’re going to go through this in 

some detail, and I want to indicate some areas where you’re not 

beginning to meet the needs. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, your comment that you’re simply being more 

efficient simply doesn’t hold water because other departments 

have not attained the same efficiencies. The truth of the matter 

is, Mr. Minister, that your department simply isn’t a priority of 

this government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, in this 

department we are quietly doing our job. We have a very 

capable deputy. We have now a very capable assistant deputy, 

who formerly worked for this government. He has a Master’s in 

Law, worked for the Government of Saskatchewan in the 

1970s, and the Government of Alberta, and Esso Resources – 

he is very knowledgeable in this area, and they are quietly 

doing their job. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not all that quiet, 

and you’re not doing your job. Mr. Minister, in virtually every 

. . . I wouldn’t be as alarmed, Mr. Minister, if this were the first 

year it happened. But this, as I say, has gone on relentlessly, 

year after year. 

 

Mr. Minister, in virtually every subvote you’re spending less 

now in this department than you were when this government 

took office. And I point out for your benefit that overall 

government spending has gone up by about 40 per cent since 

you took office. In this department in virtually every subvote 

you’re spending less. 

 

There is two exceptions to that. One is communications, which 

has grown into . . . your advertising has grown into such a 

monster that it now becomes a separate subvote. It didn’t used 

to be. And, Mr. Minister, the other subvote which has grown is 

administration. Those, I think, are the only two subvotes which 

appear in this set of estimates, and also appeared in your first 

set of estimates in 1983, a copy of which I have. Those are the 

only two subvotes in which there isn’t less being spent. 

 

Mr. Minister, you can’t pretend to do the same job with a 

fraction of the resources, which is now what you have. Inflation 

has gone up by about 30 per cent; your total government 

spending has gone up by 40, but the spending on labour has 

gone down. So, Mr. Minister, it’s not just a problem this year. 

It’s been a problem throughout the full six years that this 

government has been in office, and it’s beginning to show, as 

I’m going to indicate when I get to some other areas. 

 

But I say, as a general comment, Mr. Minister, that there’s no 

reason why you should take any particular blame for this. 

There’s nothing very new about it. This process of downgrading 

of a department, of less staff, less money, has gone on virtually 

without exception. The year ’86  

might have been an exception, but virtually without exception 

since this government took office. 

 

Working people know that. They know, Mr. Minister, how little 

priority you give their concerns, and that’s why you were 

virtually blanked out of the cities in the last election. I say, Mr. 

Minister, that the evidence here appears in the statistics; it 

appears in the electoral results, and it would strike me, Mr. 

Minister, as high time that you and your government started to 

spend some more time and put some more resources into the 

very real difficulties being faced by working people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I do 

acknowledge that government expenditures have been higher in 

other areas as a percentage of increase, and this year I do agree 

that Health budget is up $36 million, and surely we don’t run a 

contest between my department and the Health department as to 

who can get the biggest chunk of the budget. It goes where it’s 

most needed, and clearly it is most needed in Health and not in 

having more officials in my department and more employees in 

my department. 

 

My department does not directly put money into the pockets of 

the working people of Saskatchewan, but it is more of a 

supervisory and regulatory department, and you can do a lot in 

a department of that nature with greater efficiency and good 

management. For example, in my tenure as Minister of Labour, 

we’ve had . . . the Workers’ Advocate office had a backlog of 

239 cases when I was appointed minister, and we’ve got it 

down as low as 37 cases. Now it varies from month to month, 

but it runs in that range. So quite an efficiency there just with 

good management – from 239 to 37 on the backlog. 

 

We’ve started grievance mediation and it is working well. It is 

being used. We’ve made improvements in training and 

occupational health and safety. And there are general 

improvements being made in our department. Pouring money 

on a situation does not guarantee results. We’re more interested 

in results here than we are in statistics. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Let’s get on to some of the other areas 

then, Mr. Minister. One area which is a subject of continual 

complaints is the area of heavy industries, occupational health 

and safety; it’s an area which this government has just simply 

ceased to enforce. Mr. Minister, I tried to find some accident 

statistics for various industries, and they’re not easy to come by. 

 

But Mr. Minister, the complaints which we get, particularly 

from trade unions, is endless. They allege, Mr. Minister, that 

you are not enforcing the legislation. Your predecessor used to 

put it somewhat quaintly when he said that the manager and the 

boys would work it out together. Well the boys don’t think it’s 

being worked out very well, Mr. Minister, and they’re not very 

happy with it. 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, it’s time that you began to 

enforce the occupational health and safety. It’s time you began 

to make your political friends in the area of heavy industry and 

mining – it’s time you began to  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2171 

 

enforce occupational health and safety because it is an ongoing 

complaint by all trade unions. It’s particularly true in the 

potash, but that’s because of, I think, because of the size of the 

industry. But, Mr. Minister, it’s true throughout heavy industry 

that we are getting complaints that occupational health and 

safety simply doesn’t work any more. 

 

The occupational health and safety committee complains to the 

management, as is the course. They complain to the 

government, and nothing happens; problems go on. I 

understand that in some of the recent strikes – Lanigan was one 

– unsafe working conditions, to which workers were subject, 

was a material contributing factor to the work stoppage. So I 

ask you, Mr. Minister, when you’re going to begin again 

enforcing occupational health and safety legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the 

member opposite refers to the Lanigan strike, and I would think 

that one of the key factors in the Lanigan strike was politics, 

and not very bright politics at that. And once that was out of the 

way, the people were able to sit down and settle the matter and 

get on with their work. 

 

With respect to the occupational health and safety, there’s some 

discussion about the boys sitting down and doing something or 

other. Probably the solution there is for our department to hire 

some women to straighten the boys out. But for the most part 

total inspections are up, are running in the range of 2,700 per 

year, are up over what they were three years ago. Inspections 

three, four years ago used to run in the range of 2,200. They are 

now running in the rage of 27 to 2,800. We found a few more 

contraventions – 1,235 last year as compared to 681 in 1983-84 

and 707 in ‘82-83. Inspections with contraventions are up. We 

found 66 contraventions last year as compared to 282 in 1982, 

so we are checking closer. 

 

I don’t think the employers are being less cautious with respect 

to safety. However, we are inspecting closer than ever, and 

there are more contraventions, more prosecutions; none in 

1982-83, two in ’84, and there have been six in the last two 

years. The amount of fines are up to $6,800 last year from 

$1,800 the year before, and $1,400 the year before that. So 

certainly we’ve gotten tougher on safety, as indicated by the 

statistics. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re doing an 

exceptionally poor job of communicating your sterling efforts 

then, because nobody who works . . . none of the working 

people who work there believe you. They all think you’re doing 

a much worse job. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would give me the statistics 

which you just read. I wonder if you’d give me the statistics on 

the number of prosecutions, the number of complaints, and the 

number of inspections, and the number of prosecutions since 

1982, since that’s the year you began. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We’ll send the material over. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I had – notwithstanding the 

wide scope and the breadth of the target – I had not  

particularly intended to spend this afternoon insulting you. And 

I’d suggest that you may think you’ve made a successful career 

out of insulting everybody else, but I’d suggest that that isn’t 

going to work this afternoon. I’d suggest we try to keep this at 

an non-personal level. 

 

Mr. Minister, you began with what I thought was a very unfair 

comment when you said that the strike at Lanigan was over 

politics. It was over nothing of the sort – it had to do with 

working conditions. And the unsafe working conditions there 

were a material part of the frustration which eventually led to 

the strike. 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Minister, whether or not you took the time to 

spend any time with the workers there. You might not have, 

although you should have; you were minister of Labour, I 

guess, now that I think about it. But when we did, when my 

colleagues and I spent time with them, they spent a considerable 

portion of the time which we had allotted to us talking about 

safety in those mines. So I say, Mr. Minister, whatever you’re 

reading, it isn’t showing up on the shop floor, nor is it showing 

up in the mines. We are . . . Workers are increasingly concerned 

about the lack of safety. 

 

Mr. Minister, I say to you that there have been very few real 

improvements in the area of safety in industry and mines. One 

of the very few improvements, and it was a marked 

improvement, was the occupational health and safety committee 

system itself that was set up here in 1971. It marked a giant step 

forward, but it doesn’t work if the employers know that you’re 

not going to do anything and that they can rely upon you to do 

their bidding for them. 

 

So I say, Mr. Minister, I am satisfied that those workers know 

what they’re talking about. I’m satisfied that they’re not making 

it up, and they are very concerned about their safety. When I 

spent time as I did, Mr. Minister, calling people whose opinion 

I trust, and when I asked them what kind of issues do you think 

you’d raise in labour if you had the opportunity, this was an 

issue which virtually everyone who works in mining or every 

industry raised. 

 

If you think it isn’t an issue, Mr. Minister, then you need to 

spend some more time talking to and rubbing elbows with the 

people you’re supposed to be serving, because they clearly 

think it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, there’s no 

politics in safety. It’s non-political. It’s simply a matter of 

caring for the workers to make sure that they work in the safest 

conditions possible. 

 

What we’ve heard in this Assembly this afternoon is the NDP 

admit that they were involved in the Lanigan strike and that the 

member opposite was there advising the workers, listening to 

them, counselling them . . . and I don’t believe that they 

followed the counsel that the member from Quill Lakes gave 

them, who said that they shouldn’t strike; it wasn’t an 

opportune time. 

 

I believe that he has some wisdom in that case and that the 

NDP, as exemplified by the member from Regina Centre, were 

interfering in the strike, and the information we had was from 

spouses and families of miners there  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2172 

 

who were pleading with us to try to have the politics out of that 

strike so that they could get on with their lives. And here we 

have, this afternoon, a clear admission by the NDP that they 

were meddling politically in that strike. We’ve got it verified; I 

wasn’t speculating. We’ve got the admission from the member 

from Regina South. 

 

With respect to safety, my deputy has met with the union there. 

They have pointed out some of the problems they felt were 

related to safety. We’ve had our inspectors in there, and if there 

are further problems, I invite them to contact my department; 

we’ll send the mine inspectors in and check out every one of the 

problems they refer to. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’ve listened with 

embarrassment – I cannot put it any other way. I’ve listened 

with embarrassment over the last two or three days that this 

House has sat, at you answering questions. Mr. Minister, I say 

embarrassment because your answers are combative; at the 

same time they’re just foolish. There’s no other word for it that 

I could use in here. I had hoped, Mr. Minister, that things today 

might be conducted at a somewhat higher plane, but it 

apparently is not to be. 

 

Mr. Minister, I and my colleagues make no apology for 

spending time talking to workers on a picket line. We didn’t 

encourage the strike; we didn’t advise them to strike; we didn’t 

advise them not to. But when they’re on a picket line, I make no 

apology for going and talking to those workers, and I’m darn 

proud to do it. And if you were doing your job, Mr. Minister, 

you’d do the same. You’d go and talk to them and find out what 

it’s like there, instead of standing here pontificating and making 

an absolute fool out of yourself – and there’s no other 

expression, Mr. Minister, would do it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you casting aspersions . . . 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Yes, indeed I am. I am trying to cast 

aspersions on him. And indeed if I weren’t in the Assembly I’d 

put it a lot stronger than that. 

 

Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m going to resist 

the temptation to respond to the member from Morse. The time 

of the Assembly’s too valuable to do so. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you’d spend time talking to them instead of 

making nonsensical remarks, which you do, you would know 

that they were genuinely concerned about occupational health 

and safety, there and elsewhere. They’re concerned in all the 

potash mines, Mr. Minister. It has become virtually, I am led to 

believe, an honour system . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the 

member from Weyburn is going to add his very considerable 

wisdom to the rules of this Assembly, Mr. Chairman, I know 

we’ll all be much, much richer for his contribution. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s true in all the potash mines that occupational 

health and safety is a very serious concern. It seems to be an 

honour system. If the owners of the mine and the managers of 

the mine happen to think it’s good business, they do a decent 

job of it. But if they happen to think it’s a needless expense, 

they don’t. 

 

As I say, when I used to quiz the member from Yorkton  

when he was minister of Labour, he used to admit that it wasn’t 

something he philosophically agreed in; he felt that was best 

left to the management. You’re doing the same thing, Mr. 

Minister. You’re just not admitting it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if the member opposite 

will put the safety problems in writing and send them over, 

we’ll check them out. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to ask the 

minister a question with respect to the rights that employees in 

department stores, grocery stores, and many other retail outlets 

in this province are supposed to have, the right, Mr. Minister, to 

be seated in their work place, particularly when they’re behind 

the till or doing some other function where they can reasonably 

expect to be seated. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, in 1981 when the NDP was in government, 

we passed regulations ensuring that workers in retail outlets 

would have the right to be seated in their work place when the 

task they were performing was such that it would be reasonable 

to be seated. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I have informed your department of the fact 

that this regulation is not being enforced on numerous 

occasions. When I was not in government during the period 

1984 to 1985, I wrote to your department on at least two 

occasions, asking when this regulation was going to be 

enforced. I was told by the head of your occupational health and 

safety division that, first of all, he acknowledged that it was not 

being properly enforced. He then proceeded, in 1985, to assure 

me by mail that it would be enforced. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’ve gone into a dozen grocery stores in the city 

of Saskatoon in the last seven or eight months, and many retail 

stores, to see if this regulation is being enforced. 

 

I’ve hardly ever, Mr. Minister, seen a situation where a clerk 

behind a till has the right to be seated. It’s clear, Mr. Minister, 

that you’re not enforcing this regulation, and I suggest to you, 

sir, that as a result of you failing to enforce this regulation, there 

are dozens of employees across this province who are suffering 

back problems and other health problems as a result of having 

to be on their feet all day. And I say to you, sir, that it is not 

fair, particularly to older employees, most of whom are women, 

in these stores, that they have to stand on their feet all day 

behind a till when they could easily be seated. 

 

And I ask you, sir, can you explain to this Assembly why you 

failed to enforce that regulation for the last five years, and can 

you tell us when you are going to enforce that regulation? 

 

(1515) 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, to the best of the 

knowledge of my officials, the only complaint on this topic has 

been from the member for Saskatoon University. We have no 

complaints from the members of the public . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . .  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2173 

 

There is a regulation that requires employers to provide seating 

where practical. And where practical is a question sometimes of 

discretion and judgement. 

 

We haven’t had any specific cases to follow up on, and it hasn’t 

been a big issue raised with our department until you raised it 

today, and we’ll check into it further. But the regulation is 

“where practical”, and it hasn’t been raised by occupational 

health and safety committees, nor have any unions raised it with 

us. And it would be an area that I believe the union could grieve 

in if they felt aggrieved by the situation. 

 

So if there are any specific instances that you think we should 

check out, if you want to give us locations that our inspector 

should check, we’ll send them out and have them check them. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m really flabbergasted. I 

wonder why you wouldn’t enforce your own regulations. Why 

you would think that you’ve got to have a given volume of 

complaints, some sort of a crescendo of complaints from 

women who work behind these tills before you’d do anything. 

What do you think your role is, Mr. Minister? Your role is to 

enforce your legislation so that working people are protected. 

Mr. Minister, if working behind a till is not a practical spot for a 

person to have a stool, then where on earth . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d ask members to allow the 

member for Regina Centre to ask his question. All members get 

an opportunity to get into the debate on both sides of the House 

in estimates, so I would ask them to allow the member to put 

his question and allow the minister to answer. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I note in the midst of your 

comments that the member from Weyburn left, and that will no 

doubt do a great deal for the decorum of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you: if working behind a till is not a 

practical place for a stool so that a person doesn’t have a bad 

back, where is? I mean, what would be impractical about giving 

such a person a stool if they’re working behind a till? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I do 

acknowledge that standing all day or walking all day may be 

strenuous, may be hard on people’s backs, depending on the 

circumstances of their job, but I can’t make a blanket statement 

as to in which circumstances a worker should be seated and in 

which circumstances a worker should have to stand or move 

around to do their job. And if the member opposite will send us 

a list of locations that they wish us to have inspected, we will 

carry out further inspection. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 

request that you inspect, your department inspect, every grocery 

store and every large department store in the four major cities of 

Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw to begin 

with, and provide in writing to myself and the member for 

Regina Centre the results of those inspections. 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, my inspectors, I’m sure, 

purchase groceries from to time. It wouldn’t be very hard for 

them to do an inspection, so we’ll ask them to have a look next 

time they’re in. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to get on to a different 

subject. I’m laughing, not with the minister, but at him. Mr. 

Minister, I want to get on to a different subject. 

 

By way of background, I want to remind the minister of the 

disparity between wages and profits in this country. It has got to 

be very, very marked. Mr. Minister, over the last few years the 

rate of corporate profits have been going up by about 30 per 

cent. I did a quick calculation using last Monday’s Globe and 

Mail, and profits have gone up by 28 per cent. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s many years since wages kept pace with 

inflation – many years since wages kept pace with inflation. I 

ask you, Mr. Minister, if you think that’s a fair state of affairs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Of course we would like to see wages 

as high as possible, but profits have not yet been so high that I 

have been encouraged to go out and buy shares in any publicly 

traded corporations. And if you’ll see my report that I file with 

the legislature, I believe I own – is it 10? – 10 shares in a 

corporation that’s not publicly traded even, and as a matter of 

fact I’m selling those. So the profits are not so great that I’m 

rushing out and buying shares in the large corporations, and 

maybe the member opposite should buy some shares so that he 

can see what the returns are. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you missed the bet because, 

since you have taken office, the TSE (Toronto Stock Exchange) 

300 has more than doubled. That’s an accurate statement, since 

1982. So you’ve missed the bet. 

 

Mr. Minister, the rising share values, and they’ve been very, 

very marked – 40 per cent . . . that’s a bit of an exaggeration, 33 

per cent since January of this year, is a direct reflection of the 

expectation of profits by these companies. These companies are 

very, very profitable, Mr. Minister, and the TSE, since you want 

to raise that, the Toronto Stock Exchange, the bell-wether stock 

exchange, shows that. So if you haven’t, Mr. Minister, it’s 

because you don’t know how to manage your personal affairs, 

because if you’re possessed with great sums of money, then you 

might consider that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fifty thousand a year in income tax. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Yes, 50,000 a year in income tax, I’ve 

heard you boast on another occasion. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I ask you to check with your officials. Profits 

have gone up by more than 25 per cent for many years. It has 

been years since wages kept pace with inflation. I want to know 

if, as a general rule, you think that’s fair? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t accept the 

member opposite’s analysis of the profits of corporations. You 

would have to compare profits with the losses of 1981, losses of 

1982. And certainly it’s healthy that profits  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2174 

 

are up. All Canadians would share in these profit increases with 

respect to wages, with respect to a better economy, with respect 

to more jobs. And to have a constant harangue against 

corporations and profits merely gets to the ideological dispute 

over whether a socialist economy or a capitalist economy is best 

for this country. 

 

Since we’ve never had a socialist economy, we don’t have a 

good comparison, but if you look around the world you can find 

comparisons that, if Canadians really thought about it . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sweden, Finland, Germany. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — If Canadians really thought about the 

comparisons around the world, they wouldn’t take it into 

account at all. The member opposite suggests from his seat that 

we look at Sweden, Germany – these are not socialist countries, 

Mr. Chairman, these are countries which have strong economies 

built on private ownership, and the profits are used for the 

benefits of the people, and they may be somewhat further down 

the road towards a welfare state, but certainly are not socialist 

countries. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I just don’t know how you deal with 

someone who is so completely ignorant of facts which are 

notorious, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the . . . you obviously are 

not aware of it. I take it you’re not being dishonest. I take it 

your usual quick grasp of things is evidencing itself here. 

 

Mr. Minister, there is a large disparity between wages and 

profits, and has been for many years. Mr. Minister, you say that 

everybody’s sharing in it; well I say that everybody’s not 

sharing in it. Those who are possessed . . . those who are 

affluent, are possessed . . . are sharing in it, but those who work 

for a living, at the bottom of the scale, are certainly not sharing 

in it. One of the groups which has not shared in it, which indeed 

has had to carry on a disproportionate burden, is those working 

on minimum wage. 

 

Mr. Minister, I made these comments, not to get into a 

philosophical debate with you. I’ve got better things to do with 

my time than try to discuss anything with this minister. But I 

made those as a background comment, Mr. Minister, because at 

a time when the country is as prosperous as it is – and that’s 

undeniably true at the moment – it is unfair that those on 

minimum wage have not received an increase. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you took office, those on minimum wage 

were getting $4.25; they’re now getting $4.50. Mr. Minister, 

that’s a 25-cent increase, an increase I would guess of about 6,7 

per cent, on my feet, during a period of time when inflation, as I 

said earlier, has gone up by 30 per cent. Mr. Minister, while . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Weyburn’s back 

again, and once again we’re having difficulty conducting these 

things. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d ask you if you think it’s fair that minimum 

wage . . . that the people on minimum wage have received no 

increase at a time when the business community in this country 

is doing better than it ever has. 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if you look at the 

Saskatchewan economy as a whole, even with the up-coming 

increases in other provinces – $4.70 in Manitoba, $4.55 in 

Ontario, $4.55 in Quebec — Saskatchewan, without having an 

increase, will have the fourth highest minimum wage in 

Canada. Certainly our economy based on agriculture, oil, 

potash, and commodity prices in general is not the strongest in 

Canada right now. 

 

Even despite the fact that half of our potash mines are 

socialized and owned by the government, they don’t seem to be 

making a large amount of money. Even with the land bank that 

the NDP gave us years ago, the farmers on land bank don’t 

seem to be making any more money than other farmers, so 

we’re looking at a world situation here. 

 

We would like to raise the minimum wage as soon as practical. 

It’s not correct to say people on minimum wage have not 

received a raise. Some of them may have received a raise. Many 

of them probably have and are no longer on minimum wage. 

Others may be starting their employment on minimum wage. 

We do not pass a law in this province that says an employer 

must pay no more than $4.50 per hour, and therefore many 

people in this province are paid much more than that, depending 

on the state of the economy and the nature of the employment. 

And we will examine the situation and raise the minimum wage 

as soon as practical. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, along the same vein, 

Conservative governments in this country have contributed to 

this growing disparity in a number of ways, one of which is 

minimum wage. It’s true that you’re not a whole lot worse than 

the other Canadian provinces, but that’s not something I’d be 

very proud of. To say that you’re no worse than the other 

provinces strikes me, Mr. Minister, as damning one with faint 

praise. 

 

Mr. Minister, another way in which Conservative governments 

have contributed to the growing disparity is the freeze on public 

service wages. Mr. Minister, I wonder by what possible means 

do you feel it’s fair to freeze wages in the public service? In 

some cases, it’s been frozen for years. How is it fair to freeze 

wages in the public service when inflation marches on; the 

business community is generally, fairly affluent. Mr. Minister, I 

wonder how it’s fair to ask public servants to bear any 

particular burden that other people aren’t bearing? 

 

I don’t deny that they should bear their fair share of the morass 

that’s been caused largely by Conservative economics, but 

they’re being asked to carry a good deal more than that. Wages 

go up in this country an average of three and one-half to 4 per 

cent a year. Public service wages have been frozen for two 

years – in some cases for longer than that, depending on where 

they’re working. I ask you, Mr. Minister, how you think that’s 

fair? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, in 

Saskatchewan, because we have a lack of free trade in the world 

– something the members opposite are opposed to – we have a 

particularly difficult problem in potash, a  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2175 

 

particularly difficult problem in agriculture. 

 

And I have farm families in my constituency, in excess of 

2,000, most of them who are not making minimum wage right 

now. And we have to have a balance here between people who 

have higher incomes and those people who’ve had their income 

cut out from beneath them by the world economy and a lack of 

free trade. 

 

It hardly seems fair that I should go, as a government, to those 

farm families, small business-families, people who are on 

middle incomes – raise their taxes so that other elements of 

society who already have higher incomes, for example, the 

member from Regina Lakeview, so that she should have an 

increase, or that her husband should have an increase. That does 

not seem fair to me. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Once again, the minister’s adoration for the 

member from Lakeview shows itself. I just point out in her 

defence, since she’s not here, neither she nor her husband are 

public servants. And I’d suggest to the minister that if you want 

to insult members of the Assembly, at least have the decency to 

do it when they’re present and not when they’re absent. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’ve a question with respect to the labour college. 

Some concern has been expressed, and I put it no higher than 

that, but some concern has been expressed that the grant to the 

labour college is going to be discontinued. I ask you, Mr. 

Minister, what your plans are for this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, a scholarship of 

$6,000 from the Government of Saskatchewan to the Labour 

College of Canada has been discontinued. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you’re 

the minister for the Department of Labour, and from what 

you’ve been saying it seems to me to translate in your mind that 

labour equals the trade unions and unionized workers. But your 

department represents, and has to be accountable for, the 

well-being of 75 per cent of the labour force in Saskatchewan 

that’s not unionized. And between those people, and total 

exploitation of the kind that I’m receiving complaints about 

from my constituents in Saskatoon Centre, is the labour 

standards branch. 

 

It’s with great disappointment that I realize that you’ve cut the 

staff in the labour standards branch by two people this year. It’s 

already well understaffed. It’s a very important dimension of 

the Department of Labour, because without that labour 

standards branch investigating and making sure that the 

regulations regarding working conditions in Saskatchewan are 

adhered to, many, many working people have no protection at 

all. 

 

I have people in my constituency who are working sometimes 

80-hour weeks, getting no overtime, getting no recognition for 

those extra hours, getting no holiday time, being called 

managers of little, tiny retail outlets that they operate on behalf 

of the owners, and I’m expressing very grave concern about 

what’s happening to them in their working conditions. 

And I want to ask you why you’re cutting the staff. You say 

you’re doing it for government efficiency. It is certainly not 

efficient to cut the staff in such a very important branch. What 

are you doing to the people and the working people in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, there have been 

no staff reductions in the field. The reductions are not in 

Saskatoon. The two positions referred to are in management 

and not in the field. The allegations that the member opposite 

makes bear further investigation. If she will give me the details 

our branch will investigate further. 

 

Citizens commonly are in the practice of complaining to the 

Labour department, and we do investigate, but if these 

individuals have not made a complaint, we would welcome 

them to bring forward their information. 

 

Certainly we are concerned with the inequity between unionized 

workers and non-unionized workers, and would like to see the 

benefits and the wages of non-union workers to closer match 

the benefits and wages of unionized workers. I know what the 

member opposite is saying. My father was an elevator manager 

for Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and his salary was less than the 

floor sweepers at the terminals in Vancouver and Thunder Bay. 

And while he was very proud to serve farmers and be an 

elevator manager, he thought that an elevator manager had a 

greater degree of responsibility than the floor sweepers at 

Thunder Bay. 

 

So there is disparity, and a lot of times it’s not based on value or 

common sense, but it’s based on power struggles. And we will 

try to address these as best possible. Certainly the 75 or more 

per cent of the people of Saskatchewan who are non-union, plus 

all of the people who are small business, and big business and 

farmers, would all like to have higher wages and better working 

conditions and, as the economy improves, I’m sure that 

everyone will be able to do better in the future. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, one of the allegations – and I 

certainly would see to it that you receive these allegations in 

writing, and I’m sure that you have, because I know many 

people have been writing to you – one of the allegations is that 

people are dismissed from their jobs without any reason given 

for the dismissal, and the only thing they can do is go to court to 

try to retrieve back wages. Going to court and paying a lawyer 

is expensive. They have no other means of retrieving their 

salary because the labour standards branch is not able, or is not 

working in their defence. And that’s a very crucial and very 

elemental example of the kinds of things that are happening to 

the working people that I’m in touch with in Saskatoon Centre. 

 

What are you going to do about a condition like that when 

you’ve cut back the staff and you have not increased the 

funding for the labour standards branch? Are you prepared to 

help people to get back their salaries when they’ve been 

unceremoniously dismissed without cause? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we do that in the 

department – assist people in recovering wages  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2176 

 

due to them. The Labour Standards Act has not been reviewed 

in the last six years, and I’m now starting a review of The 

Labour Standards Act. We have listened to people for the last 

two or three years with suggestions for change. I do 

acknowledge that the law of unjust dismissal could use some 

revision and possibly some codification as it is a common law 

passed down to us by judges. And it’s possible that it’s time to 

codify this law and to revise The Labour Standards Act at this 

time. You have my commitment to review that situation and try 

to do something about it. 

 

Ms. Smart: — The people I’m speaking on behalf of are 

unorganized labour. Who will you be consulting with in terms 

of revising these regulations? Will you be consulting with 

unorganized people? Will you be going out and talking to them 

in the stores? How are you going to get that information as to 

what needs to be done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the point that the member opposite 

raises, that the Department of Labour is not the department of 

unions but the department of workers in this province, is a good 

point and something that we keep in mind. And we will meet 

with many people throughout the province who are not 

unionized and seek their opinions, and we’ll try to make some 

changes that will be truly progressive. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a few questions about the labour 

relations of the construction industry, which I know is a subject 

of a special interest to you as it has been to a number of 

ministers of labour over the past few years. The labour relations 

of this industry have not been sanguine, have not been simple, 

either in Saskatchewan or anywhere in Canada for the last 

couple of decades. 

 

It has been a preoccupation with ministers of labour in most of 

the jurisdictions in Canada as well as their senior officials to 

find mechanisms in the construction industry to help the 

collective bargaining process, to make the collective bargaining 

process work better. It has been recognized, for example, that 

there are unique features to the construction industry with 

respect to which the systems that we’ve established in Canada 

haven’t always fit that easily. And accordingly, in many 

provinces you have seen special legislative provisions with 

respect to collective bargaining in the construction industry, 

both in the way in which unions become certified and in the 

way in which they bargain when they’re bargaining collective 

agreements between the trade unions and the employers. 

 

Now, in Saskatchewan we have wrestled with this problem for 

many years, as I know you and your staff are aware, and have 

made an attempt to set up multi-bargaining structures, 

multi-employer structures, through The Construction Industry 

Labour Relations Act. And that has gone by the boards. And my 

first question is whether you are contemplating any legislative 

changes that will apply to the system of collective bargaining in 

the construction industry, either by multi-employer 

arrangements or multi-trade arrangements, or both. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: —Mr. Chairman, we are working on this 

process. As matter of fact, we’re now tied up in  

estimates, but should we complete these estimates, we’ll be 

proceeding with consultation with organized labour leaders in 

the construction industry, and with owners, operators, and 

management. We have tried to achieve some sort of consensus 

among the parties as to what might practically work in this 

industry, and the parties are still very, very far apart in what 

they think would work in this industry. 

 

We will try again and see what can be done in the next month 

or two towards finding some form of solution that is practical, 

and we’ll continue with construction in a smooth and orderly 

manner. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well we’ve seen grown up in Saskatchewan 

over the last few years, the practice of unionized employers 

spinning off new corporations which then operate on a 

non-union basis. These are called variously spin-off companies 

or double-breasted corporations. And it’s a problem again that’s 

been around for some years, but until relatively recently it was 

more a theoretical problem than a real one. 

 

But in Saskatchewan in the last . . . well since the repeal of the 

construction industry labour relations Act, it has become a 

virtual epidemic. I think all of the major contractors now have 

their non-union subsidiaries. And this, as I think you’ll admit, is 

causing a greater problem for the collective bargaining system 

in the industry, and a very, very great problem for the trade 

unions that are attempting to represent working people in this 

industry. Now I’d like to know what your thoughts are about 

this practice of spinning off companies, or creating 

double-breasted corporations, Mr. Minister, and also ask you 

whether you have any plans to address that subject in any future 

legislative changes that you may be introducing in this House? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, in the 

construction industry, when we had industry-wide bargaining, 

there was no flexibility at all so that companies in 

Saskatchewan could not compete with companies in other 

provinces, nor could they compete with companies within 

Saskatchewan who are non-unionized. 

 

And the problem that we’ve had is that negotiations have taken 

place in the construction industry, but there have been no 

umbrella agreements signed, there’ve been no overall 

agreements signed. And in many projects, unionized firms have 

been working with, what we would call, “under the table” 

agreements and should be recognized under The Trade Union 

Act, so that they have actually had amended agreements and 

have been working under these amended agreements on specific 

projects. 

 

It is not only a problem of companies spinning off, but a 

problem which – The Constitutional Law of Canada, that did 

not exist before 1982. It is difficult under the existing 

constitution for the Government of Saskatchewan to say to 

someone’s spouse or to someone’s son: you are not entitled to 

run a construction company. 

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2177 

 

And I’m sure the member opposite knows that prime minister 

Trudeau and then premier Blakeney brought this constitution to 

us, and it is extremely difficult, and I don’t really know if it’s 

desirable, under – and maybe they did the right thing when they 

implemented that constitution. Is it desirable to prevent 

someone’s spouse or someone’s son or someone’s cousin or 

uncle from owning a construction company? And that is what 

the member opposite and some of the union leaders are 

suggesting, that strangers can start new companies, but relatives 

cannot. 

 

So it’s quite a problem. We’re looking at the situation. We 

believe that there are actually agreements and that the union 

contractors are able to compete these days by these unofficial 

agreements. And we are looking at the possibility of whether 

these agreements are not, in fact, really contracts and should be 

recognized as such, and the usual laws of labour contracts 

should possibly apply to them. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, that must be 

nonsense. You know, I’ve heard you say a lot of foolish things 

in that House, but to stand there and tell us that the constitution 

some way interferes with your ability to deal with spin-off or 

double-breasted companies has to be the worst nonsense that 

I’ve ever heard. I’ve been over and over and over that 

constitution, and I can’t imagine what provision it is that 

prevents this Assembly from grappling with a problem such as 

exists with the spin-off companies in the construction industry. 

 

I mean, if we don’t have the right to grab a hold of related 

operations, related businesses, where it is perfectly obvious to 

everyone concerned in looking at the situation that it’s a 

deliberate attempt by using corporate veils to get around the 

effect of a certification order or a collective agreement, then I 

don’t know what powers we have. Of course we have the power 

to do that, and I would really like to hear from you or your 

constitutional advisers as to what sections of the Canadian 

constitution interfere with our right to remedy such an obvious 

wrong. And it is nothing but that, Mr. Chairman; it is an 

obvious wrong. 

 

You have a situation in the construction industry where an 

employer, call him a contractor, is certified by a trade union. 

The trade union represents the employer of that contractor. Now 

what we’re seeing happen now is the contractor sets up another 

company. A shareholders may be his lawyer, may be his law 

firm, may be his spouse, may be his children, as the minister 

has said, but still everyone involved knows, and it’s easily 

provable, that in reality that person who owned the original 

company is also the owner of the spin-off. 

 

And then that spin-off goes out into the market and operates on 

a non-union basis, and, Mr. Chairman, does exactly the same 

work as the original company. And you have the laughable 

situation where the contractor is able to determine on any 

particular circumstances whether he’s going to operate union or 

non-union. It’s up to the employer as to whether or not the 

collective bargaining agreement applies. 

 

Well the minister knows that’s wrong. He knows that  

sister jurisdictions in Ontario, in Alberta, British Columbia, 

anywhere, have already dealt with that situation, as we had in 

Saskatchewan under The Construction Industry Labour 

Relations Act. With the repeal of that Act that provision went 

down the drain, and now Saskatchewan sits, I think, unique in 

Canada, not dealing with this problem of double-breasted 

companies. 

 

And it is damaging to the construction industry. It’s damaging 

to all the people who work in the construction industry. It’s a 

disaster for the trade unions who are representing people in that 

industry all across North America. And in Saskatchewan 

they’re particularly and peculiarly vulnerable, and the situation 

is an obvious wrong and ought to be protected, and I think the 

minister knows that. 

 

It is the former minister of Labour, the member from Yorkton, 

who in an effort to deal with some of the collective bargaining 

problems in this industry, set up a conciliation board. The 

conciliation board was asked to investigate the various disputes 

and report with recommendations. And the conciliation board 

was by any test a blue ribbon board in this province. The chair 

of that board, appointed by the then minister of labour, was 

Richard Horning from Yorkton, a very prominent practitioner in 

the field of labour relations. And all Tory members know very 

well who Richard Horning is. He was the minister’s own 

appointment. The employer appointee to that board was a 

lawyer from Saskatoon named Larry Seiferling, one of the 

outstanding employer lawyers in this province. The trade union 

nominee to the board was Nick Sherstobitoff, who is now a 

justice on the court of appeal, and was the nominee of the trade 

union. The minister laughs, and I don’t know why the laugh, 

but he’ll no doubt explain that when he stands up. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that these three people, experts in 

the field of labour relation far beyond where the minister will 

ever go in terms of knowledge, got together and held hearings. 

And they met with all of the parties involved, and they met with 

each other, and they came down with a unanimous report – a 

report which each of them signed. 

 

And one of the things that they recommended is that the 

Saskatchewan legislation be amended to take care of this 

spin-off or double-breast problem. Now that was perfectly clear 

in the report. I know the report said more than that, Mr. 

Chairman, and Mr. Minister, but I would like to ask you how 

you respond, how you react, to the unanimous report of the 

board of conciliation on this subject. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, section 6 of the 

Constitution of Canada reads . . . in 6(2) . . . I should read 6(1) 

just so that people will take into account what it says there: 

 

Every citizen of Canada has the right to enter, remain in 

and leave Canada. 

 

This has not got much to do with labour, but it certainly has a 

lot to do with the comparison of rights in this country and 

socialist countries around the world. But section 6(2) says: 

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2178 

 

Every citizen of Canada and every person who has the 

status of a permanent resident of Canada, has the right (to) 

 

(a) to move to and take up residence in any province, and 

 

(b) to pursue the gaining of a livelihood in any province. 

 

The Constitution of Canada guarantees the citizens of this 

country a right to work and a right to do business. Now that 

cannot be infringed on and has to be weighed carefully if you 

were to pass legislation of the nature that, as we would say in 

court, my learned friend – he hasn’t been that kind to me; I will 

say the member from the NDP – has stated. 

 

In addition, section 6(3) puts a limitation on that right: 

 

The rights specified in subsection (2) are subject to 

 

(a) (and that’s the only one that’s applicable here) any 
laws or practices of general application in force in a 

province other than those that discriminate among 

persons primarily on the basis of province of present 

or previous residence; 

 

So if I could ban spinning off of companies in Saskatchewan, I 

could not ban a spun-off company from another province from 

doing business in this province. 

So these are constitutional implications that I would think the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview, being a lawyer, would take 

interest in. But clearly he hasn’t considered these implications. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well that’s worse nonsense than the previous 

intervention of the minister. 

 

The question is not whether people can spin off companies or 

not; they can do what they like. They can set up shareholders of 

their . . . and make shareholders of their spouse or their children 

or their lawyers or whoever they like. But the point is, Mr. 

Minister, that you, as the minister responsible, ought not to sit 

by and let this technique be used in order to circumvent the 

legislation of this Assembly, namely The Trade Union Act. 

 

It’s not a question of them not being able to spin off companies; 

they can do that. The point is that they can’t avoid their 

obligations under The Trade Union Act by the device of 

spinning off a company. And that doesn’t offend section 6 of 

the charter, either subsections (1), (2), or (3). They can do 

whatever they like. What they can’t do is to use that kind of a 

device in order to walk around the legal obligations which this 

Assembly has imposed upon them and which you, as the 

minister responsible, are responsible for enforcing. That’s my 

simple point. 

 

Now I had asked you about the unanimous report of this board 

of conciliation. And I had pointed out to you that that board had 

unanimously recommended changes to Saskatchewan 

legislation which would deal with this  

problem of spin-off companies. And I’d like your reaction to 

the report of the conciliation board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, in that report 

that the member from Saskatoon Fairview refers to, the report 

of the three learned men who my colleague here in the 

legislature has referred to and has given you a run-down of their 

credentials, the report suggested final offer selection arbitration. 

And management was not in favour of that; the unions were not 

in favour. As a matter of fact, the Government of Manitoba at 

present is trying to bring in that type of legislation, and I have 

read articles in Manitoba papers where the union leaders are 

totally opposed to that legislation. And as far as I know, the 

Government of Manitoba is backing down on that legislation. 

 

So in the absence of any agreement that final offer selection 

arbitration, as recommended in the report, be implemented, we 

couldn’t see why if none of the parties thought that was a 

solution, why we should implement final offer selection 

arbitration, and have really no intention to do that. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I want to ask my question, and I’ll speak 

more slowly and try and enunciate more succinctly so that you 

catch what my question is. That was a report that had many 

parts to it, Mr. Minister. But that part that I’m interested in is 

the part that recommended that you introduce changes to the 

Act to deal with the problem of spin-off companies – nothing to 

do with final offer selection, nothing to do with multi-party 

bargaining, but with spin-off companies. 

 

Now that report has been on your desk for every day that 

you’ve been a minister, I think, or shortly after your 

appointment, and that goes back some time now. And all I’m 

asking you to do is tell the Assembly what your reaction is to 

that recommendation respecting spin-off companies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if there is a solution to 

the spin-off company proposal that will allow Saskatchewan 

companies to compete with other Saskatchewan companies and 

allow Saskatchewan companies to compete in the western 

Canadian market-place, then we will implement it. As yet, the 

solution has not been found. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, one 

quick question. You have talked about introducing amendments 

to The Trade Union Act and possibly The Labour Standards 

Act. I wonder if you’re in a position to share with this 

Assembly any information about the timing of the introduction 

of such legislation. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, such legislation 

will be introduced when it’s ready. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well the minister might have said, no, he’s 

not, and I suppose that would have put the matter more 

succinctly. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to turn to an area, and we’ll be on it  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2179 

 

for some time if you want to have a shuffling of your officials. 

It is the WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board). I expect we 

will be on this subject for some time, Mr. Minister. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He doesn’t know what that is. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — That’s the Workers’ Compensation Board. 

I can see we’re not off to a very good start here. 

 

Mr. Minister, the English language is a thing of both beauty and 

power, but in this context it’s almost inadequate to describe 

what happened with respect to workers’ compensation. I think 

it’s fair to say of most urban members – the member from 

Regina South would be exempted, because none would live in 

his riding – but I think it’s fair to say of most urban members, 

we spend half our time dealing with WCB complaints. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is no exaggeration. I say that I am ashamed to 

be a member of a society which treats people as shabbily as 

workers’ compensation treats injured workers. 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — There are times, Mr. Minister, when 

politicians on this side take a crass delight in some of the 

mistakes you make, but this is certainly not one of them. This is 

a painful area for us; it is just so badly administered and so 

badly run. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to read – I have raised this subject every 

year that I have been the Labour critic, which is since 1982, and 

every year, Mr. Minister, I have been pooh-poohed by yourself 

and the member from Yorkton. I now, Mr. Minister, have some 

authority for my comments that there are some very serious 

problems with WCB. I refer to the report of The Workers’ 

Compensation Act review committee. On page 20 of this 

document, the following statement is contained: 

 

The committee recommends that the principles on which 

the phrase “estimated to be capable of earning a suitable 

occupation” are to be interpreted as follows: 

 

And this is the unusual nature of the statement. I’ve never seen 

this before in a report. They then go to say: 

 

And the committee further recommends that the board 

implement this policy as soon as possible. 

 

I’ve never seen that comment in an official report before. It’s 

usually left to government discretion. 

 

That comment, Mr. Minister, indicates how very serious this 

problem is. Mr. Minister, the problems are many-fold, but I 

think the most serious problems have to do with deeming. Mr. 

Minister, this was, as the report correctly notes, this was set up 

at the time of the amendments, I believe in 1979, and it was 

intended to deal with exceptional circumstances. 

 

As the minister will know, under the old legislation you got 

paid so much for a lost hand, so much for a lost finger,  

so much for a broken leg, so much for a limp, etc., etc. You got 

what was sometimes referred to, in a rather crass way, as the 

meat chart. If you lost a foot you got so much; it you lost a leg 

you got so much. 

 

That was changed in 1979, I believe was the year, Mr. Minister. 

It was changed to a system which was thought to be more 

humane. And that is because a lost finger didn’t affect 

everybody equally. I wouldn’t particularly, I think, suffer a 

great deal if I lost one of my fingers. It might be disfiguring, but 

I don’t think my life would change drastically. However the 

stenographers with whom I work in the office, their life would 

change pretty drastically if they lost a finger. So the problem 

with the old system was . . . the problem with the meat chart, it 

didn’t adequately compensate people for their loss. 

 

So in 1979 a new system was brought in which was the present 

system. It’s an attempt to replace income. At that time, and 

introduced at that time, was a provision whereby you could 

deem people capable of earning wages. It was intended to deal 

with only exceptional circumstances. A person might retire for 

personal health reasons. A person might win the lottery, in 

which case you no longer have to work, and you might, 

therefore, retire. Your uncle might leave you the farm, etc. 

They’re intended to deal with exceptional circumstances. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, virtually everybody is deemed to be capable 

of earning income, no matter how ludicrous it is. I have an 

acquaintance – indeed he’s more than that, this man is a good 

friend of mine – who is late fifties, was injured at work; as a 

result he has a bad back. He cannot sit for very long. He cannot 

stand for very long. He cannot lift. He was deemed capable of 

earning $8 an hour as a security personnel. If there were any 

security personnel jobs open, which there aren’t, it’s almost all 

done by commission . . . if there were any jobs available, which 

there aren’t, the long waiting lists for those jobs . . . if there 

were any jobs available, he certainly couldn’t get; he’s just not 

capable of doing it. 

 

Mr. Minister, The Workers’ Compensation Act, and I should 

point out for the minister if you don’t know what the WCB 

(Workers’ Compensation Board) is, you might not know who 

sat on the WCB review committee – Judge Muir chaired it. This 

is the fourth one he has chaired. He has made a very significant 

contribution to this province in chairing these. It included – I 

won’t got through it all – it included: Mr. Brown, Mr. Antonini, 

Mr. Maxwell, Mr. Magnan; those, I may say, are successful 

business men. I think that’s true in all cases. It included Mr. 

Norheim, Mr. Munt, Mr. Zaba. Some of those represent 

workers – Mr. Norheim is an employee of the Canadian Labour 

Congress. They unanimously made this recommendation and, 

as I say, they included a comment that I’ve never seen in a 

report before: “And the committee further recommends that the 

board implement this policy as soon as possible.” 

 

Mr. Minister, you got this in September of ’86. You got this 

report in lots of time to deal with it at this current session. 

Whatever else one might say about a session that starts in June, 

there’s not a whole lot to be said about it that’s very good. It 

would at least give you an extra three or four months to prepare 

the legislation which you need to  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2180 

 

implement these changes. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister, when you are going to deal with 

some of these problems and, in particular, when are we going to 

deal with this problem of having injured workmen who are 

physically incapable of working of an age where they simply 

can’t land a job? 

 

Anyone who thinks there isn’t age discrimination in our work 

place has never been in your ’50s or ’60s and tried to find a job; 

a very difficult thing to do – hard enough for men, much harder 

for women. So I say, Mr. Minister, that you are deeming people 

to be capable of earning wages, which is just fanciful. Nobody 

pays . . . my friend again . . . nobody pays $8 an hour for 

security people; he couldn’t do it if there were any jobs, and 

there aren’t any jobs available. So I ask you, Mr. Minister, 

when you are going to deal with this very serious problem with 

WCB? As I say, I’m just ashamed to be a member of a society 

which treats people in such a shabby fashion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I do detect some crass 

delight in the members opposite – as much as they protest that 

they have no crass delight in seeing people with problems – but 

I do detect some. 

 

The 1979 changes to The Workers’ Compensation Act – I have 

to compliment the former government – were good for workers 

and were good for employees. They were the right thing to do at 

the time, and there were some problems in that 1979 Act that 

have been worked out since then. And this is one area in the 

Workers’ Compensation Board where there has been very little 

politics, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Over the years each government 

has improved The Workers’ Compensation Act, whether it was 

Liberal, CCF, NDP, or Conservative, and improvements 

continue. 

 

No government has dipped into the funds of the Workers’ 

Compensation Board at election time to be generous with the 

funds in that board. The board has operated, for the most part, 

independently of government, has done an excellent job, and 

Saskatchewan is recognized to have one of the best workers’ 

compensation plans in Canada. And we have people from other 

parts of Canada coming to Saskatchewan to study our plan. 

We’ve had the Governor of Colorado study our plan, other 

states in the United States, by using Saskatchewan as an 

example. 

 

And so what was done? In 1979 improvements were made. I’ve 

given credit to the NDP government of the time for those 

improvements. We made two other major improvements. We 

opened the books as we felt that information should be 

available, and we went to 95 per cent of net, which was fair to 

families and not quite as generous to single employees. 

 

And I do agree with the member opposite that this “deeming” 

has become a problem, not a problem created by our 

government, and possibly not intended by his government in 

1979. And as much as I can influence the board without 

changing the legislation, I am now directing the board to try to 

find a solution to the deeming. I don’t know if it can be exactly 

as recommended by the board that studied the Act, but I do 

admit that deeming is a problem, and in some cases is unfair, 

and is probably the  

major problem before the board right now. And I would be 

hopeful that the board can work out a solution to this before the 

end of this calendar year. 

 

There is something you have to consider though, that the 

emphasis has been on rehabilitation. And Judge Muir, with 

whom I met very recently, indicates that he believes strongly 

that rehabilitation is the right direction to go. I tend to agree 

with him. And then you have to at some stage say to a person: 

you have been rehabilitated; therefore, you have to go out and 

earn a living and you cannot remain on the pension for ever. 

But you have been rehabilitated or you have been re-educated 

so that you can now do a different job. 

 

I do agree that deeming has to be looked at, and it will be 

looked at, and I have given you a commitment that by the end 

of this calendar year we hope to have the board with a new 

policy on deeming. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, why on earth does it take 16 

months to deal with a problem which is as serious as this one? 

That would be an unacceptable period of time if you had to find 

the solution, but the solution was presented to you 16 months 

ago. If it were the oil companies or big business, to which you 

pay such fond regard, the problem would have been solved by 

the end of September in 1986. Here it is September ’87; you’re 

talking about a solution at the end of the year. I wished I had 

some faith in that. But let’s assume that you actually meet that. 

Why on earth does it take 16 months to deal with such a serious 

problem? 

 

The rank injustices which are occurring to these people just 

should not be tolerated. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you 

ought to have done it long before the passage of 16 months. 

 

Let me just make a small guess. You’re going to wait until after 

this session is over, and then your solution will necessitate 

legislation. So we’ll be back into another session, and it won’t 

happen again; you won’t get the legislation passed until the 

middle of 1988, and then you’ll take a period of some months to 

draft the legislation. Lo and behold! 1988 will pass by with the 

solution still not in hand. 

 

Mr. Minister, you wonder why I’m so cynical. Because that’s 

what happened with the last report that you had, and that’s what 

happened with the report from the Minimum Wage Board. 

These reports which are designed to alleviate the plight of 

working people – you have developed a standard pattern which 

puts off the solution just as long as you conceivably can – you 

take 16 months to consider what is a straightforward 

recommendation comprising not more than 2- or 300 words. 

You put it off until after the session is over. Then you discover 

legislation is necessary, so you bring in the legislation and you 

don’t get that passed for another six months. Then you took, as 

you have in previous occasions, months – sometimes up to a 

year – to get the regulations passed. Two or three years goes by 

without a solution to what is a very serious problem for those 

individuals involved. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, that I am not at all relieved  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2181 

 

when I hear you talking about a solution by the end of the year. 

That, I think, is your guess as to when this session is going to be 

over. Mr. Minister, if you were at all sincere in dealing with this 

problem, the solution would have been in hand and would have 

been implemented before now, and if it concerned anything 

other than working people, it would have been done. 

 

(1615) 

 

If it was Imperial Oil that was suffering, or any of your other 

big business friends, you’d find a way to do it right away. You 

would do it right away. But because it’s an injured workman, 

who is largely voiceless, who you think has no political 

strength, you feel free to ignore it for years. And that, I say, Mr. 

Minister, is what you’re going to do here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, when you 

change a provision like deeming that was implemented many 

years ago, there has to be a calculation as to the cost that will be 

involved and who will pay for it. Now we just about have that 

calculation completed, and once that calculation is completed, 

we anticipate making changes. 

 

I didn’t say we’d wait until the end of the year. I said we would 

do it before the end of the year, and that would be the latest that 

it would be done. Possibly the policies can be changed very 

soon, but we’re waiting for the detailed calculation so we know 

exactly who will gain and who will benefit. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — But, Mr. Minister, let me remind you that 

this particular piece of legislation is not an act of charity. This 

was a contract entered into and in which each side gave up 

something. Initially, some decades ago, workmen gave up the 

right to sue their employer when they got hurt. They no longer 

have that right. Employers, likewise, got a freedom from the 

expense of legal suits. Back in . . . and that was the deal that 

was struck. 

 

And back in 1979, Mr. Minister, that contract was amended 

with each party getting something. The workers gave up what 

was a sure thing that nobody could do them out of. If you lost a 

finger, you got the money. It might have been rough justice, and 

it often was a pretty crude system, but it was sure. They gave 

that up because they trusted in the fairness of the government 

which was administering this program. And employers got 

some things of this, too. So it was a bargain, a contract. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, that it doesn’t matter. I can’t believe 

the cost is going to be that high. I understand from the board, 

who’ve considered it, that it isn’t going to be that high. But I 

say to you, Mr. Minister, that whatever the cost, the working 

people have been cheated out of their side of this bargain 

because they’re no longer getting what they’re entitled to. 

 

I can’t believe, Mr. Minister, that it’s taken you 12 months to 

add up the figures. I have met with various members of the 

board and they have told me what they think it’ll cost, and it’s 

not exorbitant. I can’t believe it takes you 12 months to add up 

the figures. I just can’t believe that. 

 

I say, Mr. Minister, that this is like everything else, whether it 

be the report of the minimum wage board which we waited on 

for some years; whether it be the regulations for accessibility to 

buildings which we waited on for some years, if it concerns the 

poor and the disadvantaged it takes for ever. If it’s big business, 

you people can act with the speed of lightning. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s just not satisfactory for you to stand here and 

say you’ve got to know what it costs. That is not good enough. 

Working people have been cheated under this system, and that’s 

the kind of language I may say which many members of the 

board use as well. It is just a fraud upon working people. 

 

For you to sit here and say that you’ve got to take your time 

adding up the figures, it will just not do, Mr. Minister. I don’t 

know whether or not I’m conveying to you the outrage which I 

and members of this caucus feel, but it’s very considerable. If 

there is one issue which I wished we could tie up this Assembly 

with for two or three weeks, it would be this one. There are very 

few things I feel as strongly about as this, Mr. Minister. I’m 

angry about it, and I wish that I could convey to you some of 

that anger. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 

being repetitive and can be repetitive as long as he wishes. The 

rules of this Assembly are within your jurisdiction. 

 

The system that we have in Workers’ Compensation is a 

no-fault system, and the trade-offs that were made between 

employees and employers that he stated were in fact made, yes. 

But he also didn’t taken into account that it’s a no-fault system 

and, as a result of The Workers’ Compensation Act, the 

employee is now also compensated for his or her own 

negligence which could not be sued upon in the past, only if 

there was negligence on the part of the employer. 

 

In addition, the system is entirely paid for by the employer. We 

have estimates of the cost on a deeming change at between 5 

and $15 million; we’d like to get that narrowed down a bit 

more. We have a responsibility at the Workers’ Compensation 

Board to treat workers fairly but also to prevent abuse. With 

respect to deeming, I agree that it’s a problem, and it’s not as an 

immediate problem as you suggest because the board has a 

discretion to hear appeals to consider the cases. I do agree that 

at the operative level some of the employees may be exercising 

their discretion on deeming in a somewhat unreasonable 

manner, and the board has the power to deal with those 

instances. It is not as serious a problem as you suggest; 

however, I do agree that it’s a problem, and we will try to deal 

with it as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to first preface 

my remarks by simply saying to the minister it is every bit as 

serious a problem as the member for Regina Centre has stated. 

If anything, the member for Regina Centre is understating the 

problem of deeming – understating. And I use that word very 

carefully. I just want to add that from my perspective as an 

urban member representing Regina North, the biggest single 

issue, the biggest single item that I receive phone calls and 

letters about is dealing with the Workers’  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2182 

 

Compensation Board. And in the vast majority of those 

instances where I’m dealing with the Workers’ Compensation 

Board, deeming is the number one problem. 

 

The member from Regina Centre did not overstate the problem; 

he understated it. The member for Regina Centre talked a little 

bit about the so-called meat chart that was in place up until the 

very late 1970s. And at that time, Mr. Minister, the deal was 

struck that the meat chart would disappear because one or two 

fingers for a politician does not directly affect our means of 

livelihood, but one or two fingers for a typist is very serious. 

One or two fingers for most types of musicians can mean, 

essentially, their livelihood. That’s why the meat chart was so 

unfair. That’s why the meat chart was eliminated, if you like, 

after a unanimous recommendation from the Workers’ 

Compensation review committee of that time. 

 

There’s two concerns that I want to deal with primarily today. 

First is – and the two are actually tied right together – 

rehabilitation and deeming. And the two go hand and hand. 

 

We should be, Mr. Minister, we should be helping workers that 

have been injured in the course of their employment. These 

workers never ever asked to be injured. They’ve never asked for 

the pain. They’ve never asked for the suffering that results 

directly from the injury. They’ve never asked for the loss of 

jobs which, in many cases, many of them are experiencing – a 

loss of jobs as they can no longer physically do the jobs they 

had earlier. Injured workers never ask for the loss in self-esteem 

that goes with having a job. We’ve in a society that that 

measures men and women by the jobs that they have, injured 

workers never ask for the loss in a career path that many of 

them have suffered, and that’s a very important consideration. 

And they’ve certainly never asked for the uncertainty about 

their future, nor did they ask to be turned out in a very, very 

harsh job market. 

 

Workers, Mr. Minister, should be rehabilitated. Rehabilitation 

should not simply mean sending a meat-cutter for example, on a 

five-week training course to allow that meat-cutter to enter 

some completely unrelated field. Rehabilitation should rather be 

something that is agreed by the Workers’ Compensation Board 

and more importantly, by the injured worker, that yes, there is a 

new career path that this worker is interested in pursuing. Then, 

I submit to you, the responsibility of the Workers’ 

Compensation Board is that of trying to accommodate that 

injured worker and get that man or that woman back embarked 

on a career path where they can continue earning moneys, 

continue being a productive member of our society and, indeed, 

maybe even continue paying some taxes to try and pay off some 

of your deficit. 

 

On top of the rehabilitation problem, on top of all of the other 

humilities that are heaped upon injured workers, there is the 

additional and persistent practice of deeming. And injured men 

and women certainly know what I’m talking about when I talk 

of deeming. That practice, as you’ve agreed, was started in the 

late 1970s and it was intended, as the member for Regina 

Centre pointed out, the practice of deeming was intended for 

use when  

suitable employment was found injured workers. And by 

“suitable” we mean work that the injured person is trained to 

do, is capable of doing, is physically capable of doing and 

mentally capable of doing, and then you deem that person for 

an actual job – not a non-existent job, not some airy-fairy job 

that somebody deems there is. 

 

I’ve got a specific example, Mr. Minister, of an unfair deeming 

practice that happened to one of my constituents. Contrary to 

what you’re saying in your earlier response to the member from 

Regina Centre, I take no crass delight in this whatsoever, and I 

resent very much that you would even insinuate that we on this 

side of the House somehow take some crass delight in the pain 

and the suffering that other human beings are having. I don’t 

accuse you of taking some crass delight in their misfortune, and 

I would appreciate it if you did not accuse us of the same, 

because we do not take any delight whatsoever in the suffering, 

particularly of injured workers. 

 

The case I want to relate to you, Mr. Minister, is that of a meat 

cutter who injured his back at work. He tried dealing with the 

rehabilitation department of the Workers’ Compensation Board, 

and for various reasons this injured worker and the Workers’ 

Compensation Board could not come to some agreement on 

how he could be best rehabilitated, or more succinctly put, how 

he could best be retrained. There was either a real problem, or a 

real problem in communication. Either way the result is the 

same – an agreement could not be struck. 

 

(1630) 

 

So after many, many, many months of frustration, I’m sure by 

the Workers’ Compensation Board – but I can assure you, 

equally from my constituent – after many months of that, the 

Workers’ Compensation Board went on a little expedition; I’m 

not sure what the word I want to use is, but they went on a little 

expedition to think up what job this man could do. 

 

And they deemed him for, Mr. Minister, they deemed this man 

for a non-existent job – totally non-existent. They deemed this 

person capable of being a meat order taker at the desk. When 

you saw the job title, it became readily apparent that nowhere in 

the meat industry was there such a position. There was, 

however, one position remotely close. The closest we could find 

to this position, and the pay, Mr. Minister, at this real job was 

substantially less than the pay that the board deemed this 

non-existent job would entail. 

 

This has, of course, caused a great deal of problems. You’re 

aware that once my constituent was deemed as capable of 

working at this non-existent job, his compensation was reduced 

by the amount he was deemed capable of earning, even though 

there is no such job And it’s just very, very frustrating . . . I get 

very frustrated trying to convey to you the frustrations that my 

constituent feels, and I’m sure he’s not alone in that. 

 

Are you, Mr. Minister, dealing with this unfairness of the 

deeming situation, and I know you have assured us that by the 

end of the year you’re going to have the deeming problem 

resolved. I share some doubts about that  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2183 

 

because deeming has been going on since 1979. You have 

known about the problem, or your government should have 

known about the problem, since 1982 or, assuming you’re slow 

learners, 1983 or 1984, but certainly not after that. Here was are 

in 1987 getting to the stage where we can see the end of the 

year, and still no action on this incredibly important issue of 

deeming. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister, is: what are you going to do in the 

cases – specifically in the case that I’m relating to you – but in 

cases like that? What are you going to do about the deeming 

situation for those people that are trapped in an untenuous 

situation right now that is just patently unfair? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we don’t discuss 

individual cases in the committee. If the member opposite will 

send me the name of the individual, we’ll look into it. Usually 

what people have to do is appeal. There are appeal routes within 

the Workers’ Compensation Board. I’ve had constituents of my 

own who’ve taken appeals. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, it should be kept in mind that the 

Winnipeg Free Press has a story on Sunday, January 25, 1987. 

The headline reads: “Workers’ Compensation Board critics cite 

Saskatchewan as a model operation.” 

 

Critics of Manitoba Workers’ Compensation Board point 

to Saskatchewan as a model of efficiency and financial 

stability which should be copied here. 

 

So I have already indicated that we would try to solve every 

problem, and the deeming is a problem. And we will try to 

work out a solution that still brings this province in the direction 

of rehabilitation but takes some of the discretion of the 

individual board workers who have used their discretion, 

possibly in some cases, in a manner that is not as fair and just as 

could be. We will try to work a solution to the problem, and no 

amount of repetition in this Assembly will speed up the process. 

We will do it as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, of course the Saskatchewan 

workers’ compensation system is the best, or one of . . . 

certainly one of the best, but I suspect the best compensation 

system in Canada. That compensation Act was passed in the 

late 1970s under New Democratic Party administration. But 

certainly . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — 1911. 

 

Mr. Trew: — The minister points out it was originated in 1911. 

But specifically, the changes that make Saskatchewan’s system 

second to none in Canada were implemented in 1979 in the 

changes that were made then. 

 

You talk of a no-fault system. Indeed, it’s supposed to be a 

no-fault system, Mr. Minister, but right now it’s no fault for the 

employers and the employees are automatically assumed to be 

at fault. That’s what is happening as a direct result of the 

deeming process, where people are being severely cut back on 

their income through . . . again through no fault of their own, 

because they’re being  

deemed for jobs that simply are not there. And that was never 

the intention when the amendments to The Workers’ 

Compensation Act were passed in 1979. The intent was never 

for the Workers’ Compensation Board to deem people capable 

of working in jobs that are either non-existent or where there 

are no vacancies – never was that the intention. The intention 

was never to penalize injured workers. 

 

You also spoke in your response to my earlier question about 

the appeal procedures. And surely you understand that as long 

as we have the present deeming practice, an appeal procedure is 

not going to do any good whatsoever. The deeming practice 

will be upheld and has been consistently upheld by the workers’ 

compensation appeal process. 

 

Because I want to point out one of the problems there is with 

the very appeal process, Mr. Minister, and that is, when a 

worker is injured, that worker goes through their Workers’ 

Compensation Board worker; if the decision is not a happy one, 

that goes to that person’s supervisor, and if the decision is still 

not a happy one for the injured worker, it is appealed. Where? 

To the Workers’ Compensation Board, which very naturally – 

very, very naturally – will want to uphold the decisions made 

by its own employees. That’s quite natural and quite 

understandable, but it’s a weakness in the appeal procedure, 

because in every instance we have injured workers appealing a 

decision made by the Workers’ Compensation Board, not to a 

court, not to an outside tribunal, but they’re appealing a 

decision made by the Workers’ Compensation Board; they’re 

appealing to the Workers’ Compensation Board. 

 

It just does not provide, despite all of the attempts by the board, 

it does not provide for that inherent sense of fairness where 

justice will not only be done, but be seen to be done. And that is 

an inherent weakness in the appeal procedure. 

 

But leaving that, we’ve still got the situation where an appeal 

on the deeming process is absolutely pointless until you come 

through with some corrective measures dealing with the 

deeming process. 

 

I just want to ask one question about the case that I was reciting 

to you. You mentioned that you would look into it. I know 

we’re not dealing with a specific case, and I’m not giving you 

that person’s name. I’ve very much on purpose not done that, 

but I’m wondering what hope that person will have. If I give 

you the details, and the Workers’ Compensation Board has 

already turned down the appeal, even though the deeming 

process is recognized, even by you, as being an unfair one, what 

sort of hope does this person have for getting a reversal of the 

unfair deeming decision that was made for him? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if the 

person in question has appealed to the board or not. There’s no 

limit on how many times the board can re-hear a new appeal. 

It’s not like a court of law where you only one appeal; it’s more 

like the American system where you can appeal over and over 

and over again. 

 

I can tell you this, that if there are merits to the case, that  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2184 

 

the board would give it serious consideration. If I examine the 

case and agree with you that this is a case where the individual 

has been hard done by, I would send my personal 

recommendation that the board reconsider this and consider the 

fresh evidence that you might be able to produce. 

 

So you know, I don’t want to interfere with the board, but I am 

prepared to state my opinion. And if your fresh evidence would 

change my opinion or convince me that there’s an injustice, I 

would do everything possible to correct it. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, when injured workers appeal to the 

Workers’ Compensation Board, they are told very plainly that 

they are allowed one appeal. If you push that, you will be told 

that, well, if you have fresh evidence we can allow a further 

appeal. But there is nothing that I’m aware of that says there has 

to be appeal after appeal after appeal allowed. You are giving 

the impression here in this House that an injured worker can 

appeal and appeal, and reappeal and reappeal and reappeal, and 

that just is not the way it is dealt with. That is not what workers 

are being told when they try to appeal. 

 

They are told: you have one shot. That decision is binding on 

the board and on the injured worker. So I’m just a little bit upset 

by your misinformation here in the House, because if you are 

giving the correct information, then I submit to you, Mr. 

Minister, that your Workers’ Compensation Board workers are 

not giving correct information, and one of the two problems 

should be rectified. 

 

The second and closing comment I have in regards to the 

meat-cutter case that I have brought before you. I, of course, 

have no fresh evidence, Mr. Minister. The deeming process is 

the problem. There’s no fresh evidence. What the member for 

Regina Centre was asking you to do is correct the unfairness of 

the deeming process. I have no information that was not 

available six months ago and a year and, indeed, most of it a 

year and a half ago. There’s no fresh evidence in this case, but 

there is a patent unfairness in the whole deeming process. 

 

That is what I’m asking you for, is simply that you will 

undertake to review this instance that I will write you a letter 

on. I’ll be writing you a letter. I want you to review it in light 

specifically of the problems with the deeming. No fresh 

information, same old information; just simply, if you’re going 

to rectify the deeming problem, let’s start with this case that I 

will be writing you in the next few days on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I await the case. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, my question’s to the minister. Mr. 

Minister, on page 73 of the Workers’ Compensation Board 

annual report, there’s an item . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, the report. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The report. 

An Hon. Member: — WCB report, not the . . . (inaudible) . . . 

report. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Annual report. There’s an item here showing 

that there was a transfer to the injury fund of over $12 million. I 

gather that that really in essence is an employer’s subsidy, and 

I’m wondering why moneys were taken out of the pension 

reserve fund and transferred to the injury fund when, in fact, 

perhaps premiums or assessments should have gone up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, there’s nothing 

very significant about $12 million being transferred from one 

fund to the other. There’s really nothing very significant about 

having the two funds any more. There are older claims from 

years ago that are based on pensions; the newer claims are 

based on wage loss, and it doesn’t really matter which fund the 

money is in. All of the money comes from the employers and is 

kept in reserve to pay future claims and outstanding liabilities. 

So your suggestion that there is some sort of subsidy of 

employers is totally impossible because all of the money comes 

from employers. 

 

(1645) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not that stupid. I do 

know that all of the money does come from the employers. My 

question to you simply is this: why weren’t premiums 

increased, and why was $12 million taken out of the pension 

reserve fund? And to follow up on that, I’d be interested in 

knowing when there were changes to various industries’ 

premiums in the last year. Which industries had those changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the pension fund would be 

adjusted for anticipated liabilities in the pension fund which are 

based on injuries past. We have a rate classification book. It 

contains over 100 industries. We could send over the book for 

you. 

 

An Hon. Member: — When was there a premium change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The question you had was: when were 

premiums changed? They’ve changed annually, and some go up 

and some go down depending on the safety record of a given 

category. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Could the minister also send over the various 

claims by industry to me? Part of the problem in reading the 

annual report, unless you have the codes available to you, it’s 

very difficult to discern which industries have the largest 

number of claims. Could the minister give me that information 

as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the information 

requested is contained on page 78 of the report and on table 2. 

All of the information requested is in the report which the 

member has in her hand. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. I’ll have to check that. But in the 

meantime, I’m wondering why your government has not acted 

on the review committee’s recommendation that legislation 

protecting workers from arbitrary dismissal be enacted? 

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2185 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, depending on the length 

of the session, we could have legislative changes later in this 

session. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, the committee of review 

had a number of recommendations for improving the quality of 

information being provided to claimants. And I must commend 

the Workers’ Compensation Board for the letters that articulate 

very clearly the reasons or the rationale for board decisions. 

 

However, this has created another problem. Because of the 

practice of sending employers copies of the correspondence, 

we’ve had some instances where workers have been fired as a 

result of the information. I’m wondering if you can assure us 

that all of these lengthy summaries of information sent to 

employees does not get into the hands of the employers, 

because some employers have fired the employees who’ve 

made the claim. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the committee of review 

has insisted that both sides, employers and employees, receive 

information as a matter of natural justice. Dismissal of 

employees: this has not been brought to my attention. However, 

if there is just cause for dismissal, that would be a circumstance 

that is normal and expected. If there’s not just cause, the 

employee would have to take the usual remedies in unjust 

dismissal. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — As I’ve indicated, the board has improved 

the quality of letters to the claimants, but in at least one case 

this has directly led to the claimant losing his job. And I’ll give 

you the information, Mr. Minister. In denying an appeal for a 

back injury claim, the Workers’ Compensation Board discussed 

the claimant’s back history in detail, and concluded, and I 

quote: 

 

It would seem clear that your recent back problems are on 

the basis of predisposition to back difficulty due to 

noncompensible factors exclusively. Your appeal, 

therefore, is denied. While a job change has been 

recommended, it is clear that this has been on a 

preventative basis in order to prevent repeated back 

strains. 

 

Now this information went to the claimant’s employer, and the 

employer was advised of the information. Unfortunately, the 

claimant was advised by the employer, and I quote: 

 

In view of the most recent Workers’ Compensation Board 

report and medical information already on file with our 

chief of health and medical services, it’s evident that you 

must avoid heavy lifting. Given the nature of your existing 

position as trackman, it’s evident that you can no longer be 

permitted to work in this position. 

 

There was no alternate work available for the claimant, and the 

person was fired. Now further to this, Mr. Minister, the 

employer put on the claimant’s record of employment that he 

was dismissed for medical reasons. Unemployment Insurance 

Commission interpreted this to mean that he was not fit for 

work, and hence ineligible  

for unemployment insurance. 

 

As a result of this type of case, the board should be very careful 

about the type of information it’s providing to employers. And 

would it not be reasonable, Mr. Minister, that the board provide 

the employer with a summary of information, but not go into all 

the detail of the information because the detail can lead to 

employees being fired. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the board has no 

intention to suppress information, and it’s unfortunate that this 

individual can no longer do that job if that information brought 

to us by the member opposite is correct. If we were privately 

given the name, we could look into the case; however, the 

problem is that the board will not suppress information, and if 

an employee cannot do the job in the position that the employee 

is in, it’s not the fault of the board. It’s unfortunate, but it’s 

certainly not the fault of the board. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, the employee was doing 

the job, was back on the job and, as a result of information that 

your board sent to that employer, that employee no longer has a 

job. That employee wasn’t even eligible for Unemployment 

Insurance Commission benefits because the employer put on 

the separation slip that the employee was ill and not capable of 

working. 

 

And it’s because of your policies of giving all of the 

information to the employer, those policies have led to this 

particular employee’s dismissal from his job as a trackman. 

And all I’m simply asking you: is it not possible to give a 

summary of information to the employer that doesn’t 

necessarily lead to employees getting dismissed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I believe you acknowledge that the 

information given was not false; that the board gave correct 

information; it was true. The board did not intend anything 

malicious. The board was simply giving correct information. 

 

We will not suppress information, because once you start 

suppressing information then somebody has to decide what to 

suppress. And we will not take a scissor and cut out information 

that says, now this information has been cut out, there’s a hole 

in the document because we don’t think you should know this 

about your employee. And the employer would then try even 

harder to find out what was being suppressed. 

 

So it sounds like a very unfortunate situation, but certainly one 

that the board cannot change by suppressing information or 

censoring the information. The truth is the truth. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, another major complaint of 

injured workers is the necessity to travel to Regina in order to 

receive rehabilitation. And I’m wondering what sort of 

rehabilitation facilities are available in Saskatoon and other 

smaller areas, and are these being utilized to the full capacity by 

the board? And does the board force people to attend the 

Wascana Rehab. Centre for therapy when adequate facilities are 

available in their home area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m advised  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2186 

 

by my officials that employees can also seek rehabilitation and 

receive rehabilitation in Prince Albert, Saskatoon, in addition to 

Regina. If they wish the best treatment, they would probably 

have to come to Regina. 

 

There is an expansion to the Wascana Hospital here at a cost of 

about $54 million, of which the Workers’ Compensation Board 

is paying $12 million. When this facility is completed, it will be 

one of the most modern in the world. And while some facilities 

are available in Saskatoon and P.A., the best in the world will 

be in Regina. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, there are a number of workers 

in this province who are injured who believe that they’re being 

forced to travel to Regina for no other reasons than to be 

monitored and to be harassed. And I’m simply asking you this: 

does a worker have to come to Regina if therapeutic facilities 

are available in their home area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the allegation has no 

substance. We have the excellent treatment facilities in Regina 

now, and they will be the best when the new $54 million 

hospital is completed. And a person who truly needs treatment 

should have no objection to coming to Regina and receiving 

treatment in the best facilities available. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: Mr. Minister, the allegation does have some 

substance. I’m not denying that there are very, very capable 

people at the Wascana Rehab Centre that are capable of doing 

all kinds of therapeutic work on injured workers. My point is 

that there are very, very capable people in people’s home 

communities that are capable of doing the kind of therapy that’s 

now being done in Regina. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have another question. Is your government 

considering implementing recommendation 10 of the committee 

of review and removing the criteria that claimants must be 

unemployable before they qualify for the independence 

allowance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, yes. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — That’s good, Mr. Minister, because there are 

a number of people who’ve contacted me that are presently 

employed, but because of their work-related injuries they’re no 

longer able to do yard work; they’re no longer able to shovel 

snow; they’re no longer able to wash their walls or scrub their 

floors. As a result, they have to hire people. And I think that it’s 

important that your government seriously consider removing 

the criteria that’s now in place. 

 

I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, if you can advise me how long it 

takes on average to process a claim; what are the bottle-necks in 

the present system; and what administrative steps are being 

taken to remove those bottle-necks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, probably the biggest 

bottle-neck is the employees’ delay in getting their files in and 

their applications in. I find the average delay is 14 days from 

date of injury until the time that we  

get the information before the board. The average turn around 

time is 28 days in order to get some compensation going – the 

average time is 28 days. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, would you admit that part of 

the problem is that employers don’t submit their form? That’s 

one of the major bottle-necks in the system – that employees do 

get their forms in, but the problem is with the employer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, our experience is that 

employers and employees are about 50-50 at fault for delays in 

getting the necessary documentation in. The judge, from your 

report, has indicated that the amount of time allowed for getting 

the information in and making the claim should be reduced to 

five days, subject to some extension in some circumstances. So 

we’re leaning towards implementing that recommendation of a 

five-day requirement for making the application and getting the 

information out, and we would hope that will improve the 

situation. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you advise me what sort of 

consultative mechanism you used in appointing your latest 

board member to the board of the Workers’ Compensation 

Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, there’s been a change at 

the Workers’ Compensation Board. As you know, we’ve had 

two retirements. The report suggests that the board stick with a 

format of three members. We have now gone back to that 

format of three members. 

 

We wanted an individual who had some experience in being an 

employee; some experience in supervision is helpful in the case 

of this employee. The person appointed is a member of the 

boilermakers’ international union, and the person appointed is 

very much a person respected by co-workers in the construction 

industry. It’s also helpful to have someone from the 

construction industry, which is one of the most dangerous and 

accident-prone areas of employment in Saskatchewan. The 

person appointed is G. Leonard Larson, appointed June 3, 1987 

and has been employed as a construction labourer, a mechanical 

draftsman, a boilermaker mechanic, field construction 

supervisor, superintendent of construction; is a journeyman 

welder and journeyman boilermaker; has served as a business 

representative of the boilermakers’ union; was a union job 

steward; has served on various occupational health committees 

– seemed like the ideal person to fill that position. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Was this person a nominee of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour or the building trades 

union, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The answer is no, the person appointed 

was not a nominee of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 

There was a nominee, an employee of the Canadian Labour 

Congress. We felt that this individual had more contact with the 

actual work situation. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know if you’re aware of 

the process that’s been used in the past, but as I  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2187 

 

understand it, since workmen compensation boards were set up 

in Saskatchewan in 1929, I guess, the guiding principle for the 

appointment of the board is to make sure that there’s equal 

representation in terms of the interest of employers and 

employees. This, as I understand it, was done to insure that both 

employers and employees had equal numbers of representatives 

on the board and that there would be a neutral chair. 

 

Now in the past the practice has been to consult the Federation 

of Labour or to consult the building trades union in the 

appointment of the employee representative to the board, just as 

the chamber of commerce and the board of trade throughout the 

province are consulted. So I’m wondering why, in this case, in 

this appointment, did you not consult with the various labour 

organizations in the province to insure that the person that was 

appointed did in fact have their blessing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Minister, we did consult, but we 

certainly wouldn’t have the chamber of commerce tell us who 

we would put on the board, nor would we have the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour tell us who we will put on 

the board. We would not have the minority dictate to the 

majority. The majority of workers in this province are not part 

of the labour union movement, are not part of the Canadian 

Labour Congress, are not part of the Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labour, and I see nothing wrong with having an ordinary 

boilermaker on the board, rather than a union leader 

boilermaker. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I think that what’s at issue here 

is not who was appointed; what’s at issue is the way in which 

you made the appointment. It’s no different than the way in 

which the Ombudsman was appointed. You did not have . . . 

you did not consult with this side of the House, and therefore it 

puts into jeopardy the whole position of the Ombudsman. 

 

And all I’m simply saying is that you did not have the 

agreement. You did not choose to consult with the labour 

movement in this province in appointing labour’s representative 

to the board of the Workers’ Compensation Board. And I’m 

simply asking you if this is the way you generally do business 

and operate your department in this province? Do you not 

bother to consult with the groups that are the groups that are 

most before the board of the Workers’ Compensation Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, now that the member 

opposite raised it, I do recall I did not consult with all of the 

union groups, and I did not consult with the Saskatchewan 

Farmers’ Union. And I suppose I could have, but we did pick a 

person who was well suited for the job. And we are not in the 

habit of asking the opposition how to run the government, and 

we are not going to start to get into that habit. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wanted to ask, as well, 

about the . . . what appears to be a transfer from the reserves to 

the fund. The figure on page 73 does, indeed, seem to be a draw 

down of the reserves. Could you . . . would you admit that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, there is one fund, 

basically. We are talking here about accounting  

procedures. There’s no draw down. The fund is approximately 

$300 million. That’s a reserve. That’s why Saskatchewan has 

one of the best systems, ever since 1929 when it was started. 

And we’re talking here really about an accounting entry. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I 

wanted to ask you . . . I wanted to ask you what your position 

was on the drug testing done by B. E. & K. in Prince Albert. 

Does that strike you as being a fair procedure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve already stated 

publicly that I saw nothing unfair about the company trying to 

determine what kind of employees they had, and whether the 

employees that they might be hiring were breaking the laws of 

Canada. And I see nothing wrong with an employer wanting to 

know whether a potential employee is out regularly breaking 

the laws of this country. I haven’t changed my mind as yet. I 

still see nothing wrong with that idea. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Is it an idea, Mr. Minister, which you’d 

like to see spread to other areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if laws are being broken 

in this country, I would like us to find out who’s breaking them 

and prosecute the individuals in all respects. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the governments of both 

Nova Scotia and Ontario have announced . . . Nova Scotia has 

implemented it. Ontario has announced plans to implement a 

proposal for indexing private . . . whereby private pensions 

would be indexed. As I say, it’s been done in Nova Scotia, and 

Ontario has announced their intention to do it. Is this something 

that we might see in the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, this concept is under 

study. It would be desirable. Unfortunately . . . where these 

plans are funded and could pay this out of the funding 

provisions, it should be done, but in a lot of cases the inflation 

was not taken into account, and there is no funding available 

there. So it’s under consideration. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m not at all relieved to hear 

it’s under consideration. So is virtually everything else that 

we’ve asked you. Mr. Minister, when do you think you might 

arrive at a decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The suggested answers are in due 

course, soon. We meet with other ministers from other 

provinces. You’ve checked my travel, and you’ll notice that I 

meet with other ministers. And if we could get a Canadian 

consensus and a Canadian solution to that, we would like to 

take part. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 8 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Just with respect to that, Mr. Minister, I’m 

not sure whether or not the member from Moose Jaw  

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2188 

 

North got from you a statement of the government’s intention 

with respect to the heritage grant. Do you view that as a 

permanent program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the Premier has already 

given the government’s position in that regard. The program 

has continued for two years now at a cost of $40 million 

annually, and it seems to have some degree of permanence. I 

cannot gaze in my crystal ball and tell you what the price of 

wheat will be next year or five years from now or, as the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg wanted to know, what 

the price of potash would be or how many people would be 

employed five years from now. But assuming that the economy 

does not get any worse than it is, and we expect it should get 

better, it should be a permanent program. 

 

Item 8 agreed to. 

 

Items 9 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 12 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I’ll just point out, Mr. Minister, under this 

particular subvote, I was complaining earlier about the 

downgrading of the department. I would point out, Mr. 

Minister, that when . . . the first year you were in office this 

Labour Standards had 47 people; now it’s down to 22. No one 

can suggest, Mr. Minister, that 22 people can do the work of 47. 

You’re just simply not enforcing your own legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the explanation is that at 

one time the apprenticeship officers were in this particular 

subvote. They’re now in Education. 

 

Item 12 agreed to. 

 

Items 13 and 14 agreed to. 

 

Item 15 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Some time ago, Mr. Chairman, the 

minister undertook to provide certain information to me on the 

estimates of this department, and that had to do with the 

property management corporation and the studies undertaken by 

consultants for the department. And I wonder if the minister has 

the information in a form previously presented to me by, for 

example, the Minister of the Environment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, no one on this side of 

the House recalls the request. If you could remind us what it 

was, we could try to recall it or try to get you the information. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I don’t have the form of the material here 

at this time, but it was a request for the breakdown of the space 

that the department occupies and, in addition to that, all of the 

consultant studies done for the department in the year, the cost 

of the studies, the purpose of the studies, and so forth. 

 

For example, Mr. Minister, I can refresh your memory. I have 

your letter here to me with regard to the Department of Social 

Services, wherein you state: 

 

Thank you for your letter of July 27, ’87, concerning two 

matters you will be raising during estimates for the 

Department of Social Services. I am having the 

department review the relevant information in order that I 

can respond during estimates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I recall that letter, 

and I recall that that’s the Department of Social Services. None 

of my officials can recall this request being made to our 

department. If you could . . . I can do this for you; if you’ll 

make the request or specify what you want, we’ll try to find it 

for you. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Being an eminently reasonable person, 

Mr. Minister, I will do that, and I will expect you will respond. 

 

(1715) 

 

Item 15 agreed to. 

 

Item 16 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I just make a quick comment, Mr. 

Minister. I note that the subvotes 16 to 21 are grants. They’re 

grants to assist in the development of youth; to assist in the 

economic development of natives; to assist with senior citizens’ 

programs; and to assist the unemployed. They have all been cut, 

and cut very drastically, and in some cases eliminated. Once 

again, Mr. Minister, we have the spectre of cut-backs at the 

expense of those who can least afford it. 

 

Item 16 agreed to. 

 

Items 17 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I just, Mr. Minister, wanted to express 

regret at this entire budget. Your particular department deals 

with human resources; that should be our first priority. We 

should be doing whatever we can to assist in the development 

of human resources. Mr. Minister, this budget, you ought to be 

ashamed of it. As I . . . 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — As I said earlier in my remarks, almost all 

the subvotes have been cut back, Mr. Minister. This department 

is a shadow of what it should be, and I can . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well those comments can be made; this is at 

the end of the totals. These general comments can be made here 

as well. If you want to . . . I simply want to say again, Mr. 

Minister, that the whole affair is most regrettable, that in the 

department which seeks, by and large, to assist disadvantaged 

people, we should see the greatest cut-backs as what we have, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank my 

officials for their assistance here. They’ve been very useful. I 

would also say that the opposition has been more civil than I 

anticipated, and I congratulate them for that. I wouldn’t want to 

say what I had anticipated, but I will say that they have been 

more civil than I anticipated. 

 

  



 

August 31, 1987 

2189 

 

We will run the department as efficiently as possible for another 

year, and I would hope that the opposition gets as informed as 

possible in the next year and we can get through these estimates 

in an even more civil manner next year, and in an even more 

informed way. 

 

So I thank everyone for their co-operation. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, given what everyone 

regards as a very high likelihood of a new minister, I expect this 

will go faster next year. 

 

I do also want to thank your officials for their attendance here 

and the assistance in these estimates. 

 

Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Vote 20 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 20 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? Carried. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Labour 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 20 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 20 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The House Leader has moved this 

House do now adjourn. Is that agreed? All those in favour say 

“aye”. All those opposed say “no”. I believe the ayes have it, on 

division. This House stands adjourned until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:22 p.m. 


