


















































July 6, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

July 6, 1987 
 

947 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me 
this opportunity to introduce a special guest today in the 
Speaker’s gallery. He is a gentleman from the United Kingdom, 
and he’s here in Saskatchewan to attend the marriage of a 
grandson. 
 
He is a gentleman who is well respected in his own community. 
He’s form Yorkshire, and he was on the Borough Council of 
Harrogate, and was so well respected in that community that he is 
an “honorary alderman” for that particular borough council. 
 
I suppose it’s fair for me to also tell the Chamber that he’s part of 
the English connection of the Brockelbank family, and I don’t 
want this to colour the warmth of the welcome that I know all 
members will extend to him when he’s introduced today. 
 
And I might say one more word about that. He was a little 
disappointed in the results of the British election just recently, 
and I wouldn’t want to say where he stands politically, but . . . 
However, let the members ferret that out for themselves. 
 
It was determined by my father, at some time prior to this, that 
Jack Brockelbank and he arose from the same place in England, 
so that they assume they must be cousins. And it gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce Mr. Jack Brockelbank from 
England. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gasoline Tax Rebate 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
direct a question to the Minister of Finance, and it deals with the 
7 cents a litre or the $6 a tank gasoline tax which was announced 
in the budget. Mr. Minister, from 1982 until 1986 you promised 
that there would never be a gasoline tax in Saskatchewan. One 
June 17 you announced a new gasoline tax imposed on 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Along with that, Mr. Minister, you have launched a massive, 
province -wide advertising campaign designed to try to sell this 
new tax, with extremely expensive radio and television and 
newspaper advertisements — even a glossy brochure that has 
now been sent to every household in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now during a time, Mr. Minister, when you’re telling everybody 
it’s necessary to practise restraint, expenditures of these kinds of 
moneys is bad enough, but your advertisement is misleading, as is 
shown in the newspaper, Mr. Minister. And I ask you: will you 
explain  

to Saskatchewan drivers how you can call a rebate of a tax, which 
did not exist until a few days ago, a saving? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I’m interested in the hon. 
member’s question because some time back the opposition were 
highly critical in that the government was not encouraging to 
people to save their receipts. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, those that 
save their receipts will receive a benefit of a tax of 7 cents a litre, 
and we’re encouraging people to keep their receipts. It’s that 
simple, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, let me ask you the question 
more specifically. And I repeat again; how is a tax, and a rebate 
on a tax which did not exist prior to June 22, a saving? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the people will be 
paying the tax until they get their rebate, in which case they will 
be getting a saving. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, it seems to me that the only 
people that are going to be making a saving is going to be you 
and your treasury, because people are going to be out of money 
for over a year when they have to apply, assuming that they have 
got their receipts and haven’t lost them. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me ask you a supplementary. At a time when 
you’re cutting, for example $34,000 in grant from organisations 
such as the Voice of the Handicapped on the premise that, as you 
have said, every dollar counts, can you tell the taxpayers of this 
province how much of their money you’re going to use to run this 
misleading and this massive advertising campaign on the gasoline 
tax? How much will the production, the placement, and the 
distribution of all of this advertising material cost the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the opposition have 
made it abundantly clear again today, one, that they do not like 
the rebate system on the gasoline tax. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I 
commend the hon. member for maintaining the consistency of the 
New Democratic Party position, which is, there always would 
have been a gas tax. The gas tax today in Saskatchewan under the 
NDP would be 8.9 cents a litre. It would never have come off at 
all, and there would have been no rebate, Mr. Speaker. They are 
informational ads encouraging the people to keep their receipts. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, the issue here is your dishonesty in the implementation 
of this gasoline tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And also at issue here, Mr. Minister, is the 
expenditure of hundreds of thousands of dollars  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

948 
 

when you’re telling people who need the money and need the 
help that they can’t have it. I ask again: how much will this 
advertising campaign on this dishonest tax cost the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the situation is very, very 
straightforward. One, the government introduced the gasoline tax 
rebatable in the budget on June 17. I think that was made clear, 
and the government’s position was made clear. Secondly, we are 
making it abundantly clear, we’re encouraging the people of this 
province to keep their receipts. The member obviously knows 
that there is the traditional estimates question as to cost and the 
details of that, and I will have as much information as possible at 
that time. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it is the government’s intention to maintain 
the informational ad to encourage people to keep their rebates. 
It’s a far superior system, I might advise the hon. member than 
8.9 cents a litre for the last five years. And, Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to encourage people to keep their receipts. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I said I would indicate during estimates. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this is another example of 
this minister’s atrocious disregard for accountability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — These advertisements which the 
government is running started a week ago, and this minister who 
had to approve the expenditure cannot tell this House today how 
much it’s going to cost. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, do you mean to tell Saskatchewan taxpayers 
that, in this period of time of severe restraint which you’re 
imposing on everyone, your government approved this massive 
advertising without knowing how much it would cost? Because 
you have refused to answer that question. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, I ask you: how can you justify 
spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in this way when 
you’re telling everybody else that every dollar counts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again I thank the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, 
for putting the opposition party’s position firmly on the record. 
One, they do not want informational advertising which 
encourages people to keep their receipts. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, 
we should keep in mind when the allegations of dishonesty that 
one summer, Mr. Speaker, when the session was not in place, that 
party, when it was government, converted a flat tax on gasoline to 
an ad valorem sliding tax and tried to sneak it in on the people of 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a clear statement of what the government’s policy and 
position is. We will encourage the people of this province to keep 
their receipts, Mr. Speaker. Whether the  

NDP want us to encourage the people or not to keep the receipts, 
we hope they do keep their receipts and take advantage of the 
rebate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the other day when you 
brought an interim supply Bill to this House, you didn’t know and 
you couldn’t answer the question about how much in special 
warrants you had spent since April 1, even though it was $928 
million. 
 
Today, Mr. Minister, you don’t know how much of taxpayers’ 
money you’re spending on advertising, misleading advertising, 
on this gas tax, Mr. Minister. I ask you: did you not personally 
approve the expenditure of this money for the placement of those 
advertisements in the media throughout Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member does 
not want the government — and I think this should be clear, that 
the New Democratic Party does not want the Government of 
Saskatchewan to tell the people of this province, the average 
drivers of this province, to keep their receipts so that they get 
their gas tax rebated to them. Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated to the 
hon. member that the detailed information is given in estimates in 
the normal course. He can obtain that information at that time. 
We will, and let me make it abundantly clear, that 
notwithstanding what the New Democratic Party says, we will 
encourage the people of this province to keep their gasoline tax 
receipts so that they can get the rebate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Red Tape Created by Gas Tax 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Finance. I have a question with respect to the mountain of red 
tape the gas tax has created. Service station operators and 
thousands of drivers alike are saying this system is full of holes 
and wide open to abuse. It gives those who want to abuse the 
system a wide open field, while those who are claiming the rebate 
honestly have been hit with a massive mountain of red tape. 
You’ve had numerous complaints from both drivers and service 
station operators. in light of this problem, what steps are you 
taking to improve your ill-conceived, totally bureaucratic system, 
and what improvements do you have in mind? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I doubt it there’s much red tape 
if people pay by credit cards. First of all, if we can take an 
ordinary example of people buying gasoline by credit cards, all 
they have to do is keep, as they would in the normal course, Mr. 
Speaker, the credit card receipt. Certainly people are not keep 
receipts, there is the additional practice of keeping a receipt and 
asking for it. 
 
My advice from the service station dealers around Regina and in 
my riding is that they are giving the receipts, and ordinary 
receipts are acceptable. I’ve indicated the practice to the hon. 
member in the past, that next spring  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

949 
 

the application forms will go out to the people of this province. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be using summer students to process the 
receipts and the program, process the receipts, process the 
receipts, program the computers for the record keeping, and 
process the cheques out, Mr. Speaker. So by using summer 
students we don’t need a permanent bureaucracy to manage the 
program. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I would like to ask the minister, Mr. Speaker, 
whether or not his department officials have done an analysis of 
how many people in this province use credit cards. Can he tell us 
unequivocally that it is 100 per cent of all the people that are 
driving vehicles, using credit cards? 
 
And secondly, does he understand, and do his department 
officials understand, that Revenue Canada requires original 
receipts if you are in business, in terms of claiming gas 
expenditures from your income, as well as this program requires 
original receipts? And does he not concur and agree that this will 
create a massive bureaucratic set-up for gas station operators, 
because they have to now provide two receipts for each gas 
purchase, to help out Revenue Canada, plus the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m disappointed to hear the NDP supportive 
and advocating of fraudulent practices in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s exactly what they are hoping for . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, order. 
Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we should keep in mind that 
it’s a very simple practice to ask for gasoline receipts. 
 
And secondly, we indicated very early in this session that credit 
card receipts were sufficient, providing they’re properly filled 
out, as they would in a normal course. So I indicate to the hon. 
member that that’s a rather straightforward practice. Certainly 
people are being asked to keep their receipts. 
 
We should keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, we should keep in mind 
that until this came in, the New Democratic Party went around 
this province saying we should be taxing the people out of 
province, should be taxing big business, should be taxing the 
interprovincial trucking companies. Now they’ve changed their 
mind. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — How can the Minister of Finance stand up in 
this House and tell us that he is going to be hiring people to 
process these gas tax receipts when his government, 10 days ago, 
fired over 411 dental hygienists from our dental program? 
 
I ask the minister, many questions have been raised regarding this 
gas tax rebate, and questions I hope you can answer, and one I’d 
like to put to you this afternoon: will the gas tax rebate claimed 
by drivers be considered taxable income by Revenue Canada for 
income tax purposes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer the first part of the 
question. There is no bureaucracy required. As I indicated by 
simply processing it and using summer  

students, no permanent bureaucracy is required. I know that that 
flies in the face of your belief that there should be a big 
bureaucracy. Sometimes there are other ways of dealing with the 
problem, rather than instituting the bureaucracy. 
 
My advice is that it won’t be taxable unless it becomes a benefit 
added to their business and they try and send in two receipts, one 
if they’re paid by the business, and then try and claim the receipt 
or the rebate as well. 
 

Cuts to Youth Employment Program 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is the 
Minister for Human Resources, Labour and Employment, and it’s 
got to do with his decision to cut and/or terminate summer youth 
employment programs at a time when there are 16,000 
Saskatchewan young people unemployed and when the youth 
unemployment rate is hovering around 14 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year your government spent $13.7 million in 
total on the Opportunities ‘86 student employment program and 
the Access youth employment program. This year, rather than 
$13.7 million, the two programs have budgets which total just 
over $4 million, and that represents, Mr. Minister, a cut of 
somewhere in the vicinity of 70 per cent. 
 
Tell me, sir, how do you and your government justify that kind of 
drastic cut when youth unemployment is higher today, higher 
today than it was a year ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m not certain, Mr. Speaker, whether the 
member opposite is wrong, intentionally misleading, or just not 
bright enough to figure it out and understand the figures. But he’s 
mixing together two programs again, the summer employment 
program with the youth Access program, which are two entirely 
different programs. The one, youth Access, has absolutely 
nothing to do with summer employment, has nothing to do with 
students. 
 
Now I just heard you say to the Minister of Finance that you 
didn’t want students to be hired to process gas receipts, and now 
here you’re telling me we’re not spending enough money on 
students. I explained to you the other day that the priority on 
students are for grade 12's going on with their education and for 
students in technical school and university, and that we did not 
have the option of continuing last year’s program which provided 
jobs for grade 9's, 10's, and 11's. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Once again we see 
an example of the kind of double-talk that this minister and this 
government is responsible for. 
 
Sir, my question was concerning youth unemployment, both 
student and non-student. Those under 25 can be students and they 
can be non-students when they’re in the work-force. What I’m 
asking you, sir, is that there’s 16,000 people unemployed in this 
province, 1,000 more than there were in May of last year; the 
unemployment rate is at 13.8 per cent, up from 12.6 per cent last 
year;  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

950 
 

how can you argue and how can you stand here and say that it’s 
okay to cut money for youth employment programs, student or 
non-student, at this time of high unemployment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I realise the NDP don’t know much about 
agriculture, but surely they don’t believe money grows on trees. 
And in order for us to have money to spend on all of the 
programs you continuously want to spend money on, it has to be 
raised somehow. But you’re against a refundable gas tax; you’re 
against any kind of taxation. you complain about the deficit, and 
yet at the same time you say, spend more money. We’ve had to 
pick priorities; all of Saskatchewan has to pick their priorities, 
and they are not the kind of squandering that your party 
advocates for many, many programs that this province can no 
longer afford. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — It’s very good to see the minister stand on his feet 
in this House and say that the youth of Saskatchewan are not a 
priority with this government. Shame on you, shame on you? 
Your actions, sir, your actions are telling your words even more 
so. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did you pick this year — this year when youth 
unemployment is higher than it has been for many, many years in 
this province — to cut programs and to make non-profit groups 
and organisations ineligible as employers under the Opportunities 
‘87 student employment program? 
 
Now these non-profit groups, as you should know, have an 
excellent record of providing creative and socially useful summer 
work for students. Why did you, sir, decide to cut their eligibility 
for the Opportunities ‘87 youth employment program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I challenge you, if you can add and 
subtract as you suggest, I challenge you to add what your 
government ever spent on youth employment programs. And I 
doubt very much if you ever spent, in any year, including this 
year, as much as this government is spending now, even adjusted 
for inflation. I doubt very much, because last year and the year 
before our program was so generous that every student who 
wanted to work was able to find a job somehow. 
 
And there is no way that the government can maintain a subsidy 
program for grade 9's, 10's, and 11's. There has to be some 
priorities. And the priority is not in finding jobs for those people 
who are still in high school. We could not do that because there is 
a limited amount of money available. 
 
we have, instead, increased the student loan program, improved 
aid to students, and have picked programs that are necessary. I 
think you people call it targeting. Are you now against targeting? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister says 
that he challenges the money put up. Well let me tell you, Mr. 
Minister, when the New Democratic Party  

formed the government in this province, youth unemployment in 
this province was only half the rate, half the rate under Devine PC 
rule, let me tell you. 
 
If you are aware, and if you are serious — if you are serious, and 
it appears you’re not — but if you are, in dealing with the youth 
unemployment rate, are you aware of the publications called 
Selected Labour Force Data, which is prepared each month by 
your own department, and are you aware that this report for the 
month of May shows that the number of young people employed 
in Saskatchewan to be at the lowest level in 10 years — in 10 
years? In fact, there’s 6,000 fewer people employed in this 
province this year, in May, than there was last year in May. 
 
In light of this fact, and in light of these figures, Mr. Minister, 
how can you back up your claim that your government is doing 
enough; even to target the limited youth audience that you 
apparently are saying that you’re targeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Ever since the member opposite came to 
this Assembly, I’ve heard him shout unparliamentary language at 
people, accusing government members of being liars over and 
over again. Therefore he must know something about it, and I 
wouldn’t believe anything he told me. 
 

Royalty Tax Rebates to Farmers 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, a question for the Minister of 
Finance, going back to the earlier discussion about gas rebates. 
The minister will know that farmers now have four rebate 
problems or opportunities to deal with, two federally and two 
provincially. 
 
And one of the changes in the minister’s budget was to convert 
the royalty rebate to an annual basis from a quarterly basis, and 
the date the minister has selected for the submission of receipts 
by farmers for that purpose, the royalty purpose, is April 30. Can 
the minister indicate the particular magic with that date, because I 
have been advised by many farm accountants that the selection of 
that date is going to cause severe difficulty in rural farm 
accounting offices in trying to get all that paper work done to 
accommodate the government by April 30? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It was based on when the bulk of the 
applications were coming in the past. Most of them were coming 
in after January 1. So we just put that in as a deadline. There was 
no magic to it other than that’s when the bulk of them were 
coming in the past. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the 
minister be prepared to entertain some flexibility in that date — 
moving it, perhaps, to the end of May as opposed to the end of 
April? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If it presents an undue difficulty, I’d certainly 
be glad to look at it. It was not . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I’m having 
great difficulty hearing. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

951 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the opposition is 
not listening to this, but I would certainly be glad to consider it. It 
was not designed to cause undue difficulties, but it was just based 
on when the receipts were coming in in the past. 
 

Increase in Student Tuition Fees 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister to Education. And it’s a question, very 
simply, that in light of the fact that job opportunities for young 
people are at their lowest level in 10 years in Saskatchewan, and 
in light of the fact that many students need summer employment 
in order to pay for their education and there’s been a dramatic cut 
in summer employment opportunities funded under your 
government, how can you justify giving students a double slap in 
the face by increasing tuition fees at Saskatchewan’s technical 
institutes by 15 per cent; and how can you justify funding cuts 
which have forced a 10 per cent tuition fee increase at both 
university campuses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the issue 
of tuition fees, certainly at the universities, the board of governors 
deals with that difficult issue. I think the increases there were 
something in the order of 10 per cent at both universities. 
 
As it relates to technical institutes, how did we arrive at the 
number as the hon. member has referred to? I met with the 
students and I found them to be very commonsensical about this 
and very realistic, very constructive. They recommended to me 
that we should increase the fees by 15 per cent and, Mr. Speaker, 
our government accepted their recommendation, knowing full 
well that none of us like to see increases, but the students 
particularly realised that if there have to be increases, then to 
maintain quality we should look at that number. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask a series of 
questions relating to checking for indoor pollutants. it has to do 
with recent trends to build tight, what is commonly known as 
tight homes — homes which are insulated to a greater extent, and 
as a result, and in addition to the insulation, you have more and 
more poly put in and less air seeping through the windows and 
through the doors. In addition, of course, we now have additional 
increasing amount of synthetic building materials that are being 
used. The cleaning and personal care products in our homes have 
been increasing. 
 
I want to know whether your department has established any way 
of determining whether the problem of indoor pollutants by these 
synthetic building materials, by  

personal cleaning products, whether it’s serious enough to 
warrant any kind of official intervention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised by my officials that the indoor 
air quality in homes is not falling in the Environment department, 
but rather would be dealt with if there is a health problem created 
by it. It would normally be dealt with by the Department of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I understand that if there were 
problems, associated health problems, that would be dealt with 
under the Department of Health. My question is related to 
methods of assessing whether or not there are problems. 
 
For example, if I built a home, a new home, a tight home, and I 
wanted to check to see whether there were any problems 
regarding synthetic building materials or any of the cleaning 
material, or whether the air was circulating enough, could I come 
to your department? Could I come to some deport of your 
department and ask for a testing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My department does go out and do checks 
for radon gas, but that’s the only one. Any other pollutant that 
you might find in the air would come under the Department of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Okay. I understand now that what you’re 
doing is you’re saying, you’re telling me that it’s radon only that 
you’re checking for. I’ll come back to the issue of radon in a 
moment, Mr. Minister. 
 
I have here an article from which I’d like to quote to you. It’s 
from a science magazine. It’s a 1983 issue titled “Indoor Air 
Pollution: A Public Health Perspective.” Just a little summary 
that they give of the entire article. It says here: 
 

It is now apparent that elevated contaminant concentrations are 
common inside some private and public buildings. Concern 
about potential public health problems due to indoor air 
pollution is based on evidence that urban residents typically 
spend more than 90 per cent of their time indoors. 
Concentrations of some contaminants are higher indoors than 
outdoors, and for some pollutants, personal exposures are not 
characterised adequately by outdoor measurements. 
 
Among the more important indoor contaminants associated 
with health or irritation effects are tobacco, smoke, radon, 
carbon monoxide and nitrogen, formaldehyde, asbestos, 
micro-organisms, and so on. Efforts to assess health risks 
associated with indoor air pollution are limited by insufficient 
information about the number of people exposed, the pattern 
and severity of exposures, and the health consequences of 
exposures. An overall strategy should be developed to 
investigate indoor exposures, heath effects, control options, 
and public policy alternatives. 

 
My question is: have you got your department working on any 
overall strategy to investigate these types of indoor exposure 
which are now being identified? 
 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

952 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that occupational health deals 
with the inspection of the work place. Now that’s not home, it’s 
just the work place. If there are large public buildings where 
numbers of people worked and there seems to be a health 
problem, then occupational health and safety will go in and make 
a check there. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I turn now to the question of radon gas. As 
you mentioned earlier, you will go in and do some . . . you would, 
upon request, do any home . . . Is it possible for any home owner 
to request a check for radon gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We did a fairly major study on radon gas 
within our department in 1975. the conclusion that they arrived at 
was that there is basically no significant radon gas problem 
within the province. 
 
If an individual person feels that they have a problem in their 
home, normally they’d call someone at the university and, for a 
fee of $75, they’ll come out and do a test to see whether or not 
it’s a problem. We have in very rare cases gone out to check, but 
it’s a very rare things. We don’t make it as a regular thing. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Have you had any in the last year — any 
inquiries about this in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We had about a half dozen contacts in the 
last year. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Can you give me some indication of what the 
results of the investigations were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The contacts that we had were referred to the 
university, so the results would have been from the university 
people if you want them. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The department, your department then does 
no testings, is what I’m hearing, and that all the testing is done 
through the university. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The only testing we did was during the 
period that we were doing this survey and there are what 10 
houses . . . from the survey there were 10 houses that showed 
some problem, and we have gone back to take a look at those 10, 
but that’s as far as it’s gone. 
 
I might also mention to the hon. member that the survey is in a 
document like that, and it’s available through the libraries and 
available to the public. It’s a public document. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I have here in that same article that I quoted 
from earlier a couple of paragraphs that I’d like to read regarding 
radon gas. It says here that higher concentrations are typically 
measured in basements, crawl spaces, and homes with low 
exchange rates. It goes on to say the typical radon concentration 
range from .01 to 4 pCi per litre. I am wondering, Mr. Minister, 
whether levels exceeding 20 pCi per litre are typical? I wonder, 
Mr. Minister, if you have any knowledge of any studies being 
done in any energy efficient homes? 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we haven’t as a department 
done any monitoring of the energy efficient homes. I am also 
advised that the energy efficient homes that are being built today 
draw air from outside — heat it, use it and expel it — so they 
likely would have enough circulation to solve a lot of their 
problems. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: —You’re probably about half right on the last 
one, Mr. Minister. I think you can purchase an air exchange unit, 
but that’s quite optional. My concern is about people getting into 
high energy efficient homes where this gas is trapped. The 
research shows further, Mr. Minister, that, and that the reason I 
believe it’s a concern, is that risk is proportional to exposure, that 
is, the risk of concern from inhaling radon gas. 
 
Now I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, whether it’s something you 
may give a commitment to putting on as something that your 
department should be looking at in the next year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — From the major survey that we did, there 
would not appear to be a major problem anywhere in this 
province, and for that reason we wouldn’t likely be going ahead 
with any further survey here. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I would hope that you might 
take a look at the more recent research on this in your department 
and perhaps be prepared to do just that, and that is to research it 
in more detail. 
 
I want to turn now to a series of questions related to a different 
topic, and this has to do with our bus lines and the air inside the 
bus lines. I’m not certain if you’ve regarded this as something 
under the purview of your department. But, Mr. Minister, if you 
have ridden any STC buses lately, you will have noticed that 
there . . . some of the buses now have routes that are 
non-smoking. Some of the routes, on the other hand, do have 
smoking in the back. And I would like to commend whoever it 
was that set up the regulations so that the buses, the non-smoking 
units in the buses were implemented, and I would like to 
commend, also, the bus drivers for enforcing that rule. But my 
question is: why was there not a complete banning of smoking in 
the buses, instead of just a partial ban? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That subject would also fall under the 
Department of Health, not under the Department of Environment. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — There is another problem related to the buses, 
Mr. Minister, and this has to do with the fumes, monitoring of the 
fumes, and the fumes that seem to get into the buses. Now at the 
Prince Albert station, at the Saskatoon station, and at the Regina 
station, if you get into any of the buses, the practice of the bus 
drivers is to start the buses for some minutes before the buses get 
going, and I suppose that applies maybe to other buses not just 
STC. 
 
(1445) 
 
The difficulty is that the circulation system at those bus depots is 
such that the fumes from the exhaust gets into the inside of the 
buses, now, whether it’s through the air  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

953 
 

intake system or whether it’s through the door. would there not be 
some way, Mr. Minister, of setting up regulations so that those 
bus fumes could be exhausted out of the area where the people 
are because it causes tremendous discomfort, in some cases 
actually a sort of a nausea, as well, people who do not feel very 
good about those fumes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That matter would not fall under the 
Department of Environment, rather it would come under the 
Department of Transportation and the responsibility of the 
Department of Transportation and as the owners, or the 
manufacturers of the bus, to produce a vehicle that operates 
properly. If there is a difficulty like you’re staying right at the 
station itself, then the Department of Transport would be the ones 
to address and ask for a change there. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have 
a few questions surrounding the grasslands national park, and I’m 
hoping that you can provide a few answers today. 
 
I had an opportunity to ask you a question about the park back in 
December, and you were able to say to me on that day, and I 
quote from the December 15 Hansard: “The department has 
worked long and hard . . . “in reference to the formation of the 
grasslands park. And then you said “. . . I think soon we will 
reach a conclusion.” 
 
Mr. Minister, can you report to the House today that a conclusion 
in these negotiations has been reached? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry, but I must advise the hon. 
member that grasslands park and the concerns that he had with it 
that were discussed in the House would come under Sask Water 
and could not be dealt with under these estimates. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I would assume as Minister of the 
Environment you have an interest and a concern, if only a 
personal interest and concern. As Minister of the Department of 
Environment, could you venture a guess on behalf of your 
government on when these negotiations might be concluded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It wouldn’t be proper for me to do that in 
Environment estimates because Environment basically has 
nothing to do with that subject. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then perhaps closer to your own 
department, can you tell the House today if an environmental 
impact statement has been done by the federal government 
towards the formation of the park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The formation of a park would not require 
an environmental impact study, but there has been no study 
completed. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, it’s 
come to my attention that at the Cypress Hills Provincial Park 
there are certain developments taking place around Adams Lake. 
I wonder, are you aware of these developments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there are individual 
improvements being proposed by Parks for developments 

 that are already there within the park, and it’s being handled by 
the Parks department up to this point. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m referring to Adams Lake and 
the developments that are proceeding at Adams Lake, some of 
which, in fact, are already in progress, in terms of earth-moving 
equipment and drainage ditches and the installation of drainage 
equipment and so on. 
 
Adams Lake, as you may be aware, has been designated as a 
crucial wildlife area in the sense that it forms the basis of the 
home of the trumpeter swan and one of the largest . . . of my 
understanding is from the groups who have been informing me, 
that it’s one of the largest trumpeter swan nesting grounds in the 
province. To my understanding, Adams Lake is now drained. Did 
the people who drained Adams Lake, did they submit an 
environmental impact study to you or your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there was no environmental 
impact studies done there. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So could the minister please advise us as to 
precisely what type of development is occurring at Adams Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that that’s all being handled by 
the Parks department. We’ve had no specific written proposals 
from Adams Lake or from anybody doing developments there. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — But,. Mr. Minister, Adams Lake is drained. It is 
dry at this point in time. It is dry because it has been drained 
through works done by certain individuals in that Adams Lake 
area. Is it not your responsibility, as Minister of the Environment, 
that certainly the drainage of a crucial wildlife habitat like Adams 
Lake, would come under the purview of your department, and 
wouldn’t you be on top of these kind of developments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have not been contacted by anyone with 
regards to the drainage of Adams Lake. I would be pleased to 
look into it, but at this point I have no information on it, so I can’t 
provide more than I have. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well I understand that you’re taking a form of 
notice, Mr. Minister, and fine, I’ll respect that hopefully you’ll 
get back to us in the next estimates day on this question. 
 
Are your department officials aware of the type of development 
which is, as you said, being handled by the Parks department? 
Are they aware of the nature of that development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The answer would be, no, we haven’t been 
made aware of any particular developments that are going to go 
ahead. The indication that I gave you earlier was that the 
proposals that we were told about, were that they are going ahead 
to improve developments that are already in existence. If there’s 
something different from that, no, we haven’t been made aware. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Minister, would you tell us what 
developments that are already in existence are going to be 
improved by the developments at Adams Lake? 
 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

954 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff advise me they’re speaking only of 
the issues that are within the park. And they’re really, I don’t 
think, aware of anything on Adams Lake itself. So we’ll have to 
check it. And I don’t know how quickly I can get it, but I’ll try 
and get back to you next estimates day. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate your co-operation in 
this matter. There’s some concern being raised given that, in fact, 
it was a nesting ground for the trumpeter in that area, and a major 
sort of nesting ground for the trumpeter swans. 
 
I’d like to ask, Mr. Minister, if we could get back to some of the 
questions and some of the answers that you provided to us the 
other day in regards of the Rafferty dam project. On page 939 of 
the Hansard for July 3, 1987, you said: 
 

The people likely, in the area of the Rafferty project, as the 
environmental impact statement is made available to them in 
the (ongoing) public review process, and as the ongoing 
negotiations occur that will give them a land value for the land 
that will be flooded, alternative lands that they can use because 
their present land is flooded . . .When you talk about the 
Mainprize Park, and it (is) going to be flooded, you know, I 
can tell you (about) Palliser Park . . . 

 
And so on. You have made the statement, Mr. Minister, when I 
read this that when you talk about “ . . . the Mainprize Park, and it 
(is) going to be flooded, you know.” Does that indicate to you 
that in fact a decision has been made around Rafferty and that in 
fact the Mainprize Park is going to be flooded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Mainprize Park would be in the area 
that would be flooded if Rafferty project goes ahead. That’s what 
I’m referring to. It would be in the designated area. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you used the terms, “and it will be 
flooded, you know.” You said, it will be flooded, you know. And 
you go on to talk about . . . You’ve talked about certain 
developments that are occurring in relationship to Rafferty. I 
wonder if now you will tell us about some of the other events that 
will occur if Rafferty dam is built. 
 
Any one of these occurrences is the whole question of irrigation 
and your government’s contention, and your contention, that land 
will be irrigated. Could you tell us how much land is going to be 
irrigated through the development of the Rafferty dam. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Any land that falls under irrigation from this 
project will be handled under the water corporation, not under 
Environment. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, one can make the same argument in regards 
to Mainprize Park as probably having to do under the Parks 
department. Yet you said that, in fact, things will happen if 
Rafferty happens. So I assume, sir, I assume, sir, that you know 
what those things are. have you . . . has the  

Department of the Environment received any reports on the 
economic viability of irrigation and of the contention of the 
proponents that irrigation is one of the important aspects of this 
project? Has your department received any reports regarding the 
viability of irrigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The information that would deal with the 
number of acres to be irrigated would be covered with the 
environmental impact statement hen it is out for public review. 
We’re not at that stage, yet, but as soon as we can reach that stage 
that figure will be available to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, as part of the environmental review 
procedure, in regards to the environmental impact statement 
that’s been presented by the proponents on the question of 
irrigation of land as part of that study, will the Department of the 
Environment be doing viability, economical viability assessments 
as part of the overall assessment procedure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, that would not fall under the purview of 
the Department of Environment . It would, rather, fall under the 
water corporation. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, as part of the environmental 
impact statement presented to you by the proponent, there is, by 
your own words and admission, that one of the things proposed is 
in fact certain land is going to be irrigated. Are there any figures 
put forward by the proponents as to the economic viability of the 
irrigation projects which they themselves are proposing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the environmental impact 
assessment speaks of the number of acres and the suitability of 
the soil, but does not go beyond that. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So it just proposes as part of the statement that in 
fact irrigation . . . that there is proposed irrigation. Is there a 
commitment? Does the statement put forward by the proponents 
on this question tell us, tell you as a Minister, how many farmers 
are committed to irrigation using the water from the Rafferty 
dam? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The answer would be simply no. 
 
Mr. Lyons; — Then how can the proponents of the project say X 
number of acres are going to be irrigated, or will be irrigated, if 
Rafferty is built, when in fact it doesn’t say that there’s anybody 
committed to irrigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that the only statement that’s being 
made is that there is capability of irrigating a given number of 
acres, but I don’t think there’s any indication of who might 
irrigate or how many acres they might irrigate. That’s not 
considered in this statement. That’s something that would be 
dealt with by the water corporation in the future. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, does the irrigation capability of the 
project that is being proposed, is it based on a certain location of 
the dam? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe it only deals with the acreage  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

955 
 

involved, and it probably draws that from the quantifies of water 
that are anticipated to be available for irrigation, and it looks at 
the suitability of the soils in the area. So that’s the only area that it 
covers; it doesn’t go into just different acreages because the dam 
is 3 miles east or 3 miles west. I don’t think it deals with that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
know that now under the Department of Environment and Public 
safety you have many people there that were not in Environment 
before that have the responsibility of either law or regulatory 
enforcement. I’m thinking of inspectors, those types of people. 
And I’m wondering if the department has any plans to provide 
some of these people with uniforms. 
 
It can sometimes be uncomfortable for them to go and conduct an 
enforcement, and they’re dressed either as I am or with a jacket 
and tie on, but there’s nothing to identify them in fact with the 
enforcement authority that they have. And my question to you is 
very simply: do you have any plans to provide people who do 
regulatory enforcement with uniforms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’ve had no requests for that that I’m 
aware of. All of our inspectors are provided with access cards so 
that when they come to a job site they can identify themselves as 
to who they are. It has their picture and their name and what their 
inspection area of expertise would be. So they produce that card, 
show it to the owner or the contractor, whoever is on the site, and 
then have access. But we haven’t really had any requests that I’m 
aware of for uniforms. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister enlighten us as to how many 
different types of people like fire inspectors, and whatever, how 
many different categories of inspectors or regulatory enforcement 
people you now have within the Department of Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There’s about eight different categories. If 
the member is anxious for it, maybe the best thing would be to 
send you a list of them prepared by the staff. I could run down 
some of them for you. We have the fire inspection division, the 
boiler and pressure vessels, gas, electrical, elevators . . . 
 
Mr. Anguish: — If you’d provide me with a list, I’d appreciate 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that would be the better way to 
answer the question. We’ll provide you a list. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I thank the minister for his offer to provide a 
list for us, and if we could have that for the next time that we are 
sitting in estimates of Environment, we would appreciate that, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m wondering on a different topic, Mr. Minister, and it concerns 
Weyerhaeuser, as to whether or not there have been any 
applications by Weyerhaeuser to do spraying over the forest 
releases that they have to have defoliage of the broad-leaf trees 
that they consider as waste product. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we have received a request 
from Weyerhaeuser either Saturday or today.  

We just opened it today. And it’s for a very small area, but no 
approvals have been given. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Is the application for actual spraying for 
defoliage of the broad-leaf trees in an area? Is that what the 
application is for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s for a test. I’m advised it’s an area about 
the size of three football fields. But we have given no approvals. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister enlighten us as to where this 
test plot of spraying will be done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The request if for an area in the Candle Lake 
district — not right against the lake or anything. It’s in that 
general area though, in the forest near the Candle Lake district. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Why do they require . . . why have they made 
application to do some test spraying? Is this because they’re 
testing a new chemical, or have they told you what the chemical 
in fact is that they’ll be spraying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We haven’t had any of that kind of detail 
yet. This is just the initial contact saying they’re interested in 
proceeding. And they’ve been talking with Parks, I believe, to 
some extent. But we have certainly given no permission for them 
to do any spraying at this point. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The application that they’ve made, does it 
include whether it’s aerial spraying, or be sprayed by sprayers 
from the ground, or by machine from the ground? How’s the 
spraying to be conducted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They indicated hand spraying cone from the 
ground. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Is there not a standard application procedure 
they’d have to go through? I find it surprising that they would 
want to do test spraying and yet not indicate to you what 
chemical it is that they’re using on the spray plot that they want to 
test. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there is no standard 
application form, but they do go to the Department of Parks and 
renewable resources, asking for permission. And they would need 
to have from Parks a permit to allow it. Parks, in turn, would not 
give that kind of permit without clearing it through the 
Department of Environment. 
 
Now this has just come in and we don’t have . . . at this point we 
haven’t had time really to review it or to have much of the detail 
yet. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, are you saying to me that they 
cannot proceed with that type of spraying unless they have 
permission of the Minister of the Department of Environment? Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I understand it’s just a courtesy that Parks 
has always followed, is to come to Department of Environment, 
that the permit is actually under the Department of Parks and 
renewable resources. 
 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

956 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I’d want you to keep a very close 
eye on what’s happening, and I think it should be more than a 
common courtesy for Parks to check with you. And this is maybe 
a wild example, but if Weyerhaeuser or any other group wanted 
to spray agent orange across the forests in northern 
Saskatchewan. I don’t think it should rest solely with Parks, who 
don’t have the mandate to be . . . they don’t have the regulatory 
mandate, at least, to be concerned about the environment. 
 
And I would ask you to be in very close consultation with the 
Minister of Parks to try and come up with some legislation before 
this Assembly, so that we’re assured that the Department of 
Environment has to give the approval before there can be any 
spraying done in Saskatchewan. I think that that’s absolutely 
necessary, especially when it’s possible to be done on a very, 
very large scale over millions of acres of land in Saskatchewan. 
 
Would you give us your undertaking that you will in fact speak to 
the Minister of Parks and renewable resources . . .or whatever the 
name of that department is now, and give us your undertaking 
that you will speak with that individual to try and come up with 
some legislative Bill before this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the very fact that the request — the 
first request that has come — comes that route and the minister 
responsible immediately sends it to Environment is a good sign. 
But I’m as concerned as you are that this not be done 
indiscriminately in any way. I’m not even sure that the test would 
get approval, so we’ll have a look at the whole thing. I don’t want 
to see any large acreages sprayed in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, before you come back again 
before the estimates, and I assume that that’s going to carry on for 
some length of time at least yet, what I’d like to know is before 
we come back into this Chamber again, would you get in contact 
with the Department of Parks, and renewable resources to ask 
them the chemical or chemicals that are being used, because I 
would assume that Parks and renewable resources must know the 
chemical or chemicals that Weyerhaeuser want to use. 
 
Would you talk to the department and inform us as to what 
chemicals Weyerhaeuser wishes to test-spray with, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’ll certainly be dealing with the subject in 
the next day or so, as soon as we have an opportunity. As you 
appreciate, when we’re here in estimates you don’t have much 
time to do other things. This issue isn’t going to move forward 
today or tomorrow, so we’ll have time to deal with it specifically 
and see what all the details are before any decisions are made. 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’m 
assuming it has cleared Parks, which is why it’s now at the 
Department of Environment. If that’s not the case, would you 
please correct me on that. 
 

Secondly, I’d like to know whether you have . . . whether the 
Department of Environment has the right to veto a decision of 
Parks? You said the permit came from Parks, but I’m wondering 
whether the Department of Environment is only acting in a 
consulting capacity or whether it actually has the right to veto an 
affirmative decision by Parks to go ahead with the spraying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that what we have now was 
referred to us from the director of forestry in the Department of 
Parks. We will be looking at it very closely. Probably the best 
method for us to deal with it, if we feel it’s a significant enough 
proposal, is to call for an environmental impact study as to the 
results that this will have on the forests, and that way we will 
have direct access and control of what’s happening there. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well I would like to see the Department of 
Environment . . . If you don’t have the power to veto a decision 
like that, I would like to see your department and you, Mr. 
Minister, lobby for that sort of control over this kind of a 
situation. I was just reading something a couple days ago that 
indicated that something like 90 per cent of our health problems 
are directly attributable to things such as environment and 
life-style which tells me, Mr. Minister, that the Department of 
Environment needs that sort of control and probably needs wider 
powers with respect to maintaining and preserving, and 
maintaining adequate standards in our environment. 
 
So if you don’t have the right to veto, then I would suggest, sir, 
that you should be looking at strengthening your legislation to 
make sure that you have broader powers in that regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think if this can be considered a 
development, and we’d have to look at it very closely to see 
whether it meets those guide-lines, then we have that kind of 
control. So I believe that’s the route we would have to follow. 
When the hon. member was speaking about environment and 
life-styles, you know we have some control over environment, 
but a lot of life-styles are a little beyond our control. And when it 
speaks of health-related problems from life-styles, I am sure that 
the hon. member realizes that we can’t control who smokes and 
who drinks and a lot of the other things that people do these days. 
So our department isn’t taking that one on. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I wasn’t suggesting that you had control over 
life-styles, Mr. Minister. But you know, being that you’ve raised 
that the . . . A government does have control over life-styles to the 
extent that it can engage itself in an education program that 
educates the public with respect to bad life-styles and good 
life-styles and so on. But I realise that that’s not in the purview of 
the Department of Environment. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I would appreciate if you would 
get us back the information, or more information as we requested 
on the Weyerhaeuser application to spray over their leased areas 
as soon as possible, preferably by tomorrow. I’d like to move on 
for a couple of moments to another item. And the item that I’d 
like to discuss briefly with you is one of toxic waste disposal. 
And first off: are there any toxic waste disposal sites in the 
province of Saskatchewan; and if not, are there any being  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

957 
 

contemplated, or do you have an agreement with other provinces 
that do have toxic waste disposal sites? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — At this time we have a low level PCB 
decontamination unit, and it’s a portable unit that moves around 
the province and processes the oil with PCBs. So in that respect 
we do have that kind of capability which is very narrow. 
 
The other toxic wastes at this time are just put into storage, or 
they’re transported out of province, depending on what the waste 
product is that we’re dealing with. And there are quite a broad 
variety of toxic wastes. But at this time we don’t have any actual 
disposal methods available within our borders. Now it’s a subject 
area that we are looking at, but we haven’t made firm decisions 
on which way we’re going yet. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if whether or not 
. . . I understand there’s just recently been a high-level, toxic 
waste disposal site that’s been opened in Alberta, and I’m sorry 
the name of the exact location escapes me at the moment — I 
should have it here; I apologise for not having the name — but 
are you aware of the new site that has opened up in the province 
of Alberta that we would have access to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m aware of the site; it’s at Swan Hills. 
Whether or not we’ll have access, that’s an entirely different 
matter. As you realise, that facility has just opened up. It will be 
operating, I suppose, to process the waste collection that’s been 
gathered within the boundaries of Alberta. We will likely make 
some contacts with the government again in the near future. But 
at this time the Alberta government says they are not allowing 
anybody to bring wastes in, so there’s no indication that we have 
access at this time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — An application . . . or application I suppose is 
the wrong word. Has there been any approach made by the 
province of Saskatchewan, namely through your department, to 
actually sit down with people from Alberta that have the authority 
to go into such negotiations to negotiate the use of the facility at 
Swan Hills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — For a period of time the four western 
provinces were involved in a group discussing the methods of 
disposing of toxic waste. Then the group split off — Alberta went 
its own direction; Manitoba has now formed a Crown corporation 
and is looking at something in its own province. So that has 
narrowed it down that we’re going to likely have to do something 
within our borders. We don’t feel that the quantities of toxic 
waste that we have within Saskatchewan are sufficient to make 
construction of our own plant a viable operation, but we’re still 
looking to see what other options we have. If you can’t dispose of 
it outside your borders, then eventually you’ll have to do 
something, and that’s sort of the stage we’re at at this time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I know this is a bit of a hypothetical situation, 
but suppose that the province of Saskatchewan and Manitoba had 
an agreement with Alberta to use the Swan Hills facility. Does 
your department have any regulatory authority over the 
transportation of toxic 

 wastes across or through the province, or would that fall under 
the Highway Traffic Board or . . . I’m sorry, Department of 
Highways and Transportation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The transportation of dangerous goods falls 
under the federal jurisdiction, under the federal dangerous goods 
Act, and so we don’t have direct control of that as a province. So 
we would have to fall under that legislation and operate under it. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’d like to come back to the question of forest 
spraying for a minute and ask the minister whether proposal that 
is currently being put forward by Weyerhaeuser, asking for 
permission to spray a test site with chemicals, presumably to 
eliminate broad-leafed trees, is essentially the same proposal that 
a couple of years ago was put forward by PAPCO (Prince Albert 
Pulp Company) in a small test site near the Nipawin Provincial 
Park to do the same thing. Are we talking about the same test site, 
and are we talking about essentially the same proposal, or is this a 
different one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member was not here at the time I 
answered a similar question. I told the member from The 
Battlefords that the test site was in the Candle Lake forest, in the 
general area of Candle Lake, not against the lake, but in that 
forest area. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — You didn’t answer my question, Mr. Minister. 
Are we essentially talking . . . I head the answer that you gave to 
the original question put by the member for The Battlefords. And 
my question to you is: are we talking about the same test site that 
was originally put forward by the Prince Albert Pulp Company 
two or three years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — With the limited knowledge we have of it at 
this point, I would have to say no. But we will be looking at it in 
much more detail in the next day or so, as soon as time permits. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Could we get clarification again on the question 
of whether this proposal cleared the Department of Parks and 
renewable resources? Has the Parks department come seeking 
your advice prior to making a decision, or have they already 
made a decision and are they now approaching your department 
asking for support? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We can’t really be that definite on whether 
or not Parks has approved it or not, but I don’t believe they have. 
I think it’s just brand-new to them as well, and it was sent 
through for us to give due consideration to the proposal. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, when did Parks receive the proposal, or 
do you know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t know. The minister was here. He was 
not even aware of it yet, so it’s so new that it hasn’t had time for 
any of us really to digest what the proposal really is. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, it’s fairly clear that Weyerhaeuser 
is embarked upon the same kind of a project that the Prince 
Albert Pulp Company originally 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

958 
 

 tried to get approved by your department and by the Department 
of Parks and renewable resources about three years ago. 
 
And the history on that project at the time was that finally as a 
result of substantial opposition in northern Saskatchewan to any 
proposals for forest spraying in the north, a task force was set up 
to examine the question of northern forest spraying, headed, I 
think, by Dr. Rennie at the time, if my memory serves me correct. 
And that task force in fact recommended in favour of herbicide 
spraying in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to you is: in light of the fact that there is very 
substantial opposition in northern Saskatchewan as demonstrated 
by the opposition in the last three years to any forest spraying 
proposal, will you make a commitment to this legislature that you 
will not permit any widespread spraying of herbicides on our 
northern forest resource in this province? Will you make that 
commitment to this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would just say to the hon. member that this 
is the first request that has come in for permission to spray. This 
one deals with a very limited area, as I told you, approximately 
the area of three football fields. It’s not the 100 acres that was 
proposed before. As the member may be aware, the study that 
was done on the last proposal was looked upon favourable by the 
committee. I think Dr. Rennie approved it; our department turned 
it down. So I think you have to look at each one of these 
applications individually. We’ll take a very serious look at it and 
look at it with our eyes wide open to protect the environment of 
Saskatchewan. And I think that’s the purpose of the department 
here. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’d like to ask the member, Mr. Chairman, if he 
could give us his assurance that when this review is done, of the 
proposal that’s now come forward from Weyerhaeuser, that there 
will be consultation and involvement of northern residents in 
making that decision. Because last time when we had a task force 
on this issue, there was a noticeable absence of anyone from 
northern Saskatchewan, either who was going to be affected by 
spraying or whose livelihood in some way might be impacted by 
spraying of herbicides in northern Saskatchewan. Will you give 
us your assurance that before you make a decision you will 
consult with northern people on the issue of forest spraying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I mentioned to the member from The 
Battlefords, we’ll be looking at this to see whether it can be 
classified as a development. If it is, then it would fall under the 
requirements of an environmental impact assessment. In that way 
the northern people could be directly involved in the whole 
process. It’s probably the right way to go, and one that we were 
certainly looking at. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I just want to say, on behalf of 
members of our caucus, that we’re of the view that no northern 
spraying of herbicides should be permitted in northern 
Saskatchewan. That’s the position of members on this side of the 
Assembly, that there should be no spraying of herbicides on the 
northern forest resource. 
 

Instead, Mr. Minister, what your department and the Department 
of Parks and renewable resources ought to be emphasising is 
opportunities for employment by manual weeding of unneeded 
trees in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. If that’s the 
concern of Weyerhaeuser, and if that’s the concern of your 
department, that there is a . . . that you want to see broad leaf 
trees that are interfering with the growth of coniferous trees, if 
you want to see those trees weeded out, in northern 
Saskatchewan, do it through a program, a manual program, for 
moving those trees. create some jobs for people in northern 
Saskatchewan, instead of allowing the forest resource to be 
polluted. 
 
Will you make a commitment that you will ask Weyerhaeuser, 
Mr. Minister, to emphasise manual weeding of trees, hiring 
northern residents, instead of embarking on an attempted 
herbicide spraying program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that the request that you make of 
me does not fall, really, under the purview of this department — 
to instruct Weyerhaeuser whether or not they can. It think you 
should rather be talking to the minister responsible for the 
Department of Parks and renewable resources at the time of his 
estimates, and I’m sure he’ll be here in this House in the near 
future with that department. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, you have a responsibility, as 
Minister of the Environment, to make sure that environmentally 
sensitive and environmentally sound means of forest management 
are implemented in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Obviously if herbicide spraying, Mr. Minister, is permitted by 
your department and the Department of Parks and renewable 
resources that will pose a significant long-term threat to the 
wildlife habitat in the north and to the forest ecology. 
 
So I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, in your capacity as Minister of 
the Environment, to encourage environmentally sound methods 
of forest management. And obviously the most desirable method, 
as borne out by the examples — for instance, in countries like 
Sweden and Norway — is to give more emphasis and more 
attention to manual removal of trees that may be regarded as 
weeds in the northern forest resource. 
 
And my question to you is: will you start promoting that and start 
de-emphasising and discouraging the use of herbicides in the 
northern forest resource? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member draws a rather long bow when 
he says I’ve been encouraging the idea of spraying in the northern 
forests. I’ve been telling you that we will review it very closely. If 
it’s a development, or can be classified as a development under 
the assessment Act, then we will have an environmental impact 
assessment done. We won’t be jumping to give clearance for 
spraying in the northern forest without considerable thought. 
 
So the member can’t stand there and say that I am supporting the 
idea of spraying in the forest. That’s not the  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

959 
 

case. I think we do have a responsibility, though, to look at 
what’s being proposed, understand what the environmental 
impacts are, and then to make a reasoned decision after that 
process has been accomplished. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I should just clarify. First of 
all, I wasn’t suggesting that your department was directly 
promoting northern herbicide spraying. What I was suggesting 
was that many departments in your government were. And a 
classic example was the Prince Albert Pulp Company that when it 
was owned by you before your department asking to spray 
herbicides in northern Saskatchewan. So in fact many aspects of 
your government have been promoting this policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member can say, many aspects of 
the government. That’s an easy statement, but would be very hard 
to prove. 
 
I think that the P.A. Pulp Company, as a company, made that 
proposal. And as I mentioned to you before, the proposal was not 
approved by the Department of Environment. So the government 
was not at that point encouraging or authorising anyone to do 
spraying in the forest. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I would 
like to move to a different topic, if we may. And if we can move 
to the operation recycle operations of the department. 
 
I’d like to refer you, Mr. Minister, to an ad inviting tender under 
the title of “Operation recycle scrap vehicle collection.” And I 
don’t have the date that it was posted, but it’s some time prior to 
May 29, 1986 because that was the date in which tenders were 
required to be submitted. 
 
It called for tenders to deal with work including “ . . . .the 
gathering of scalp for abandoned vehicles including components 
part of said vehicles and transporting the components part of said 
vehicles and transporting the vehicles to designated retention sites 
in the contract area of R.M. of Redburn, Baildon, Hillsborough, 
Pense, Moose Jaw, Caron . . . “ and so on. 
 
And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: when that invitation to 
tender was offered, who were the successful bidder for that 
contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I could get that information for the hon. 
member. We have about 62 contracts for that purpose around the 
province, and when you identify those communities. I would not 
really be aware of who the contractor is. But I could look it up 
and provide the answer to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I’d appreciate it if . . . could that be provided by 
tomorrow, Mr. Minister? That would seem to be fairly 
straightforward information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Tomorrow is private members’ day, so 
probably we won’t be in estimates. But likely by Wednesday 
when we’re back, I could bring it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Is there any reason why the information couldn’t 
be provided even though it’s private members’  

day? And I would appreciate it if that were possible. 
 
May I add some additional questions, then, that related to that if I 
may, Mr. Minister. I would ask to know then, not only who the 
successful bidder but on what basis was that bid selected? I 
would appreciate knowing, as well, the price that was tendered, 
and also the price that was paid prior to that in the year before. 
 
Can I also ask then a related question, Mr. Minister, and you may 
be able to answer this one. Is the agent who collects those scrap 
bodies the current, the same firm that successfully won that bid 
today? I’m talking about as of this date, 1987. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m afraid I don’t have that information here. 
The person who had been director of that division for a 
considerable length of time was hired by a Toronto firm and left 
the employ of the department recently. So the person now in 
charge there doesn’t have all of that information quite at his 
fingertips. We’ll have to get it for you. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I would appreciate it if that question could also be 
answered. And I suppose a simpler form of asking that same 
question is to ask you whether there has been a subsequent call 
for bids since that one in 1986. Have there been any tenders 
requested since that time? If not, I assume it’s the same agent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised the contracts for this work are 
traditionally two-year contracts. And so as areas’ contracts 
expire, those would be re-advertised. I’m not certain of all the 
details of the one you’re mentioning. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I would assume then, Mr. Minister, that those 
questions will all be answered in the information you provide 
tomorrow, if possible, and most certainly by Wednesday. Could 
you tell me for the record, and the members of the House, Mr. 
Minister, under the operation recycle program, what number of 
scrap vehicle bodies are collected each year in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They traditionally use so many tonnes, and 
they indicate about 12,000 tonnes. Most vehicles weigh in the 
neighbourhood of two tonnes, so it would be something like 
6,000. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. and I assume 
that that’s a predictable average, and that that’s a standard 
number each year? Okay. 
 
It has been reported to me, Mr. Minister, and if I may ask for your 
clarification, that approximately $1.50 per licence plate per year 
has been assessed to licence plates to be assigned for the 
operation recycle. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that it’s about $1 per licence 
plate. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And could you advise me then, Mr. Minister, 
about what amount of revenues, approximately, if you can’t quote 
it to the dollar, does that generate per year then for the 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We just don’t have that kind of figure.  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

960 
 

You’d probably be better to ask it from the minister responsible 
for SGI, who would likely have the number of licences issued in 
a year. We just don’t have that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me ask the question of 
you, because the question was not how many licence plates there 
are in the province. You said it’s approximately $1 per plate that 
you realise in revenues. My question that I’M specifically 
concerned about and related to the Department of the 
environment is the revenue that is realised, and I would 
appreciate the answer to that question. The question is not the 
number of plates, the question is the number of dollars that are 
realised. And would you provide that then tomorrow as well, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We could undertake to get the figure from 
SGI for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And by when, Mr. Minister, can you give me that 
figure for the fiscal year 1986-87? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Likely on Wednesday. My staff will be here 
this afternoon and again tonight, and they won’t really have time 
to do very much of that gathering until tomorrow sometime. So 
Wednesday likely would be possible. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Okay, thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
In reviewing the annual report of Saskatchewan Environment for 
1985-86, Mr. Minister, I note that the expenditure related to 
operation recycle was $1,486,156 nearly $1.5 million. I note then 
that in this year’s estimates, Mr. Minister, it was estimated that in 
the year 1986-87, $1,177,000 was budged for operation recycle, a 
reduction of approximately $300,000. I then note, again with 
interest, that for the fiscal year ‘87-88, the year in which we are 
now, that there is budged for operation recycle $700,000, just 
about a half a million dollar reduction again. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would appreciate an explanation as to why there 
has been a reduction of nearly $800,000 from the 1985-86 fiscal 
year to the ‘87-88 fiscal year for operation recycle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s our intention to discontinue the operation 
of the recycle program as a department and turn it over to the 
private sector. Ipsco still wants the steel. They will contact with 
private contractors to bring the steel to Ipsco. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I believe that . . . What you’re referring to is what 
the member from Melville refers to as terminating the program. Is 
there a date at which it is intended that the program will be 
terminated, or has it already been terminated, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Act will be repealed and the program 
phased out over the course of this year. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well let me ask again then, Mr. Minister. I would 
assume that this is occurring according to some  

kind of plan. Has the plan already been put in place, or is it 
evolving, or are you just contemplating this? At what stage are 
you reviewing operation recycle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The plan is well in hand. But, as I mentioned 
to you earlier, we have 62 contractors who gather scrap vehicles. 
We have some 175 sites in the province that are also under 
contract, and there are many vehicles on site around the province 
that need to be gathered. So the program will likely wind down in 
a period of about four months, depending on the time it takes to 
clean each of the sites and to come to an end of the cars that we 
now have gathered. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Are you saying then, Mr. Minister, that is your 
intention to honour the contracts for remainder of the duration 
that have been signed with agents across the province? Is that 
what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — When the legislation is repealed, the 
contracts come to an end. Then there’s a matter of people who 
have an investment in a certain number of cars that they’ve 
gathered, and things like that, that we have to deal with in order 
to pay our obligation to the people involved. That’s the reason for 
the ongoing four-month period, or thereabouts, to try and finalise 
and come to a mutual decision on when the program can be 
wound up. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Let me ask you then, Mr. Minister. What I 
understand you to be saying is that in effect operation recycle is 
to be privatised and to be delivered by Ipsco, in effect. Let me ask 
you, Mr. Minister, at what date was a decision made then to 
privatise operation recycle? when was that decision made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It was part of this year’s budget process, so 
June 17, I guess, is the date that the information was generally 
public. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, as part of this year’s budget 
process, that could be any time in the last year. As you and I both 
know, that was the longest deliberation for budgets in the history 
of Saskatchewan, with questionable results, I may add. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me repeat my question. I understand that today 
is the first time that it has been said publicly that operation 
recycle has been privatised — that that announcement has not 
been made previously. Am I correct, or do you have other 
information to offer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The first announcement was given in a news 
release on June 8. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — One June 8; that was when the announcement was 
made, you say, by news release. I must admit I didn’t see it, but 
so be it. 
 
Let me ask my original question again, Mr. Minister, because I 
don’t believe that you’ve answered that. I understand when the 
announcement was made. My question is: when was the decision 
made? When did you decide to privatise operation recycle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I told you before, the decision was made 
during the budget process. I’m not going to give you  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

961 
 

any one day that that decision was made, because decisions of 
that nature, they begin and they are really a kind of evolving 
thing, that it takes time to come to the decision and to deal with 
all of the facts involved. So it happened over the course of this 
year’s budget process. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me ask another question 
then: will the provincial government — along with this 
movement to privatise operation recycle through Ipsco — will the 
provincial government be inputting any money into that program, 
or is the provincial government’s involvement with operation 
recycle completely eliminated sometime, approximately four 
months from today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The money that’s in this year’s budget will 
be used basically to wind the program down, so that’s the money 
that we’ll be using until the program comes to an end. Beyond 
that, the collection will happen through the private enterprise, and 
I understand there are a number of people that are very anxious to 
carry on the collection of the steel around the province. I think 
they can do an excellent job of it and have no need of government 
participation. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I respect your point, Mr. Minister, that you say 
that they will have no need for government participation. My 
question to you is: will there be government participation? Will 
the provincial government be putting any money into operation 
recycle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s not the intention to put more money in 
after this year’s budget, just to use the funding that we have in 
place now to wind down the program. It will come to an end, and 
we don’t expect to fund it then. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Let me then go back to a point we discussed 
previously, Mr. Minister, related to that fee that is charged related 
to the plates on vehicles of approximately $1 per vehicle per year. 
Will that then be cancelled, and will that amount be returned to 
vehicle operators or people who licence their vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I guess you would have to ask SGI that 
question. I would take an awful lot of paper work too return $1 to 
each licence holder. And probably we’d use more in stamps, in 
paper, and labour than the $1 would cost. So it’s not liable that 
kind of a refund would . . . . 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would suggest that you’re 
going . . . We heard earlier today that there was going to be a 
hoard of university students, creating summer employment to 
return gas tax — charges that have given to Saskatchewan 
people. And perhaps you could just tack in the $1 per licence as 
well. It seems that there is a large bureaucracy of some sort that’s 
been put in place for that, and I’m sure you want to consider that. 
 
Can I ask, Mr. Minister, then in light of this decision to privatise 
operation recycle, you have obviously made the decision for 
some reason. Let me ask you then the pressing question, that is, 
why? On what basis was the decision made to privatise operation 
recycle? 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I guess the main reason that we decided to 
get out of the business as a government is that is has been costing 
us significant numbers of dollars over the years to operate the 
program. 
 
When I talk with the people who used the steel, they indicate to 
me that they’re very interested in continuing to use that steel. 
They feel that they can contract with the general contractor and 
with others, making the necessary arrangements to bring the scrap 
steel to Ipsco. And the government will likely realise a savings of 
something like $350,000 annually. To me, that’s significant. If 
they can do the job and do it reasonable well, and the government 
saves money besides, it has to be a good venture for us. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I would assume the operation 
recycle, if I am not mistaken, was instituted in 1972. I would 
assume by the fact that it was continued to be operated under 
your government from 1982 until 1987, that it was believed that 
operation recycle served a purpose. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell me, for the clarity of my 
understanding and others, what the mandate or the objective of 
operation recycle has been? Obviously, this has not been a 
concern to you, or you would have done something, you know, 
within the previous five years. What has been the objective of 
operation recycle, and I ask that question and I would ask that 
you would answer it in the interest of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The program was put in place because there 
had been a collection of a number of scrap vehicles around the 
province. But at one point in history, as the hon. member knows, 
we didn’t have a steel plant in this province to process that kind 
of steel. We now have a plant here that can do the job and still 
maintain the clean environment that we are achieving through 
this program. So we see no need as a government of continuing to 
pay taxpayers’ dollars out to bring in the steel to a steel company 
that will do the job for themselves, at no cost to us. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, what I’m hearing you saying then, is 
that in terms of the government’s interest, that the objective of 
operation recycle was to assure that those vehicle bodies were no 
longer cluttering the landscape, so to speak. And that is the public 
objective in terms of implementing operation recycle. Am I 
correct in that paraphrase of what you said, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that would be about the same statement 
I made. Everybody will say it differently. Over the years, before 
there was an opportunity; for people to have anywhere to dispose 
of the car bodies, they were just left — sometimes by the 
roadsides, in farmyard, everywhere. And the need to clean it up 
was very evident. 
 
And when we had a steel plant that could process that type of 
steel, then the program came into place to do exactly that. I think 
the job has been done reasonable well over the years. And I’m 
advised by Interprovincial Steel that they still want that steel and 
would be willing to enter into agreements with contractors to 
bring the steel in. So there’s really no need of government 
involvement at this point. 
 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

962 
 

Mr. Hagel: — I ask then, Mr. Minister, in light of your objective 
and mine . . . We obviously share the same concern — to remove 
the clutter from the landscape. I ask then, Mr. Minister, what 
assurance do you have from Ipsco that, in privatising operation 
recycle, that as a matter of fact that objective will still be 
continued? I ask specifically, Mr. Minister . . . It would seem to 
me that it may be more expensive, for example, for Ipsco to 
collect car bodies that are in the neighbourhood of the member 
for Meadow Lake than car bodies that would be somewhere 
around my home riding in the Moose Jaw area, the Regina area. 
 
What assurance do you have from Ipsco that that environmental 
objective of operation recycle will be honoured when the 
programs privatised and they are operating it? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have nothing that I would call 
assurances. Those are very hard to come by. But the steel 
company, when I met with them, indicated that the steel was in 
demand. They could actually use far more than what they are 
finding here within Saskatchewan. They’re shipping steel in from 
the United States and steel from Winnipeg. So I would think that 
the collection of car bodies at Meadow Lake would not be any 
further away, likely, than to bring them from the United States or 
from Winnipeg. 
 
They indicated that they could use far more steel that the province 
is producing and would be willing to undertake the job of 
collecting the steel. And I believe they are a reliable company and 
will likely keep their word. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — So what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is that 
you’re committing an act of faith. 
 
My question again then is: if the member from Meadow Lake 
runs his car to it’s death, sticks it in a ditch somewhere near 
Meadow Lake, and Ipsco doesn’t feel that it’s economically or 
fiscally prudent for them to pick up that body, that there’s nothing 
. . . there is no agreement in place that can . . . on behalf of your 
department, to require that that body will be picked up from the 
ditch that the member from Meadow Lake hypothetically left 
there to die? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There is the steel company itself that enters 
into a contract with the general contractor to deliver a certain 
tonnage of scrap per year. If that contractor who signs his name to 
a contract to bring in approximately the same tonnage as he’s 
been bringing in over the last while, then he will have to gather 
those cars to meet his quota. 
 
So I would expect that is the best guarantee you could have, is 
that kind of a relationship and contract between the two. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Is it the intention of your department, Mr. 
Minister, to continue to monitor this situation, to respond to 
complaints, for example, from citizens about unsightly 
landscapes having to do with deserted car bodies? Have you 
thought about that? 
 

What assurance — I guess I asked the same question — what 
assurance do Saskatchewan people have that, should good 
business practice not result in the picking up of these deserted car 
bodies along the roadside, that as a matter of fact something will 
be done to correct that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think that we can give that kind of 
assurance. When we discontinue the operation recycle program, 
that’s the end of our department’s direct involvement in that area. 
So I think that what we have to do, as a government, is monitor 
up to a point what’s happening. If we’re not satisfied, there would 
be nothing stopping a government at any time in the future of 
making the decision that the venture was not satisfactory and we 
may have to go back into it. But I wouldn’t see that happening. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, I fully respect your act of faith, Mr. 
Minister. I do realise, however, sometimes circumstances change 
and, as you said before, whereas at one point there wasn’t a steel 
plant here in Saskatchewan, circumstances do change, and it may 
not be as prudent in the interest of Ipsco two years from now as it 
is today to collect those bodies. 
 
I note with interest, you say that the department would monitor it 
to a point. And I must admit, Mr. Minister, that that is less than 
clear to me as to what that point is and how we would know if it 
was being pointed. 
 
And let me ask you again, Mr. Minister, how does the department 
intend to monitor the collection of those vehicles in the interest of 
the objective of operation recycle to clear the landscape of 
deserted bodies? How do you intend to monitor that, is my 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe I said fairly clearly to the hon. 
member that the government would monitor, not necessarily this 
department, but you monitor it the same as it was done before. 
Prior to 1972 you didn’t have to have somebody go around and 
tell you there were a lot of scrap vehicles around the country; 
they were everywhere. So the program was put in place to clean 
them up. I think the program has worked. 
 
The indications I have from the steel corporation is that they still 
want the product. They’re willing to enter into contract with 
private citizens to do the work, to bring them in. I’d like to see it 
work that way and to save the government 350-some thousand 
dollars a year, and so for that reason we’re quite pleased to give it 
a try. 
 
I suppose we always have to be in a position of trusting business 
up to a reasonable level. You trust everyone, you know. You trust 
people to pay their income tax; you trust people to license their 
car and to carry a driver’s licence. We generally trust the 
population of our province. And for that reason I think that we are 
probably on fairly safe ground to go the route we’ve gone. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, while we’re talking about 
trust then, I would assume that it’s not unreasonable of the people 
of Saskatchewan to trust that its government will, when it has 
privatised a program that you say, and I agree, for 15 years has 
successfully met its  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

963 
 

objective — it’s cleaned up the landscape; it’s made use of those 
bodies . . . 
 
And so you are saying, Mr. Minister, this is not the people of 
Saskatchewan who have made this decision. It is the decision of 
your department to privatise operation recycle. It is placed in your 
department, I assume, because there was a concern, an initial 
concern for the environment. That’s what got it into the 
Department of Environment. 
 
And if the people of Saskatchewan, then, are entitled to trust that 
objective will continue, I don’t think it’s unreasonable to ask the 
question of you: when you say we have privatised this operation, 
we commit this act of faith in the business — and they are a 
business; I have no reason to mistrust that they will do what they 
say — I simply ask, Mr. Minister, in terms of your obligation to 
the people of Saskatchewan who have had an effective operation 
recycle program for 15 years, how will you monitor that that 
objective will continue to be met? 
 
And as you pointed out in your answer, prior to 1972 there were 
scrap bodies sitting all over the landscape, and that’s what caused 
us to decide that something had to be done. What will it be that 
will trigger for your department or, if not your department, you 
say the government . . . I assume that when you terminate a 
program, you have some interest in how that program will still be 
conducted. 
 
My question . . . I come back to the question: how will you 
monitor the objective that when those car bodies, or if those car 
bodies are not collected because of a business decision by Ipsco, 
that as a matter of fact they will be removed from the landscape? 
 
I think you have that obligation, Mr. Minister, when you say the 
program has operated well; we are now privatising it because 
we’re going to save $350,000 — and we’ll come to that in a 
minute. I assume that the same objectives will be continued, and I 
ask the same question again: how will you monitor that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me say to the hon. member: the people 
in Saskatchewan are used to the operation recycle program, and 
they know that the bodies of used cars have been picked up. If 
that ceases to happen, I won’t have to be out there is the field to 
take a look to see whether the cars are being gathered; my phone 
will never stop ringing. So I suppose that’s the method that 
MLAs traditionally monitor in, is by public opinion. And that 
opinion would surface very quickly if the job is not done. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I am not for a second 
suggesting that you should take your vehicle and trip around the 
province of Saskatchewan picking up every deserted scrap body. 
I’m not suggesting that for a minute. But as you and I know, what 
you have suggested may be an effective method of monitoring 
the pick-up of scrap bodies. 
 
My question to you though, Mr. Minister, then is that if we are 
getting reports and complaints of deserted scrap bodies, do we 
have your assurance that the government will take action to pick 
those up to the same degree we’ve been used to for the last 15 
years? 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — That type of decision would be made by the 
government if the circumstance arises. We can’t make predictions 
on just a guess that something may happen, that you’re going to 
do a certain thing. You wait until you see if there is a need, then 
the government will have to make that decision at that time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well then, as we set this particular point to rest, 
Mr. Minister, let me just say that I am somewhat disappointed 
that you have not been more specific in your deliberations, and I 
would ask that the department would consider that. 
 
Can we turn to the $350,000, Mr. Minister. You’ve made 
reference to that figure several times. On what basis do you 
justify, do you claim, that there will be a saving of $350,000 to 
the people of Saskatchewan by privatising operation recycle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The figure has varied somewhat over the 
years — different years, different dollars — but between 300 and 
350,000 has been an average cost of that program since its 
inception. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you didn’t swamp me with 
detail on that answer, I must admit. 
 
Let me repeat the question, Mr. Minister. When you say the 
program has cost $350,000 — 300 to $350,000 per year — on 
what are you referring to, on what basis do you draw that 
conclusion? I simply ask that question because I note that for 
‘85-86, $1,486,000 was spent; $1,177,000 last year; and $700,000 
this year has been intended. I must admit that there was a little bit 
of specificity lacking in your answer, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry, I think I missed part of your 
question. 
 
Let me assure the member that that’s the kind of money that was 
budgeted to operate the program. But on the other side, the 
hauling of the scrap vehicles in generated a revenue which went 
into the general revenue of the government. The net cost was 
about 300 to 350,000 on average since 1972. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — So what you’re telling me in effect the, 
administration included, as well as the pay-out for hauling, 
subtracted from that the revenue from Ipsco for the delivery of 
steel bodies, resulted then in net expenditures of somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of 300 to $350,000. Mr. Minister, I would 
assume that in making the decision to privatise operation recycle 
that you had done some kind of study to justify that, and I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would be able to table in this 
legislature a study that you used to justify in financial terms that 
particular decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We just know from the records of the 
department how much it costs and what the revenue return was. 
We didn’t go out and do any new study. That wasn’t necessary. 
You could see it in the figures within the department and that’s 
what was used. There’s no study to table. 
 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

964 
 

Mr. Hagel: — So what in the . . . if I may summarise, Mr. 
Minister, and draw this discussion to a close, disappointing as 
that may be to both of us, what you are saying is that there was no 
study done. You simply looked at the ledger, you said there is a 
cost to the province of Saskatchewan of 300 to 350,000. This can 
be privatised, and we hope that the objectives will be met by 
privatising and having Ipsco in effect operate operation recycle 
by itself. And it was on that basis then that the decision was made 
that we find . . . that has come before the House and that we’ve 
discussed today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We did the internal look within the 
department. Then we went and met with Ipsco to see that they 
would take on the responsibility of continuing to operate and 
gather the scrap vehicles. After that was completed, then the 
decision was made. We didn’t just decide and walk away, but 
rather we decided that we would walk away if we could have 
certain things happen. And Ipsco agreed to take on the 
responsibility, and I look forward to seeing how well they can do 
it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Just finally, Mr. Minister, and I hope that this will 
be the last question. And I come back — I guess in a sense we’re 
re-discussing an item we referred to earlier. The question is this: 
do you have then a written contractual agreement between the 
Government of Saskatchewan or the Department of the 
Environment and Ipsco assuring that they will undertake the 
collection of steel bodies in the province? 
 
(1615) 
 
I ask that question in the context, Mr. Minister, as you and I will 
know people . . . maybe let me . . . as possible who are engaged in 
good business practice will know that written agreements make 
for good friends, and they clearly outline the understandings and 
the responsibilities so that we don’t come somewhere down the 
road and find ourselves at odds because I thought you meant this 
and you thought I meant that. On behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan then, has there been a written agreement, a 
contractual agreement of some sort between Ipsco and the 
Government of Saskatchewan or an agent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There will be no written contract between 
Ipsco and the Government of Saskatchewan. The written contract 
will be between Ipsco and the general contractor that they will put 
in place to do the job. 
 
So we have a general understanding between Ipsco and the 
government — and they’re not working for the government; 
they’re working for themselves — the contract will be between 
them and the contractors who will collect the vehicles for them. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well then, it seems then, Mr. Minister, that the 
government . . .you have not placed the government in a position 
where you can assure the people of Saskatchewan — we’ve had 
the monitoring discussion and so on already here this afternoon; I 
don’t intend to repeat that — but that as a matter of faith, an act 
of faith in Ipsco, you have turned over the responsibility for 
operation recycle to Ipsco, assuming that largely business practice 
will take care of the collection of those deserted vehicles — 
bodies, I should say — but without there  

being any monitoring or assurance to the people of Saskatchewan 
in effect to protect the environment from deserted vehicles around 
the province then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The agreement that we had was that Ipsco is 
still anxious to have at least the tonnage that they were getting, 
and if possible a higher tonnage of scrap, brought to the Ipsco 
site. And the indication that they gave us at the time of our 
meeting was that they would indeed pick up the scrap vehicles 
and, if they can get the proper crusher, they will go on to pick up 
combines and farm equipment and that sort of thing as well. So 
it’s quite possible that we’ll get a better job than what we’ve been 
getting in the past. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to go back 
to a topic we’ve spent some time on already, and that’s the topic 
of environmental impact assessments. And I’m wondering if the 
minister is aware that property owners at Greg Lake in the 
Meadow Lake Provincial Park have been notified in writing that 
there’s a proposed development to take place — quite an 
extensive development — and I’m wondering whether or not the 
minister of the department has any knowledge of this 
development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I wonder if the member would give us the 
name of the lake that he’s talking about. There was a little noise 
and it was hard to hear. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The name of the lake is Greg Lake in the 
Meadow Lake Provincial Park and I’m informed across the way, 
by the member from Meadow Lake, that this development is no 
longer in the works. I’m not sure that the property owners at Greg 
Lake have been all informed about that. I know that I was given a 
copy of a letter that was sent to each of them informing that a 
development would take place and their input would be welcome. 
Is that development taking place? Is, in fact, the department 
aware of that development, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that my department is not aware 
of a development at Greg Lake. Perhaps the Parks department 
may know something about it, but our department is not aware of 
it at this time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, I’m wondering — I go back again then 
—- you’ll recall the six or so criteria for having an environmental 
impact assessment done, if any one of those are in question then 
the environmental impact assessment will go ahead. 
 
I’m wondering how the procedure as you had determined . . . .or 
in fact, not even be aware of any development at Greg Lake or 
proposed development at any time, and is it only public outcry 
that would cause an environmental impact assessment to be done 
on a development like that? Because I know that poor Paul 
Meagher certainly had to do an environmental impact assessment 
on his operation at Redberry Lake. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Poor Paul. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Poor Paul. Why the department wouldn’t be 
aware of this development, and is it the fact public outcry is the 
only criteria for doing an impact assessment? 
 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

965 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that I was fairly clear to you the 
other day when we discussed the same issue — not dealing with 
the same lake — but the issue of how you arrive at those who 
must do an environmental impact study. 
 
It’s not the responsibility of the department to see that each and 
every person is going to do something that follows the legislation. 
It’s the responsibility of the proponent to follow the legislation, 
and if they don’t, and there’s an outcry raised, then we go and 
enforce. But you know, for you to say that I should be able to see 
what’s happening at Greg Lake, we have no one in the 
department at Greg Lake on a regular basis. If somebody came in 
there and built something, we’d have very little way of 
understanding or knowing that they were doing that. 
 
But if it is a development and required an environmental impact 
study before the development should go ahead, it’s the proponent 
that really is on the hook to see that the environmental impact 
study and the requirements of the Act are met. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, you can tell me very clearly on 
the record here today that, in fact . . .I’ll wait until you’re done 
consulting with the member from Meadow Lake there. You can 
tell me very clearly on the record today that no one or no 
organisation or corporation or company has ever approached the 
Department of Environment for ministerial approval to proceed 
with the development at that location? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I was consulting with the member for 
Meadow Lake, and he advises me that Greg Lake is within the 
boundaries of the provincial park, so that anything happening 
within the boundaries of that park normally would fall within the 
Parks department. That’s likely the reason that we’ve had no 
contact. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I can’t believe that you even 
admit that there’s legislation in this province for environmental 
impact assessments to be done. You’ve given dozens of reasons 
in this House since estimates has started as to why you don’t have 
any authority to make sure that environmental impact 
assessments are conducted, or, in the wisdom of the department 
and yourself, if there is not an environmental impact assessment 
required, that you have to issue a permit for a development like 
that to proceed. 
 
If Redberry Lake then was in a provincial park, are you saying 
that Paul Meagher and associates would not have had to have an 
environmental impact assessment done? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If Redberry Lake had been within a 
provincial park, he wouldn’t have got to first base as far as a 
development without a permit and a licence from the park. 
 
The other thing is that that is a federal bird sanctuary. And I think 
that makes a considerable difference when you have a bird 
sanctuary operated by the federal government at Redberry. You 
have to look at the Act and at the specific methods of determining 
which ones require  

environmental impact assessments. You can’t just pick on any 
one thing. You have to look at the whole act and apply the Act, 
and that’s what is done by our department. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, you were saying to me that an 
environmental impact assessment wouldn’t be required at Greg 
Lake for development because it was within the boundaries of the 
provincial park. I’m asking you then if exactly the same situation 
applied at Redberry Lake, if Redberry Lake happened to be 
within a provincial park, are you saying to us that there would not 
be an environmental impact assessment required? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The situation at Redberry is very specific 
because of the endangered species of water-fowl that habitat that 
area. But within a provincial park, if there were specific issues 
where we could identify the need for an environmental impact 
assessment to be done. It would take very specific things, 
something like the occurrences at Redberry, that would cause that 
to be triggered. So you have to look at each case, case by case, 
and all the circumstances to put in place. It’s very difficult to 
relate Greg Lake and Redberry Lake. The only thing they have in 
common is that they are lakes. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Do you have authority to conduct 
environmental impact assessments within provincial park 
boundaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We do have the authority, if it is necessary, 
to go in ask for environmental impact studies within park 
boundaries. But it’s not customary. Normally the clearance would 
be given by the Parks department, unless extenuating 
circumstances were involved. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Public outcry would be reason enough for you 
to conduct an environmental impact assessment within the 
boundaries of a provincial park, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that just a public outcry is not 
the whole criteria. If they’re just an outcry saying we don’t want 
it, and there’s no environmental impact involved, then just the 
outcry would not be sufficient. But if there’s an outcry and an 
environment impact, then it would be necessary. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Changing your story, Mr. Minister. At least . . . 
Well, you certainly are. You shake your head in the negative, but 
you’re changing from what you told us originally. You dwelt 
quite heavily on the fact that one of the reasons there wasn’t an 
environmental impact assessment done on a previous topic we 
discussed was because there was no public outcry. You’re very 
clearly on the record for that. And now you’re saying that it has 
to meet more than one of the six criteria. 
 
You told me, in these estimates, that any one of those six criteria 
being violated under the impact assessment Act — your 
legislation — as long as any on e of those are violated, that was 
grounds for an environmental impact assessment to be looked at 
by the department. If not conducted by the department, then at 
least you could waive the requirement for environmental impact 
assessment and you would have to be responsible for  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

966 
 

signing the permission to go ahead with the development. 
 
Now how many of those six criteria, under The Environment 
Assessment Act, have to be violated before an environmental 
impact assessment is considered by the department? Is it one? 
You say no. Is it two only, or is it three, or is it all six, or how 
many of the criteria have to be violated before you perform an 
environmental impact assessment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think I’ve changed my story at all, 
and I’ve been saying the same thing time after time. If there’s 
public outcry, but the public outcry has no relation to 
environmental problems, no environmental impacts, that outcry 
would not be addressed as calling for an environmental impact 
study. But if there are environmental impacts, and there’s an 
outcry because of it, then the environmental impact study would 
be required. It’s not whether there’s one or two or five or six of 
those items addressed by the Act; it’s whether or not the items 
that are addressed in the Act are dealing with strictly 
environmental matters. 
 
So we are a Department of Environment. We’re here to preserve 
the environment. So if people just say: I don’t like it, I don’t want 
it, and they get up and have a big public outcry, but there’s really 
no impact on the environment, then there isn’t a problem as we 
see it, and not enough need to go ahead with an environmental 
impact study. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well could you tell me, very specifically, how 
the impact on the federal bird sanctuary in the Redberry Lake 
development project — how they conflicted with each other to 
come to the environmental impact assessment? Would you 
describe that for me, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me read to you point (iv). And when you 
talk about public concern, it says: 
 

(iv) cause widespread public concern because of potential 
environmental changes; 

 
And that’s what I’m telling you. If the outcry is indicating that 
there will be an environmental problem, then of course you do an 
environmental impact study. But if it’s just an outcry to hear 
themselves talk, then it’s different. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well if we want to go back to quoting the Act, 
Mr. Minister, we can maybe find some things in there. But before 
we start getting into a debate about the wording of the Act that 
you’ve just cited to me, I’d like you to tell me, very specifically, 
the relationship between the Redberry development and how it 
affected the federal bird sanctuary in order for you to order the 
environmental impact assessment to be done. And until that’s 
done, the project is on hold. Tell me the conflict between the 
development and the bird sanctuary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the Redberry case, I’m advised that it 
would be the impact that the development would have on the 
shore line as it related to the nesting habitat of the endangered 
species of birds, and the activity on the lake  

itself that would be generated by the development, all of which 
would have a negative effect and disturb the reproductive abilities 
of the birds in the area. Now these were endangered species, and 
for that reason they are looked at very seriously. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I appreciate, Mr. Minister, that it would be 
looked at very seriously. Let’s go to a clear example that I’m sure 
that you will have some knowledge of, and that’s a development 
proposal for The Battlefords Provincial Park. Now in The 
Battlefords Provincial Park, your government — not your 
department, mind you, but your government — has called for 
tenders for a development proposal at the North Battleford 
provincial park golf course. I hope that this example, you’d be 
able to tell me very clearly whether there’d be an environmental 
impact assessment done there. Because from what we understand, 
is that already there have been some changes take place. 
 
I am told by people in that area that one Myles Morin — who 
you’d be very familiar with I’m sure, Mr. Minister; he sat with 
you in this House — and a prominent business man by the name 
of Regan Hamilton secured the contract to provide golf carts for 
the provincial park golf course, Battlefords Provincial Park. And 
in fact, Mr. Hamilton’s spouse, wealthy business family in The 
Battlefords, Mr. Regan’s spouse is working in the pro shop in the 
golf course. I wonder, not as a side thought, whether that’s where 
some of the student jobs are going to, that business people from 
The Battlefords have to have their spouses working in the pro 
shop at the golf course. But anyway, I would suspect that she’s 
likely working there to keep an eye on how the business runs, so 
that they can have an inside track on the development proposal at 
the gold course. 
 
Now before such a large development like that would go ahead 
— swimming pools and possibility of hotels; lots of extra traffic; 
either they’re going to be cutting on services to the park or 
increasing fees — would something like that qualify for an 
environmental impact assessment, a major development within a 
provincial park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Many of these things are difficult to 
comment on here unless you have a lot of detail, and we don’t 
have much. Now the fact that somebody’s wife is in the pro shop 
on the golf course is not an environmental problem, I hope. 
 
The development of a major hotel and swimming pools and 
things like that could easily be considered a development. We 
haven’t been contacted by any developer or any company that’s 
proposing to develop at this point. If it comes forward we’ll 
certainly take a look at the whole proposal and make decision 
under the Act, depending on what the proposal is, whether or not 
that would require an environmental impact study. Some cases it 
would, and others it may not, depending on the location and the 
circumstance. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I hope you would watch that. I don’t think 
you should have to wait until someone comes forward. And I 
wasn’t suggesting that Mrs. Hamilton was an environmental 
problem in the pro shop, Mr. Minister. I wouldn’t go to that 
extent at all. But it seems to me there 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

967 
 

 must be some lack of criteria. When you told me a few days ago 
in this House that the Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford 
was not considered a development under the terms of the 
environmental impact assessment legislation, but a hotel and a 
swimming pool and possibly some other things could be 
considered a development, I don’t know what your criteria is. 
 
It seems to me that if this was in the private sector, and I know 
you’re all great supporters of the private sector over there, you’d 
be a fly-by-night operation. What’s the criteria that triggers 
whether or not there’s an environmental assessment done? 
Because it’s different for every individual case. And are you 
telling me, Mr. Minister, that there is no criteria other than every 
individual case has to be assessed on its own, and many cases 
you’re not aware of the developer has to come to you to get the 
environmental impact assessment? 
 
Well if the onus is on the developer all the time, why would you 
ever have to issue a permit? There’s no reason for you to issue 
permits for developments to take place. I think that major 
developments like that, as long as you’re aware of them — and I 
can understand there could be some developments that you may 
not be aware of, because there are many developments that take 
place all over the province, and I don’t blame you for not 
knowing about all of them — but if you’re made aware of them, 
if you’re made aware of them either in this House or through 
public outcry or some reason, then shouldn’t there be some 
initiative on your department to look into these things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The legislation applies in all cases. This 
particular project that you’re speaking of is within a provincial 
park. If there’s a need, if someone in the park area indicates an 
environmental impact that is negative, or needs to be looked at 
because a proposal is coming forward that somebody’s going to 
build something, of course we’ll take a look at it. But we haven’t 
had that kind of outcry by anyone at this point. 
 
Now you’re the first one to raise it, as far as I know. If the hon. 
member thinks it’s something that’s different that’s going into 
that park than what they’ve traditionally had, and if there’s going 
to be a significant environmental impact, then perhaps you should 
let us know, or have someone in the area that’s going to be 
affected let us know, what that impact may be, and then our 
department could take a look at it. 
 
But we haven’t been contacted by anyone at this time about a 
development in that park. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’m contacting you now, Mr. Minister. I don’t 
want you to think that I’m the front for a large public outcry. 
You’ll find out on your own what kind of a public outcry there is 
when you privatise the golf course out three. 
 
If there’s a need for an environmental impact assessment, how do 
we know if there’s a need for that? I can’t get from you what 
requires an environmental impact assessment and what does not 
require an environmental impact assessment in this province. 
 

Does it have to be toxic chemical that comes out of a 
development before there’s an environmental impact assessment 
done? What is it that requires an environmental impact 
assessment? You’ve answered that to me in so many different 
ways, Mr. Minister. If you could just be very clear and concise to 
me, we might drop this environmental impact assessment 
question for the rest of the day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ll answer it very precisely for the hon. 
member if that’s the case. It’s a promise, is it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you going to read to me from the Act? 
I’ve got it here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well that’s the way you decide, is to come to 
section 2(d) and if the development falls under those six 
guide-lines — I’m not going to read them all out to you — but if 
the development falls under those guide-lines, if there’s any one 
of those impacted, then it’s a development and must do an 
environmental impact study. 
 
It’s very straightforward but the Act is specific. If you’re wanting 
a development, wanting to build something, you would take a 
look at the Act, or take it to your lawyer and say, do I have to do 
an environmental impact study under this Act? If he reads it and 
says, no, that wouldn’t apply to what you’re doing, you likely are 
home free and can go ahead. 
 
But you would likely have to follow the guide-lines spelled out 
within the provincial park, or within a city, or wherever the 
project’s going forward. The Act is the clear-cut method of 
deciding what needs to have an environmental impact study. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I promised that I would give up 
on you for today, so I’m going to turn it over to the member from 
Regina Rosemont, and let him have a go at you for a while. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you. I’d like to thank my colleague from 
The Battlefords, but I want to pursue this line of questioning, Mr. 
Minister, because we’ve got two different answers from you 
today to exactly the same question. On the one hand you said it’s 
not necessarily any one of the items under section 2(d) of the Act, 
and on the other hand we just heard you say, yes, it was any one 
of those items. 
 
You said earlier on that a public outcry would not be a sufficient 
basis to invoke the sections of the Act in determining what a 
development was. The section (iv): “cause widespread public 
concern because of potential environmental changes, “ you’re 
now backtracking on that statement as that is any of the one 
conditions under that. But I want to ask, sir, I want to ask you in 
regards to that, if any one of these conditions under section 2(d) 
of the Act are met, how then do you explain section 8(1) of The 
Environmental Assessment Act? And section 8(1) says: 
 
Notwithstanding the requirements of any other Act, regulation or 
bylaw relating to any licence, permit, approval, permission or 
consent, a  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

968 
 

proponent shall (a proponent shall) obtain ministerial approval to 
proceed with a development, and no person shall proceed with a 
development until he has received ministerial approval? 
 
Would you say, sir, that the Act is as clear as a bell on that, that 
anybody developing any development in the province of 
Saskatchewan has to obtain ministerial approval from yourself as 
the Minister of the Environment? Is that your interpretation of the 
section 8(1)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the member has to realise that the 
interpretation of different words used within an Act are put in the 
interpretation section under the Act. And the determination of a 
development is very clearly outlined under section 2(d). Under 
section 8(1) it continually speaks of a development, so if 
something that has been determined to be a development under 
section 2(d) when you come to development under section 8(1), 
then it would most definitely apply and they would need 
ministerial approval. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, one of the conditions under section 
2(d), which determines the development, includes a large public 
outcry — widespread public concern. I believe, subsection (iv), “ 
. . .cause widespread public concern because of potential 
environmental changes . . .” 
 
The member from North Battleford asked you earlier on this 
afternoon: would in fact, would in fact an environmental 
assessment study and ministerial approval, or ministerial 
approval, be required if any development was to take place in the 
provincial park, that causes widespread public concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the hon. member has the Act there, just 
finish reading that section 2 (d)(iv), and it says, “. . .cause 
widespread public concern because of potential environmental 
changes . . .” And that’s what I have said to the member from The 
Battlefords. Just an outcry isn’t significant, but if it does have that 
effect because of potential environmental changes, then the 
outcry would be enough to trigger it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Minister, could you tell us how one 
determines whether or not there’s potential environmental 
changes occurring around any particular development without the 
Department of the Environment and its environmental assessment 
branch being involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As soon as a proposal comes forward, our 
department is involved and they evaluate the proposal and take a 
look at the situation. and if they see that there is an environmental 
impact likely, then they would order the proponent to go ahead 
with an environmental impact study. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister how does the department become 
involved if you, in your own words, say that first of all it’s up to 
the proponent to decide whether or not that person should get 
involved in terms of approaching the  

department, and that it’s up to the proponent whether or not to 
decide whether in fact what they’re developing is a development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I guess it’s very simple, that he must find out 
under the law if he’s going to proceed to build a development of 
any kind — construction, whatever. It’s up to him to refer to the 
legislation in the province to make that determination. And it’s 
when he comes forward that we review to see whether or not it’s 
a development. Now if a group of citizens have an outcry and 
they tell us that it’s going to do this and this and this to the 
environment that would all be negative, then that would also 
trigger us to look. So we have those two opportunities. You 
know, if you’re going to build a home in Regina, it’s up to you, as 
the person that’s going to build the home, to get a building 
permit. This is a very similar process. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m afraid, Mr. Minister, that one can’t draw the 
parallel, because jut on your line of thinking, is it a similar 
process if, for example, Hoechst chemicals or May & Baker or 
Ciba-Geigy, all of which have chemical plants within the city of 
Regina which produce toxic chemicals or formulate toxic 
chemicals within the city of Regina — if, for example, say 
Hoechst Canada Ltd. was going to expand their operation in 
Regina, building and adding on to their existing operation, would 
they, in your opinion, need to receive ministerial approval from 
this Department of the Environment, or whether, in fact, is this 
just like anybody else building a normal home in the city of 
Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the case of a chemical company, if you 
read section 2(d)(iii), if any of the emissions of that plant or of the 
new proposal were going to cause environmental difficulties, they 
may have to be dealt with by our department, or they may be 
regulated through other departments of government or through 
the city itself. So I can’t give you a direct answer on that. what 
I’m telling you is that they would have to ascertain whether or not 
the proposal that they’re bringing forward is governed by this 
legislation, or whether it’s some other legislation. If three were a 
public outcry that the new addition to Hoechst chemicals was 
going to cause a problem for the people in the area and they 
registered that concern, then our department would look at it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So, Mr. Minister, you are saying that the fact that 
there is a widespread public concern can in fact, in and of itself, 
form the basis for the Department of the Environment to demand 
an environmental impact statement, and to go through the 
environmental assessment process. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m saying that the public outcry, if there is 
potential environmental change possible — that’s the other part 
of the same section. It’s not just public outcry, but public outcry 
because of perceived environmental change — negative 
environmental change. Then you would look at it, not just the 
outcry by itself. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I can appreciate that final point that you’re 
making, Mr. Minister. what I think we’re disputing here is the 
fact that it’s up to the proponent, it’s up to the  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

969 
 

proponents of the development. And I just want to be clear on 
this. 
 
It’s our position that you, as the minister, have the responsibility 
and have the authority as outlined by the act to in fact make sure 
that any development, any kind of building which has the 
potential, which is likely — and I use the word in the Act, in 
section 2(d) — which is likely to “cause” any of a host of a range 
of problems, that it is the responsibility of yourself, as minister 
and as head of the department, to intervene in that process. Would 
you not agree that, in fact, the act confers that responsibility as 
well as authority to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The legislation is put in place to give 
guidance to people within the province who are going to engage 
in construction of new developments, new buildings, new power 
lines, whatever. It is their responsibility to see that they fall within 
the guide-lines of the Saskatchewan legislation. If the concern is 
brought forward to us by individuals that there is going to be 
environmental impact, then we will get involved, as I indicated to 
you before. But it is not up to the department to be out and trying 
to police everybody that’s going to build something. 
 
The legislation is there. If they don’t follow the legislation and 
then there is a concern raise, then it is our responsibility to step in. 
But you can’t expect the department to be the watch-dog, to see 
when somebody is going to lay the first piece of lumber and start 
to build something. We just don’t have that capability. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Again, Mr. Minister, I think I want to make it 
clear that in fact your view of the operation of the department and 
our view of the operation are diametrically opposed. We think, in 
fact, and I’ll say this straight, bluntly, sir, we think that it is the 
job of the Department of the Environment to police on behalf of 
the citizens of Saskatchewan; that it is your job to police the 
environment and to intervene in any kind of development which 
would threaten the environment. And you’ve done it in the past. I 
mean, what you’re saying belies, in fact, your actions. 
 
You’ve done it in the case of Redberry Lake, for example, prior 
to the public outcry around Redberry Lake — prior to the public 
outcry — when, in fact, by your admission, Mr. Meagher and Mr. 
Mamchur came to you on February 13 of 1984, I believe it was 
— or was it 1985? — when they first approached your 
department, there was not the public outcry that there was later 
on. Yet, in fact, at that point in time you told them that they 
would need an environmental impact statement. 
 
But in terms of your statement that you’re not able to police the 
province, to look after the environment on behalf of the people of 
the province, could it be, sir, that . . . could it be in fact the reason 
that you’re not able to is that in 1980 and ‘81 the Department of 
the Environment had 106 positions with a budget of six million 
and seven thousand dollars — this is all related to 1987 as a 
standard — that in 1982-83, the Department of Environment had 
120, and in 1981-82 had 125.2 positions, whereas now, in 
1987-88, the Department of the Environment has been reduced 
by 45 positions in regards to 1981-82, that in fact  

the department has lost 45 positions and received less money in 
real dollars now than they did in 1980 and ‘81. Is the fact, sir, is 
the fact that you’re not able to police that environment and 
protect the people of this province, due to the fact that your 
government has cut 45 positions out of the Department of 
Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I realise that the hon. member is new in this 
legislature and may not have some of the background for what 
he’s speaking about. Let me first tell you that the way the 
Department of Environment operates now under this legislation is 
exactly the way it operated when you were government. So 
there’s been no change in that role that the department is playing, 
and many of the staff of the department are the same staff that 
were here then. And they tell me the process has not changed. 
 
You speak of less people within the Department of Environment. 
You may or may not be aware that a good number of people who 
used to deal with the water side of the Department of 
Environment were transferred to the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. And whether the figure is 45 I don’t know. Have 
you got that exact figure . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
All right, so that accounts for a big change. Now what they dealt 
with was not strictly environmentally related, so you have to take 
time to decide whether or not we really do have less people. We 
have a different function as a department. We have had some go 
out; we’ve had some come in. And the numbers of people that we 
have at this time perhaps are not quite as significant as the 
member might at first think in looking at it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s interesting that you 
mentioned the people that were transferred out of the department 
into Saskatchewan Water Corporation. What you didn’t mention, 
in fact, was the people that were transferred in, in the public 
safety branches — the electrical inspectors, and gas inspectors, 
and so on. You didn’t mention those numbers. And the facts of 
the matter are that the job of policing Saskatchewan’s 
environment remains a much bigger task now than it was in 1980, 
in 1981, because the government of the 1980-1981 period in fact 
put a higher priority on the environmental issues of the day. 
 
And I think when you compare the standards and compare the 
amount of money spent in the department in 1981-82, compared 
to 1987-88, that there is no way in this world that you, as the 
Minister of the Environment, can stand up and say that you in 
government has either enhanced the role of the Department of the 
Environment or in fact maintained it at the same level. Because 
when you use 1981-82 standard and apply it to what’s happening 
today in 1987, you will see, in fact, just in terms of dollar funding 
that your department has suffered a cut in the priority of this 
government. 
 
And the point that we’ve been trying to make throughout this 
estimate period, and I think that we are making, is in fact one of 
the things that suffered by that is the development of a realistic 
assessment process; that in fact things which would normally 
within any kind of common sense or reasonable interpretation of 
what constitutes a development . . . for example, the Peter  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

970 
 

Pocklington plant up in North Battleford. any common and 
reasonable interpretation of the Act would say that that’s a 
development — any reasonable interpretation. Yet because of the 
cut-backs, your government has been unable to respond in any 
kind of reasonable manner to . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. It being 5 o’clock this committee is 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


