


















































October 30, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 October 30, 1987 
 
 

3715 
 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 2:03 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to 
the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Gas Inspection and Licensing 
Act 
Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Boiler Pressure Vessel Act 
Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Management Accountants 
Act 
Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Superannuation Act 
Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Time Act 
Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act 
Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax 
Act 
Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act 
Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 
Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Controverted Municipal 
Elections Act 
Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 
Bill No. 42 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 
to Certain Acts resulting from the Enactment of The Provincial 
Auditor Amendment Act, 1987 
Bill No. 43 — An Act to repeal The Public Utilities Review 
Commission Act 
Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 
to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Public 
Utilities Review Commission Repeal Act 
Bill No. 49 — An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 
Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Hospitalization Act 
Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Hospital Standards Act 
Bill No. 15 — an Act to amend The Student Assistance and 
Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 
Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Act 
Bill No. 86 — An Act for granting Her Majesty certain sums of 
Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending on March 
31, 1988. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:06 p.m. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Immunization Against Hepatitis B Virus 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Education. The minister will be aware that the medical 
lab technology course at Kelsey Institute in Saskatoon involves 
students working with blood supplied by the city’s hospitals. This 
type of work always comes with a risk that blood infected with 
hepatitis B could be accidentally supplied by the hospital. Because 
of this, Mr. Minister, the school instituted a policy last

year where it would provide students with immunization against 
hepatitis B virus. This year, however, students were informed that 
government money is no longer available for this immunization. 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us why, and explain why the 
government has ceased paying for this immunization program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the 
question relative to immunization of technologist students against 
the hepatitis B virus. It’s something I’m not really familiar with, 
and I’ll take notice and endeavour to bring back a response to the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, while you’re taking notice you 
should realize that these students, along with medical students and 
nursing students, must now pay up to $180 for this immunization. 
Some of these students advise us that they can’t afford to do this. 
Now I realize that $180 doesn’t mean a whole lot to a 
free-spending government and the free-spending members over 
there, but I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, are you prepared to put 
several dozen students, in fact 60 students, at risk for $180 each, 
which is less than $11,000 for the entire class. Are you prepared to 
do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, what I’m prepared to do is 
look into the details of the case. I, quite frankly, am not aware of 
immunization policies there. I guess I can only go back to my days 
in a post-secondary institution in college where we had, for 
example, in the area I was working at, a high risk for rabies . . . a 
high risk of contact with rabies, and there was a program in place. 
And I’ll take notice and endeavour to bring back the details. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I may, I would respond 
to notice I took three or four days ago relative to the question. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Further supplementary, Mr. Minister, this is 
$11,000 — this is less than one-tenths of what the Premier’s office 
spends on postage. There’s no fiscal justification for this decision 
by your government. There is no fiscal justification whatsoever to 
put these students’ health at risk by your mean-spirited and 
tight-fisted policy. 
 
So I would simply ask you this: will you instruct your department 
to see to it that this immunization program is restored to those 
students? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a little difficult for me 
to instruct my department or health officials or anybody else to do 
anything until I have some understanding of the details and make 
sure that we have the story right. 
 

Television Advertising Campaign 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3716 
 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address a 
question to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade, 
and my question deals with a matter of misplaced priorities. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department has launched a series of splashy, 
expensive television ads which are little more than Conservative 
Party campaign commercials. Now you’re doing this at a time, 
Mr. Minister, when your government is preaching restraint to 
average people and raising taxes and doing away with 
immunization programs. 
 
I ask you, sir: how much did this political propaganda, which is 
disguised as government advertising, cost the taxpayers to produce 
and place on province-wide television? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the ads in question deal 
with the important issue in this province of trying to diversify our 
economy, trying to build our economy to create a positive 
environment in this province to build our economy. Now we 
campaigned throughout the last election saying that our 
government was committed to diversifying Saskatchewan’s 
economy, to building on Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
We are doing that in many ways, whether it’s through building a 
new paper plant in Prince Albert, or a variety of other new 
businesses and new industries in this province. We are doing it 
through a bilateral trade agreement with the United States, and this 
is simply part of the overall package that we wish to use to build 
Saskatchewan, to diversify our economy, to create more jobs, and 
to make a better environment for our people to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, now that the minister has got 
his speech out of the way, maybe he might address the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, how much is the cost of this 
advertising that you’re talking bout? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I, at my fingertips, do not 
know the whole cost of what the particular program is. I can 
assure you that it’s a modest cost, but I will get that information 
and bring it back to the House next sitting. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister. It seems to me that the only diversification that’s taking 
place here is more money for certain advertising agencies which 
this government puts out tends of millions of dollars to already. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you saying that a province-wide television 
advertising campaign, that likely costs hundreds of thousands of 
dollars in production and placement, is something that your 
department would undertake without your prior approval? 
 
In view of this, Mr. Minister, and in view of the fact that

the Premier, who is here today, keeps claiming that cabinet 
ministers are counting every penny these days during these days of 
restraint, how can you say that you don’t know how much your 
department is spending when they’re spending hundreds of 
thousands of dollars without your approval? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that. I said 
that the money was spent without my approval. I said I wanted to 
get the exact amount that was being spent so the House fully was 
aware of what was in fact being spent. 
 
Now this particular advertising program, along with the strategy 
one — the strategies of this government to diversify and build the 
economy — is a method by which we can have more procurement 
within our province by local Saskatchewan suppliers to develop a 
supplier base within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker, of Sask Power. Prior to 
our coming to government, Sask Power purchases in 
Saskatchewan were about 20 per cent of what they purchased — 
80 per cent was purchased from outside. By encouraging local 
businesses to know that (a) they could access and bid on some of 
those contracts, they have in fact started to build supply industries 
within the province, and now supply something like 80 per cent of 
what Sask Power in fact bought. Now if that works for Sask 
Power, that can work for Weyerhaeuser; that can work for the 
Co-op upgrader; that can work for a whole host of other programs. 
 
This advertising is designed to inform people of that so that we 
can in fact build a supplier base and create more jobs in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, these ads are nothing but an 
attempt to boast of your government’s record. They tell you 
nothing about programs that businesses might apply for. 
 
Mr. Minister, your Premier says you don’t have any money for a 
prescription drug plan for seniors. He says you don’t have any 
money for a dental program for children. Now we find out that we 
don’t have money for immunizing children, and yet you have 
hundreds of thousands of dollars for an advertising program which 
is nothing but an attempt to bolster the sagging fortunes of the 
Tory party in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I ask you, Mr. Minister, how do you justify 
taking immunization programs and dental programs away from 
children and spending the money trying to save the political hide 
of the PC party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, we are proud in this party 
and in this government about the record of 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3717 
 
 

economic diversification in this province over the last four years, 
and look forward, quite frankly, to the next four years of further 
diversification, and then on into the next five years after that. Mr. 
Speaker, as it relates to the hon. member who asks a question 
about the drug plan, the Premier has said, on many occasions, we 
had to take a decision; should we put the dollars that we have in 
health care into free drugs for people, or should we put that money 
into drug rehabilitation program in Yorkton to assist people that 
are suffering from drug abuse and alcoholic abuse. 
 
This government took the decision that the priority was to put 
those dollars into drug rehabilitation rather than total free drugs for 
the people of Saskatchewan. That’s been our policy. We’ve 
debated that in the House, and I think we accept that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there’s yet another problem 
with these ads, and it’s called truth in advertising. Mr. Minister, 
any attempt to portray the last four years of your government as a 
ban-up success in job creation is the equivalent of trying to make 
chicken salad out of chicken feed, Mr. Minister. There’s no basis 
for it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you must be aware that today there are 22,000 jobs 
in manufacturing in Saskatchewan. That’s 2,000 fewer than there 
were a year ago. You must also be aware, Mr. Minister, that 
there’s about the same number there was in 1982. Mr. Minister, is 
there nothing to be said for truth in advertising? Do you feel no 
responsibility to bear some semblance to the truth when you spend 
public taxpayers money bolstering the fortunes of your political 
party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that truth, 
the word “truth” sitting on the lips of the member from Regina 
Centre probably quavers more than on any other member in this 
House. If we were to look at the development record and the 
building record of this government over the last five years . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me go through the list of the best job 
creation record in western Canada, right here in Saskatchewan. 
Weyerhaeuser, Weyerhaeuser, that the members opposite: (a) are 
opposed to and said we’d never build; (b) the Co-op upgrader, the 
members were opposed to and said we’d never build — both of 
them are being built; major expansion of Intercontinental Packers; 
the building of Hunter’s new RV business in North Battleford; 
Gainers; Marubeni; we’re going ahead with the Shand project. 
 
I could go on and on and take up the rest of question period just 
going through the new businesses that have been developed. And I 
can say to the hon. members, Mr. Speaker, just hold tight because 
there’ll be that many again and that many again over the next 10 
years when this government is in power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Call for Saskatoon Eastview By-Election 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier. We have just heard about the outstanding record of the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I know you will want to find out, 
Mr. Premier, whether that view of your outstanding record is 
shared by anybody outside this Chamber. And therefore I know 
you’ll want to give the people of Saskatoon Eastview an 
opportunity to vote on your record just as soon as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, since it’s now four months 
today, I believe, since the member for Saskatoon Eastview 
resigned his seat, are you able to announce when that by-election 
will be, and what is the date? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I will announce today that the Leader 
of the Opposition will be among the first to know when I do 
announce the date of the by-election in Eastview, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A 
supplementary. I’m pleased that I will be among the first to know, 
but there are 18,000 people in Eastview who want to know even 
more than I do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Is it your position, Mr. Premier, that these 
18,000, more than 18,000 voters are not entitled to representation 
in this House, and is it your position that a wait of four months is 
appropriate? Shouldn’t you now give these 18,000 people an 
opportunity to be represented in this House, and will you now do 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said to the hon. member 
several times, as he knows, it’s up to the Premier to call the 
by-elections and the general elections, and I will certainly be doing 
that. 
 
I’m reminded, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP across the country are 
asking to have a vote on free trade, and it’s particularly led, Mr. 
Speaker, by Mr. Bob White, who is the union leader from Ontario 
who says we should all vote on this right away. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to point out when they ask Mr. Bob White why he didn’t 
take a membership vote when he decided to pull the union out of 
the international union, Mr. White said the following: 
 

A few thought we should not proceed without a referendum 
vote of the entire membership. I couldn’t let that happen. If 
we went out to the locals, opening the door for corporate 
interference and internal politics and personality clashes, by 

  



 
October 30, 1987 

3718 
 
 

the time we counted the votes the union would be split into 
pieces. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that shows that the NDP . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I believe it might be said 
that was somewhat off the topic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
know whether the Premier misunderstood my question or not, but 
I was talking about the constituency of Saskatoon Eastview in 
Saskatchewan — 18,000 people there in Saskatoon, looking for 
representation. 
 
Mr. Premier, they had a member, one Kim Young, whose name 
you will know because he resigned his seat to take a patronage 
appointment. They had a member, Mr. Martineau, who resigned 
his seat. Will you now give them an opportunity to elect an MLA 
who will represent them in this House, represent them as they 
deserve to be represented? Or will you continue to procrastinate, 
continue to put off this by-election, continue to deny them their 
right to representation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I mean we heard this all 
during 1985 and during ’86. And, Mr. Speaker, we finally got to 
the point where we called an election, and obviously we won for 
the second time. And now they want another election, and they 
want an election on Meech Lake, and they want an election on free 
trade, and they want an election on every issue you can think of. 
They’ll want an election on farm policy. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, they lost the last election, all they can do is 
sit there and be against every single, solitary thing that comes 
down the pike. And secondly, they want an election all over again 
because they lost for the second time in a row. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, one final 
supplementary. Mr. Premier, I ask you whether you think your last 
answer had anything to do with the question put to you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I said to the hon. 
member who has stood in his place for four consecutive questions 
— I answered him the first time — that I would make the 
announcement when I’m ready to make the announcement. And 
he stood up and asked it four more times. He doesn’t deserve an 
answer, Mr. Speaker, in terms of any more detail —he’s asked and 
he’s asked and he’s asked. If he wants to ask me again, I will make 
the appropriate announcement when I decide, Mr. Speaker, as he 
did when he was Premier. 
 
So he knows the rules as well as I do and anybody else. And I just 
point out, the NDP won’t even let their own membership vote 
when it comes to unions. They won’t even let their own 
membership vote. They deny . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cuts in Grants to Cosmo Day Care Centres 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I took a question related to 
a $1,300 a month grant . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. The hon. 
member took notice of a question. he wishes to answer the 
question today, and I’m giving him that permission. I believe the 
House should do the same. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question 
related to a $1,300 a month grant to the Cosmo Day Centre for 
special needs children in Saskatoon, and to a similar day care 
centre in Lloydminster. 
 
I advise the House, Mr. Speaker, that several factors led to the 
decision to discontinue the pilot project that was started in 1981. It 
was a pilot, a test run, if you like, Mr. Speaker, and hence had an 
evaluation at the end of the time when the pilot came to an end. It 
was determined that pilot projects are an inequitable process for 
identifying and admitting children to the program. 
 
The department, together with the University of Saskatchewan, 
conducted a research study which demonstrated significant 
difficulties associated with the identification of learning disabled 
children at a pre-school level. So one of the reasons why the 
program was discontinued is because it was inequitable in its 
identification process. 
 
The second reason, and perhaps an equally important one, or even 
more important, Mr. Speaker, is that there was other programs 
developed to meet this target group. There were several new 
governmental initiatives developed to meet the needs of mildly 
disabled children. The early childhood intervention program has 
developed since 1981 and provides a home base service to 
children and their families identified as disabled or at risk for 
disabilities. 
 
In addition, the Department of Health has expanded its service 
mandate to pre-school children . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Is the hon. member almost 
concluded, because it’s getting to a rather long question? So if he 
wishes to wrap up his remarks I’ll give him a couple of seconds, 
but he shouldn’t take about three minute to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The program was discontinued. The 
point I’m trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is that there were other 
programs put in place to pick up that target group in part, some 
through boards, some through Social Services, and some through 
Health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

Saskatoon Eastview By-Election 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3719 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s to the Premier. In 
respect to calling the by-election in Eastview, Mr. Premier, there’s 
a special circumstance that you should be aware of, and the special 
circumstance is that your member who ran in the last election and 
within six months deceived the people of Eastview and resigned 
for his own personal reasons and deserted the people that elected 
him. 
 
You have an obligation, a special obligation, don’t you feel, to call 
that by-election so the people can once again get a representative. 
And hopefully they won’t look at another Tory because the last 
two deserted them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I responded to the Leader of 
the Opposition asking the same question four times. This is the 
fifth question that’s being asked by the NDP, and now they won’t 
even hold their mouth quiet as we respond. I said . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The Premier 
is attempting to answer the question, but he can’t if the person 
who asks the question continually interrupts him. I think he’s 
answered it, and we’ll go to the next question. 
 

Cuts in Grants to Cosmo Day Centres 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of 
Education in response to the announcement that he just made with 
respect to his justification for cutting the grants at the Cosmo Day 
Care Centre. My question to you is this, Mr. Minister: you know 
full well that the results of your cuts at the Cosmo Day Care 
Centre have first of all resulted in staff cuts at that centre to 
support children who are speech impaired, children who are 
physically disabled, children who have serious behaviour 
problems who are being served right now at that centre, and as a 
result of your cuts will not get the special professional support that 
they need? 
 
And my question to you, sir: in light of the fact that your 
department has a million dollars a year alone for advertising with 
one single agency, Dome Advertising, will you explain to this 
Assembly how you can get your priorities so severely messed up 
that you can’t even find $1,300 a month to help several small 
children in a day care centre that are speech impaired and 
physically and mentally disabled? Will you explain that to this 
Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, we 
are committed to that target group of individuals. But the decision 
was made that rather than just target our services to two locations 
only in this province, that we ought to perhaps look at a broader 
approach, one for the entire province. And because of that there 
have been initiatives in health, the early childhood intervention 
program, the commitment by school boards across this province, 
Mr. Speaker. And as well, present day care regulations provide a 
grant when and if the centre provides service to special-needs 
children.

Mr. Prebble: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister. The minister says he wants to expand services to the 
whole province. Why then does he begin by cutting services to 
these two day care centres? 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: will you now then give this 
Assembly your commitment that you will provide special support 
for speech impaired, and children with other learning disabilities, 
in pre-school centres right across this province where the demand 
is needed — right across this province so that we can begin 
addressing their problems and put in place a preventive program at 
the pre-school level instead of waiting until these children have to 
get into school before addressing their problem? Will you do that 
and will you reverse these cuts now which are just symbolic of 
your uncaring government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly why the pilot 
project was discontinued so that we could expand the program 
across the province. That’s why since 1981 there has been put in 
place an early childhood intervention program; the speech 
pathology and educational psychology pre-school services 
provided by the Department of health; the pre-school programs for 
moderate and severely disabled children provided by local school 
boards with funding from Education; and also that special grants 
are available to accommodate those children with special needs 
best served in a day care setting through the Department of Social 
Services, Mr. Speaker. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 46— An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We were talking 
about the labour-related sections of the Bill last evening, Mr. 
Minister, and you were trying to impress on me how concerned 
you were about the employees who will be employed by the new 
institute and how concerned you were about protecting their 
benefits and ensuring that they were well off. And I want to talk 
specifically about seniority rights in the context of the remarks that 
you made last night. 
 
Now as you know, most of these employees have incurred 
seniority over months or even years of service for the Government 
of Saskatchewan, doing the same kind of work that they will be 
doing for the institute. There will be no break in their employment. 
They’ll continue to do tomorrow, or the day after this Bill is 
passed, exactly the same work as they’ve been doing before the 
Bill is passed — working for the province of Saskatchewan, for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan, helping to deliver 
those programs, doing so at a rate of pay that is the same as 
they’ve been getting. That won’t change. You told me that last 
night. The benefits are going to be right up there. 
 
But with the respect to the question of seniority, as I understand 
the effect of your Bill, that will be wiped out. I 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3720 
 
 

talked last night about the effect of this Bill being to tear up the 
collective agreement, to junk it, to wipe it out, to throw it into the 
waste basket. And when you do that, I’m afraid that you’re going 
to be throwing with it the seniority rights that these people have 
built up over years and years of dedicated service to the people of 
this province. 
 
And I don’t think it’s fair, and the Deputy Premier agrees with me. 
My question to you, Minister, is: if you agree with the Deputy 
Premier, will you amend the Bill — and will you amend the Bill, 
at least to the extent of preserving the seniority rights of the 
employees who will now become employees of the new institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In response to all the member’s 
questions, the first thing I would say, Mr. Chairman, is I think 
your interpretation of the employees doing the same jobs because 
it’s the same old thing, obviously I have a fair amount of 
disagreement with that. 
 
The reality is this is a new educational institution. We will indeed 
have people that were doing jobs in a community college setting, 
in an institute setting, that come together now. A good example, it 
seems to me, that I could give you of how there are going to be 
jobs that are not the same and just carrying on business as usual 
would be, for example, the career counselling area. We have those 
involved on the college side; we have those involved in the 
institute side, and now they’re coming together. In fact I think I 
recall seeing in the Moose Jaw newspaper the official opening of 
the new career counselling office, that now the two had come 
together — the Moose Jaw Community College and as well the 
former STI. So I think your observation about somehow that it’s 
just business as usual, in the same old job, probably isn’t a valid 
observation. 
 
Having said all of that, I wouldn’t want to suggest for a moment 
that seniority isn’t a problem area. It is a problem area because its 
application differs among the various employee groups. 
 
For example, community college seniority now applies only to 
individual college. So one might ask: how does that fit in the 
larger contest? The institute will have to determine when and how 
it might be applied. Depending on the employee’s choice, 
collective bargaining may be a means of defining this. 
Accumulated service will be taken into account on promotion, 
etc.; service-related benefits such as pension credits and vacation 
entitlement will carry forward to the new institute. This is true for 
accumulated sick leave credits as well. 
 
So those are the points that I would make in so far as what we can 
say about the whole seniority issue this very moment. First of all, I 
don’t think your observations are totally valid in that somehow it’s 
business as usual. It is a new institute; as it relates to vacation and 
pension credits and that kind of thing, that’s carried forward, but 
there are some issues as it relates to seniority. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I thank you for 
that answer. I don’t think we should get into a debate about 
whether it’s business as usual. I think you’ll concede, and I think 
you have conceded, that there will be instructors who have been 
instructing and who will 

continue to instruct. There are maintenance people who have been 
maintaining buildings and who will continue to be maintaining 
buildings. And I think that you concede me that as I concede you 
the fact that some people may be doing a different . . . may have 
different job duties. 
 
My concern, though, is for the people who will be employed by 
the institute who were employed by an institute or community 
college in the past. And as I said to you in my previous question, 
these people have given years . . . months or years of service to the 
people of this province. And one of the effects of this Bill ought 
not to be to strip them of any of their benefits that should go along 
with this long service. 
 
Now I take it from the answer that you gave me that you will not 
agree to amend the Bill to explicitly preserve their seniority rights. 
Let me ask you this, Minister: will you undertake that in the 
discussions with the trade union following the establishment of the 
institute, the full seniority rights of employees will be recognized? 
In other words, no one will have to start over again accumulating 
seniority; no one will lose the seniority that they have. 
 
Now I understand, Minister, that I’ve asked you a complex 
question. I know that it’s a problem to adjust seniority right that 
may carry different benefits with them, and that some collective 
bargaining will be necessary in order to tidy up those questions. 
But what I’m looking for is a fundamental assurance from you — 
an assurance from you on the fundamental question of seniority, 
that the seniority rights that these employees have accumulated to 
this point will be recognized, subject only to such adjustments as 
may be necessary when you’re melding the different rights that 
have been accrued under the various collective agreements into the 
new collective agreement that will be negotiated in respect of the 
institute. You got that? I can ask it again, if you like. You’ve got a 
puzzled expression on your face. 
 
The question is just simply: will you start from the position that 
you will respect their seniority rights, subject only to whatever 
adjustment is necessary as you’re melding the eight separate 
collective agreements into one? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well what I can tell you is that we’ll 
respect the issues around sick leave, vacation time, not losing 
service-related benefits. I think we’ve given that assurance; it’s in 
writing in the update that went out to them. 
 
The other assurance — fundamental assurance, I think is how you 
put it — that I give to you and give to them, is that we want to do 
right by our employees. And I guess I would be upset if you 
thought we would try and do otherwise. But I think as well it 
would be unfair for you to, as it relates to any other issues around 
seniority, unfair for you and I to start to bargain in this House. 
 
But if you are looking for a fundamental assurance as . . . the 
fundamental assurance I give you is, we want to do right by our 
employees, and that’s why we’ve tried to be as explicit and as 
clear with them, as up-front with them 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3721 
 
 

as we can, in all these areas. And I don’t deny that there are some 
areas that do have to be worked out. And I talked earlier about 
community college seniority that now applies only to individual 
college and how does that fit in the overall context, and obviously 
that’s something the institute will have to wrestle with. 
 
But if there’s any question in anyone’s minds about, you know, 
the attitude that I come into this legislation with, in so far as our 
view of these employees, albeit that they will be new employees 
of the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), of the institute, is that we want to do right by them. 
And that’s why we’ve got those provisions in . . . not provisions, 
but that’s why we are prepared to explore the notions of 
sabbaticals and professional development, all those kinds of 
things. 
 
We recognize that this institute is only going to be as good as the 
people in it, and I don’t know if I can say much more than that. 
And you may want me to say more than that, and I don’t think I 
can, in all fairness. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I think I thank you for that answer, minister. I 
think you said the things that I wanted to hear you say. 
 
I want to now ask you, in the preparation of the sections dealing 
with collective bargaining and the orders of the Labour Relations 
Board, whether your officials or you or your staff took the 
opportunity to consult with the considerable expertise that’s 
available within the government. I’m thinking of the chairman or 
vice-chairman of the Labour Relations Board, or any of the senior 
people in the Department of Labour, to determine whether your 
legislation met the commonly accepted norms in labour relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In so far as the expertise that we drew 
upon, given that this Bill wasn’t hastily constructed — and as you 
well know, some of the consultations that I undertook went back 
as far as last January for restructuring our post-secondary 
education system — the first point I would make is, no, we did not 
consult with the Labour Relations Board. I think that clearly 
would be a conflict of interest. 
 
But certainly, over this process, not only did we consult with the 
people who are going to be affected by the change, if you like, but 
more importantly we consulted with that large cross section of 
people out there who gave us the sense of what post-second 
education ought to look like as we move towards the 21st century. 
That’s on the policy side, in so far as making sure that we’re doing 
everything in a right and proper fashion, if you like. 
 
Obviously we had the highest level officials possible available 
from the Department of Labour — as well, Justice, the Public 
Service Commission. It was not something hastily thrown 
together, as you well know, and I think we’ve been fortunate to 
have the expertise of not only the citizenry of this province but as 
well those specialized areas. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well I have one final comment and a question. 
I’m a bit depressed by your answer. As I said last night, what 
you’ve done here is a radical thing from a 

labour relations point of view. You have, in my submission, 
abused your power as a government to pass laws. You’ve abused 
your power by taking a situation where you, as an employer, have 
used your power as a government to radically change the 
relationship between you and your employees. 
 
Now you will tell me that these people were employed by the 
government and are now employed by a new institute, a new 
employer. And I will answer to you that in labour law that’s a 
situation that’s been covered for decades. For decades we’ve had 
successor rights and transfers of obligations. And as I said last 
night, if this were in the private sector, there would be no question 
that the board orders would continue to apply, the union 
certifications would remain in place, and the collective agreements 
would continue in force. 
 
And you’ve used your power as a government to legislate those 
board orders and those collective agreements right out of 
existence. And that’s not fair, and it’s not right. And your advisers, 
if they know anything at all about labour relations in this country, 
know that that’s an abuse of a government’s power, that it’s not 
right, and that it ought not to be done. 
 
All the changes that you want to take place can take place at the 
bargaining table. The only one that can’t are the description of the 
bargaining units which you, by legislation, have set up. You 
divided them into two, academic and non-academic. 
 
That’s a role which in this province and every other jurisdiction in 
Canada has been fulfilled by labour relations boards, by expert 
boards who know what they’re talking about. And if it makes 
sense to split the academic and non-academic unit in the new 
institute, you should have relied on your board to come to that 
judgement. 
 
It’s not up to the employer to make the judgement as to what the 
bargaining unit should look like. That’s not a decision for the 
employer to make. That’s a decision for the labour relations board 
to make, and you’ve taken that decision away from them. Again, 
you’ve abused your power as a government to get some advantage 
for yourself as an employer. And that’s wrong, minister, and your 
officials ought to have told you that was wrong. 
 
Now my question relates again to consultation. In these 
consultations that you had, did you consult with the trade union 
representing these employees to get their views as to appropriate 
bargaining units; to get their views as to how the collective 
agreements could be melded together; to get their view as to how 
some of those other problems that you foresee could be worked 
out? In other words, did you try and work it out with the union 
ahead of time to try and head off the kind of radical, draconian 
measures that are contained in this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The essential question that in a way that 
you ask is how did we get where we got to with this legislation, 
and why is it framed as it is? And the hon. member from Regina 
Centre talks about pure, unadulterated ignorance, and that’s 
exactly what that statement belies, my friend. Because the reality 
is — and 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3722 
 
 

I’ll give your colleague credit from Saskatoon University. He 
came to a national forum and listened to 5 or 600 people from 
across this country talk about the kind of post-secondary system 
we need in this province and in this country, if we’re in fact going 
to enjoy the social well-being that we do this very day, and the 
economic well-being that we do this very day, over the next two 
decades, and to ensure that our children do. 
 
So the notion that some how this legislation that’s before us is to 
take us back in time or backwards or a step backwards, is 
ignorance. That is an ignorant commentary. We want to take our 
nation, our province, and our country forward. And if you doubt 
that, then I submit to you, talk to your other colleagues who have 
heard what the kinds of demographic and economic and social 
changes that we’re going to have to deal with over the next several 
. . . two or three decades at any rate. 
 
This is educational legislation, first and foremost. I respect the 
hon. member’s comments about his views, and I know he has a lot 
of expertise in this area, but the fundamental fact that we must all 
address first and foremost here is this is now an educational 
institute. And that’s very difficult, I know, for some NDP to get 
their heads around, that this is not going to be an educational 
institution now that’s run by a department of the government. It’s 
going to be an institute like a university. It’s going to have its own 
board, so they do not work for government any more. 
 
And you can talk about, sort of, the fundamental kinds of . . . some 
fundamental issues in your mind that have been breeched. The 
fundamental issue in here that has not been breeched, and that 
must not be breeched, is their right to choose. Their right to 
choose, given that they now will work for this brand new institute 
with new objectives and new goals and new mandates. I don’t 
think it would have been fair for me to impose anything else other 
than that on them. And I know you and I are probably going to 
have a different view on this, and that’s what this forum is all 
about. 
 
But the essential thing, and I think that my colleagues, some of 
them across the way have to come to realize that you may not 
agree with the changes that we make in these two companion 
pieces of legislation, but the thing, I think, if you examine it at all, 
you’ll recognize that it is imperative that we make changes. And 
that was clear, certainly the three days early this week at the 
Saskatoon forum. We can argue about what kind of change, but 
there’s no sense arguing that we ought not make changes. 
 
Now is so far as what consultations I had over this part year with 
the trade-union movement, trade-union leaders, the union leaders, 
union members at the consultation meetings, the 20 held across the 
province — at those meetings were invited, labour-union 
representatives. As well, before this Bill was introduced, I met 
with, I don’t know, something in the order of 1,200 of the 
employees themselves to give them some sense of what we were 
looking at; to try and answer as best I could any of their questions; 
to give them a notion, our view of how this institute could serve 
their children and your children and my children well into the 
future; to in fact put some rumours to rest; to say yes, we’ve had to 
do

some lay-offs this past spring, but all of that is behind us now. 
 
And as well, only a couple or three weeks ago, I as well met with 
the table officers from the . . . or at least two or three or four of the 
table officers with Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union. 
So certainly I don’t expect you to agree perhaps with the “what” 
that we have chosen, but I think you cannot deny the “why” and 
the “how.” 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, it’s certainly my intention to 
deny you the “how” that you’re doing it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am intrigued by your continuing use of the 
sentence: we’ll do right by our people. I have never heard that 
sentence used outside the movies. And indeed I heard it used in 
the movie Norma Rae, and the script-writer who used the 
sentence, used that intending to portray something very important, 
Mr. Minister. First of all, the atrocious grammar in the sentence 
was intended to portray someone ignorant from the backwoods, as 
they call them, red necks. But much more important than that, that 
sentence drips with an autocratic attitude that “I’ll make the 
decision about what’s best for my employees.” 
 
Mr. Minister, let me try to bring you north of the 49th parallel and 
talk about how heretofore it has been handled in this jurisdiction, 
Mr. Minister, heretofore in this jurisdiction it hasn’t been the boss 
doing right by his people, because inevitably there’s a large 
measure of self-interest in how the boss does right by his people. 
Heretofore it has been a negotiated process, and that’s what this 
was. The employees and the employer agreed upon a contract, and 
this was a proprietary right, a contract — not very different than a 
contract whereby you agree to buy and sell something that’s 
tangible; each side got something. 
 
Mr. Minister, as my colleague from Saskatoon stated, this kind of 
thing has been prohibited with private companies for very good 
reasons. The reason is because it’s abused. If it weren’t for the 
rule, all you’d have to do is change companies and there’d be no 
contract — same people doing the same jobs, serving the same 
people, same person paying the bills, but no contract because they 
changed companies. That’s exactly what we have here — the 
same people doing the same jobs in the same building serving the 
same people, the same person paying the bills, but now they don’t 
have a contract. This is an outright, straight abuse of power, Mr. 
Minister. There have been several such instances of abusive power 
when this government’s been in office, but few more blatant than 
this. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve taken away their contract, you’ve taken away 
their union. Why? — because I’m going to do right by my 
employees. Well, Mr. Minister, if you’ve got enough guts to call a 
by-election, those employees and the other people in 
Saskatchewan are going to do right by you, and you’ll get what 
you deserve. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Minister, I would appreciate it if you would tell us why you 
think that contract which your government had 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3723 
 
 

entered into in good faith with the employees is no longer in the 
public interest? Why was it not in the public interest to honour that 
contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think we’ve said it many times in 
this House, in question period and certainly last night as well as 
we debated this Bill, why we are doing, what we are doing with 
these two companion pieces of legislation is to make sure, in fact, 
that we have, as best as we can determine along with the people 
who have helped us, the right education and post-second education 
system for the 21st century. 
 
I want, because I think the people sensed the need, we want to 
make changes. Our government believes that changes are 
necessary. You do not want to make change, and we’re probably 
going to have the fundamental disagreement. Part of those changes 
ends up . . . or part of those changes entail the setting up of this 
new institute — strictly an educational institute, not part of 
government any more, employees that will no longer work for the 
Department of Education. 
 
As I said last night, I don’t know . . . you know, the issue six 
months ago for the NDP, eight months ago for the NDP was, we 
wanted to change the form of governance, get it out of the 
Department of Education, advanced education. Now we do that 
and you’re still not happy. That’s what the employees wanted. It 
seems to me that for me to do anything than what we’re doing, 
other than providing them with that fundamental right that they 
should choose whom and how, I think would be irresponsible of 
me. 
 
Now you will argue that this is not a new institute with new goals 
and a new mandate, that there is nothing changed. I will argue, and 
I hope that your colleague from Saskatoon University is starting to 
come around to that view, that the world is changing socially, 
demographically and economically. And so, too, must our adult 
education system change. 
 
It’s no longer going to be good enough to have it as an arm of the 
government. It’s not flexible; there’s duplication; it’s too slow; it 
doesn’t respond quickly enough to the needs. You can’t even 
entertain, really, without a tremendous amount of road-blocks, 
notions like professional development and sabbatical leave and 
applied research. For all those reasons and other technical ones, 
that’s why we’re making these changes. 
 
And, you know, the thing that intrigues me to no end — and it 
intrigued me through 42 hours of budget estimate debate in this 
legislature, and again now, last night and today — we can debate 
and debate educational legislation, and I’ll tell you what: it’s a rare 
day that the NDP mention the word young people, or quality, or 
excellence, or looking after those groups that don’t have access to 
our system like they should today . . . and somehow turn the entire 
focus down to: that this piece of legislation is somehow a labour 
legislation. 
 
The goal of this legislation is to make sure that we do look after 
that ever-increasing group of 18- to 65-year-olds and, as well, your 
children and my children who will come behind them — no other 
goals.

Mr. Shillington: — The minister is avoiding the question, and 
very well you know it. I asked you, Mr. Minister, why you thought 
it in the public interest to take this contract away from these 
people? 
 
There’s no question but what, if you didn’t have the legislative 
. . .if you didn’t specifically include it in the Act, if you hadn’t 
especially abused your power by saying in the legislation, there’s 
no contract, the Labour Relations Board would have followed 
decades of established practice, and the contract would have gone 
forward. Why did you think it in the public interest to take these 
employees’ contract away from them? 
 
I don’t particularly need, for the 81st time, your comments about 
why you think the legislation as a whole is good. I’m asking you 
to address yourself to a very serious blemish on this Bill, and 
that’s your abuse of power in taking a contract away from people 
that was freely, openly, and democratically negotiated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, you 
say we’re taking something away. Last night I heard the rhetoric 
used — “radical,” “stripping.” I say we’re providing that choice, 
that fundamental choice, that now this is a new educational 
institution, they ought to have the right. And it seems to me it 
would only be right for them to choose how and whom. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is the minister aware that they’ve always had 
that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That right is a fundamental right in this 
province, and I suspect it’ll be there for a good long time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Then why did you feel the necessity to take 
their contract away if, as you admit, they’ve always had the right 
to change unions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Because this is a brand new educational 
institution with new goals, new mandates. It’s not going to be an 
arm of the government. Technically, the reasons that I suppose 
are, in some people’s minds, equally important is the fact there’s 
eight or nine or ten bargaining units now, and all kinds of other 
different technical situations. To me those aren’t the real reasons, I 
mean, important as they may be. The real reasons, in my mind, are 
those fundamental ones about what kind of post-secondary 
education system do we want, and addressing the fact that we do 
have a brand-new institute and giving the people the choice that 
are in that institute. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you really 
appreciate what a trade union is. It’s not an enemy of the state, as 
you people sometimes pretend. It’s not some eastern dominated 
institution which sucks the very blood of western Canada dry. A 
trade union is a voluntary association of employees, which they 
can form at any time, or leave at any time, or change at any time. 
Any time they wished, they could have got out of the union; they 
could have changed unions. And, Mr. Minister, there isn’t a bit of 
substance nor a bit of sense to your comment that you’re giving 
them their freedom of choice. As you just 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3724 
 
 

admitted, they always had it. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you going to be honest and admit the reason why 
you’re taking away that contract is because you’re going to take 
away the benefits, some of the benefits, too? The same people 
may be doing the same job, but not under the same conditions. If 
you’re not going to take away some of their benefits, then, Mr. 
Minister, this makes no sense at all, and you’ve bought yourself a 
pile of trouble without any apparent benefit to the government or 
the taxpayers. So will you admit the truth. They’re not going to 
carry all of their benefits forward into the new situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I know the hon. member would 
like to — as some of them before him have done — try and create 
an atmosphere of fear, uncertainty and insecurity for those 
employees. I dealt with this kind of rumour-mongering a month 
ago or more when I was at the institute — that somehow when the 
new institute was formed, people would lose their jobs. I clearly 
said that’s not the case. That somehow when this new institute was 
formed, because the collective bargaining ceased to exist, that 
somehow there would be a cut in pay — we dismissed that one. I 
have no doubt that tomorrow if I was to put another 20 of those to 
bed, tomorrow you would come up with another one. 
 
And I think you and I are going to fundamentally disagree. I want 
to talk about education; I want to talk about young people. I want 
to talk about accessibility for our young people, and making sure 
that we have institutions that can meet the opportunities and, 
indeed, the challenges over the next two decades. You maybe do 
not; I do. And I think we’re mile apart on what you see as the 
vision for this institute as far as what I see for it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Does the minister even remember what my 
question was, and if you do, would you answer it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I said earlier the . . . I’m not 
about to . . . As I told your hon. colleague from Saskatoon, 
anything that we can say has been said, and if you’re trying to 
draw me in somehow to start doing some negotiating in this 
Chamber, it will not work. This is not the place for it. 
 
And you may not believe me. History will be the test of time, as I 
said to another member last night, but if you think I, or my 
government, don’t want to see these . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We do right by our people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And yes, you’ll suggest that somehow 
condescending statements, and you can make light of it all you 
want. You can make light of it all you want, but I’m telling you 
these are our valued employees. We’re interested in their 
professional development because they are the ones who will keep 
us on the leading edge. 
 
Now you can try and create whatever distortion you want. That’s 
your right. You and I are fundamentally going to disagree, and I 
don’t know if there’s anything more I can add. 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, there is something more 
you could do. You could drop the bizarre statement that we’re 
going to do right by our people, and you could make an 
unqualified, categorical statement that the employees hereafter 
will have all of the benefits which they had heretofore. Just make 
that categorical, unqualified statement, Mr. Minister. That’s what 
more you could do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well if you don’t accept my 
fundamental reasons, for some technical ones that would be 
impossible to do. There is 10 or 11 bargaining units. It wouldn’t 
even be fair. Some of them work different hours, different 
classifications, all of those things. And would that be fair to bring 
in an employee, for example, who’s had a secretarial or support 
staff job at 32 and this one’s at 37, and somehow they can 
continue to go like that. I mean, for some technical reasons you’re 
reducing — you cannot. And I think to try and suggest it, that you 
can reduce this issue to that simply duality, is indeed an 
over-simplification. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think the employees 
may draw — and the public of Saskatchewan may draw — their 
own conclusions about your refusal to answer the question. And 
the conclusion which they’re going to draw is this is a naked use 
of power, to take away a proprietary right that was freely and 
fairly negotiated in a contract. 
 
Mr. Minister, you people seem to have no understanding, none at 
all, about how . . . and that is why I made the comment when you 
said, you may want to know where all this came from. And that’s 
why I made the comment from my seat, “it was borne out of 
ignorance,” because indeed it was borne out of ignorance. 
 
You don’t understand what trade unions are. You don’t understand 
that they’re voluntary associations, freely entered into, which they 
may freely leave. You don’t seem to understand that labour 
contracts are something that are negotiated, it’s a contract, they’re 
fairly negotiated. You don’t understand any of that. You simply 
sweep it away for your own narrow purposes, because what the 
heck, they’re only a few hundred people and they’re not going to 
prove conclusive in any particular seat. They’re not going to 
defeat us. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, just keep it up. Because there are more and 
more groups of people, in and by themselves, can’t defeat you, but 
who together are forming a fairly impressive little alliance. 
 
I noted with some interest the lack of success which the Minister 
of Social Services had in trying to get the senior citizens off the 
drug plan the other day. I’ve noticed some of the success which 
the Minister of Health has had with quite a different variety of 
groups. The Minister of Labour has made no attempt at all to get 
along with organized employees — picked a fight with them since 
the beginning. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, you’ve done the same thing to the 
teachers. I have . . . and the staff. I have people calling me asking 
me, is there nothing that can be done. My response 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3725 
 
 

is, by and large, that’s one of the limitations of a parliamentary 
democracy, government with a majority may abuse it. And there’s 
not much you can do until the next election. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s going to be a next election because you’re 
not going to be able to put off that by-election in Eastview for 
ever. And you’re going to get a taste of all the goodwill which 
you’ve built up by your abuse of so many different groups who in 
and by themselves may not be capable of handling you, but taken 
together they’re going to leave a bitter taste in your mouth when 
that by-election’s over. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to ask the minister a 
couple of remaining questions before we go into moving 
amendments on the section by section debate on this Bill. The first 
amendment is simply a supplementary to the questions asked by 
the member for Regina Centre, my colleague. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you deny that as a result of Bill 46 you will be 
taking away the seniority rights of every employee in the technical 
institute and community college system of this province? And I 
ask you, how can you justify telling people who’ve worked for the 
institute system for 15 or 20 years and provided long-time service 
and excellent service to this province, that their seniority in that 
institute or their seniority in that community college, counts for 
nothing any more as a result of Bill 46? Will you explain that to 
this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think my answer . . . I mean the 
question is the same as was asked before and my answer can only 
be the same. We recognize that the seniority area is a complex 
one. There are some issues around it. The point that we have 
made, and that we have made in writing to the employees is this, 
this very clear statement. We put a question/answer insert together 
that has been delivered to each and every employee. And the 
question that was asked because they were probably asking, will 
the collective bargaining agreement still apply? And there’s 10 or 
11 of them I think there is. 
 
(1515) 
 
And the answer is no. And then it went on to say: 
 

However, the majority of the terms and conditions which 
employees currently have will be continued with their 
employment with the institute. For example, the 200-day 
year, vacation leave, and sick leave will continue. 

 
We’ve already talked about the job security and pay security. 
Some of the issues that you would want us to resolve and clear up 
in black and white here, we cannot do. I mean there’s community 
college seniorities that now applies only to individual colleges. 
How will the new institute deal with that complex issue? That’s 
something the institute is going to have to deal with. 
 
It’s not that simple; it’s a complex one, it’s an area that deserves 
some attention. And I think you believe me — at least I’m hoping 
you do — that we have . . . we want to see this new institute have 
the employees best interests at 

heart, and that’s why we’ve attempted to give every assurance in 
every area that we can because there has been a fair amount of 
rumour an speculation and for the most part, all of it unfounded. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has simply failed to 
answer the question. He’s failed to justify why employee seniority 
cannot be recognized in the collective agreement. When you 
abolish the collective agreement as you’re doing, Mr. Minister, 
you abolish seniority which was one of the most important rights o 
teachers and staff at our institutes and colleges. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, my next question to you is: you are setting up 
an interim governing council to govern this institute that you are 
creating, this super-institute for a seven month period. That interim 
governing council, as you well know, is mostly made up of your 
own departmental staff. 
 
Isn’t one of the reasons why you want to abolish employee 
seniority the fact that you want to give your new interim 
governing council free rein to dismiss employees who you can’t 
get at because of their seniority, but who you can get at after you 
pass this Bill. 
 
Will you give this House your guarantee that seven months after 
this Bill has passed, has been proclaimed, and has become law, 
when your interim governing council is done, not one single 
employee will have been dismissed from the system. Because if 
you don’t give that guarantee, it’s clear that the reason you’re 
abolishing employee seniority is so that your interim governing 
council can get at those employees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — You know, the question that you ask is 
not unlike employees asked when I visited the four campuses. And 
I think, in fact, you may well have been at the one meeting. 
 
And somehow anybody that has the view that this interim 
governing council, once the legislation is passed, is somehow 
going to go out there and wreak havoc is simply untrue. And as 
I’ve said before and I say again, I mean if you’ve got a job the day 
before, you’re going to have one the day after, and you can take 
that in its broadest sense, if you like, as well. 
 
I mean, I know we’ve had some lay-offs, and every one of those 
people was given a subsequent opportunity, which you will not 
acknowledge, and I asked you in all fairness to acknowledge. And 
that is the absolute truth as well . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, 
we had to because of some program duplication, some program 
rationalization. 
 
But as I said to the employees and I say to . . . that day that I was 
there, and I say to you today, that is behind us. Now we’re into the 
very exciting part of this new institute —its formation. And I have 
no doubt that as we get into forming this new institute, there’s 
going to be some glitches. You know, there’s going to be 
mechanical things. The computer won’t work right for awhile or 
whatever the issue might be. 
 
But I’ll tell you, I have no doubt as soon as this thing is 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3726 
 
 

given some time to get up and running that you’re going to see 
what it’s all about, and that these changes are indeed the right 
changes. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Just one more brief question to the minister, Mr. 
Chairman, before we go into the amendments. The minister will 
have received petitions from some of the institutes asking for 
assurance that the names of those institutes can continue to be 
used for things like fund-raising purposes. I want to just use as an 
example, Kelsey. 
 
Kelsey wants to be assured that they can continue to use the name 
Kelsey Alumni Association and the Kelsey Institute Foundation, 
and that the Kelsey name can be used to describe their campus. 
Will you be permitting that, Mr. Minister, for each of the four 
campuses in the institute system? 
 
The issue here, of course, is that people don’t want to lose their 
identity. They don’t want to lose the identity of their campus, and 
they want to be able to maintain the support of their alumni in 
such initiatives as fund raising. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As it relates to . . . And I, too, have met 
with some of the people relative to the Kelsey Institute 
Foundation, and I appreciate the . . .that special feeling, I suppose, 
that they have because of their attachments, and I might add that 
they’ve been very successful in their fund-raising efforts. 
 
We recognize, that, and there’s provision for them to continue to 
raise funds or carry on the activities surrounding the Kelsey 
Institute Foundation. As I understand, that’s the only campus that 
has that kind of structure. But I guess that’s the kind of thinking 
we take into this process, or has been in the process from day one. 
And as you may well know, there’s two committees looking at 
new logos and new names, and I don’t think it would be fitting for 
us to decide. And that’s why we put a mechanism in, to involve 
those who are on the campuses to help determine those kinds of 
things. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment moved by the member for 
Saskatoon University to clause number 3: 
 

Amend section 3 of the printed Bill by adding “non-profit” 
before “corporation” in the second line. 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, just very briefly. It’s our view 
that the new institute should be a non-profit corporation, Mr. 
Chairman, not a corporation designed to make a profit. Profit 
education takes place either at the expense of quality education or 
at the expense of students having to pay higher tuition. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this isn’t to say that extra contracts cannot be 
entered into where the institute does make a profit on that 
particular contract, but that profit should always be

used to improve the quality of education at the institute and not for 
any other endeavour. 
 
And therefore we think that the term “non-profit corporation” 
ought to express the objectives that this institute has, rather than 
simply using the terminology “corporation.” 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — A quick comment, Mr. Chairman. I 
mean, why we have framed it as we have is that we . . . if there is, 
in fact, profits, which may well be desirable, in terms of increasing 
accessibility and the quality of education, it’s that kind of profit 
that we’ve talked about that can go into staff development, 
purchasing the latest in terms of technology and equipment. And 
that’s why it’s framed the way it is. I would hate to handcuff them, 
when there’s such tremendous up-side potential there. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The minister’s incorrect. They’re not being 
handcuffed at all by using the terminology “non-profit 
corporation.” All the things that you claim to desire can easily be 
accommodated under the heading of a non-profit corporation. 
 
The point is that we’re not into profit education here, and we’re 
not into encouraging the privatization of education — two things 
that your side of the House appears to support. 
 
We believe that education is to be a service, above all for students, 
and yes, also a service for such things as staff development. And 
that’s why the term “non-profit corporation” is the appropriate 
term to use in this Bill. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 5, moved by the 
member for Saskatoon University: 
 

Amend section 5 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out “at least once in every five years” in the 
  first two lines of subsection (1), and substituting, “in 
  1989 and in every third year thereafter”: 
 
(b) by striking out “minister” in the first line of subsection 
  (6), and substituting, “Speaker”; and 
 
(c) by adding the following subsection after subsection (6): 
 

The Speaker, shall, in accordance with The Tabling of 
Documents Act, lay each report received pursuant to 
subsection (6) before the Legislative Assembly. 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, just very briefly. It’s our 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3727 
 
 

view, Mr. Chairman, view, Mr. Chairman, that the institute would 
be much better served by a review to take place two years from 
now, not waiting five years; and that that review should take place 
independent of the Minister of Education; that that review panel 
should report to members of the Legislative Assembly and not to 
him; and that the review should not only examine the 
super-institute but also the role of the Department of Education is 
playing in relation to the institute. None of those things are 
provided for under this Bill, and hence the amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, just 
quickly here. I think the question as to whether the review should 
be every three years or something up to and including every five 
years, obviously that’s a point that we can debate. 
 
Our view is that we ought to at least give ourselves the leeway to 
go as long as five if we need it. Obviously with the way it’s 
worded we can . . . If there was some major issue that would need 
to precipitate a review after two years, the way the legislation 
reads, we could do . . . I think we could do that. 
 
And the other point is relative to the . . . you know, to whom the 
review should go. I mean, I think that’s sort of standard procedure 
that it would come to the minister, and if there was something that 
needed to be forthcoming from the review in terms of legislation, 
then he would bring it to the House. And I’m sure it would have 
no . . . as we have had a practice of doing in this House, make 
those documents available. I think it may come in a good sense to 
come to the minister and to the minister’s attention. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 7, moved by the 
member from Saskatoon University: 
 

Amends section 7 of the printed Bill: 
 

by deleting clauses 1(c) to (f) and renumbering the remaining 
clauses accordingly. 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is one of the important 
amendments to this Bill. This gets directly at the question of the 
minister’s powers versus the powers then of an autonomous board. 
 
As we said earlier in this debate, Mr. Chairman, the minister is not 
setting up here a board that is akin to the university board of 
governors at either of our two provincial universities. Instead, the 
minister is setting up a board over which he ultimately exercises 
real control. And in effect we have here what is virtually a puppet 
board, in legislative terms, where the minister passes on so-called 
responsibility to the board and claims that it’s autonomous, but 
where in effect he can continue to provide direction and make 
decisions and, in fact, intervene to a ridiculous degree of detail in 
the operations 

of the board, setting down everything from detailed courses that 
are to be offered, through to intervening on detailed budget 
matters, through to even determining what nature the accounting 
system of the institute should take. 
 
And we say that the minister has no business having those powers, 
and hence, Mr. Chairman, we are suggesting that all the powers 
relating to the matters that I’ve just mentioned be transferred out 
of section 7 and away from the minister and into section 11 and 
given to the board of this institute. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, just so 
everyone is clear. We know we’re not talking about, in this 
section, is not a situation where somehow I, as minister of the 
department, want to get into day to day operations. I’m talking 
about our responsibility on behalf of the public to ensure quality 
and accessibility and . . . As I did earlier with the universities this 
year, when I met with them, you know, I presented them with the 
province’s view, in terms of our social and economic goals which, 
quite frankly, they asked for. 
 
(1530) 
 
I think what you’re probably having trouble differentiating from 
here is, on the one hand, autonomy, and on the other hand, 
accountability, which I think you would expect that we should 
retain. 
 
From a public policy administration standpoint, if we’re going to 
send a cheque over to this institute for 50 or $60 millions, it seems 
to me that they ought to expect me to be accountable to you and to 
others across this province in this legislature. Or to put it another 
way, let’s suppose we didn’t have this provision in there. It seems 
to me then your criticism would be: Mr. Minister, are you telling 
me that your department is going to write a cheque out for 50 or 
$60 million and ship it over to this institute, no questions asked. Is 
that what you’re telling us? Is that what you consider good 
government, Mr. Minister? 
 
I use this example — perhaps you will argue that I 
over-generalize, or I’m not fair — to show what we mean in terms 
of the difference between autonomy and accountability. And you 
yourself will know, because we went through it for 42 hours in the 
legislature earlier this year, but you do quiz me on what the 
programming is and why are you doing this and why are you 
doing that? You have that expectation. 
 
What we’re saying here is, I think, that expectation is here in the 
institute Bill as well, because you do have that expectation, as do 
the people of this province. So I think you ought not get this out of 
perspective in terms of those two issues — on the one hand, 
autonomy; on the other hand, accountability in terms of good 
government and the proper practice for public policy 
administration. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3728 
 
 

Clause 9 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 9, moved by the 
member for Saskatoon University: 
 

Strike out subsection 9(1) of the printed Bill and substitute 
the following: 
 
(1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council shall appoint a 
  board of each campus of the institute consisting of: 
 
  (a) two persons who are elected by the  instructors and 
   staff at the campus; 
 
  (b) two persons who are elected by students at the 
   campus; 
 
  (c) five persons who are elected by the members of the 
   community adult education councils established as 
   required by subsection (1.1); 
 
  (d) three persons designated by the minister, one of 
   whom represents an employer that uses institute 
   services. 
 
(1.1) A community adult education councillor is to be 
established in each area in which a campus of the institute is 
located, in the manner prescribed in the regulations. 
 
(1.2) Any interested organization in an area in which a 
community adult education council must be established is 
eligible to be a member of the council in that area. 
 
(1.3) The Lieutenant Governor in Council shall appoint a 
board of directors for the institute, to be known as the 
Technical Institute Co-ordinating Council, consisting of two 
persons elected by each of the boards of the campuses of the 
institute, and two persons selected by the minister. 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, this gets, I think, at the 
fundamental difference between our model on this side of the 
House for the technical institute and community college system of 
this province versus the minister’s model. We believe, Mr. 
Chairman, that the minister should be establishing autonomous 
boards, and that the way to ensure accountability in the system is, 
first of all, by giving the boards the kind of power that our 
universities have, and secondly, Mr. Chairman, by ensuring that 
those boards are largely elected boards rather than appointed 
boards. 
 
I think the key difference between our model and your model, Mr. 
Minister, is that you believe in a centralized system with appointed 
members, and we believe in a more decentralized system with 
elected members who we think will be accountable to students, 
who will be accountable to faculty, who will be accountable to the 
community at whole, and will be accountable to employers in the 
community who use institute and college service. And the way to 
ensure that accountability, Mr. Chairman, is to ensure that each of

those groups have the right to elect representatives on to this 
board. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, it’s our view that the model that worked so 
well over the years at the Prince Albert Regional Community 
College with respect to a partially elected board ought to be 
applied now to the whole college and institute system. And it’s our 
view therefore that at each of the centres, Saskatoon, Regina, 
Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert, a local community education 
council ought to be established. That council ought to be open to 
any interested organization that wants to have membership on it 
and is concerned about adult education. 
 
And that council in turn, from the members which various 
organizations sent to represent them on the council, should elect 
five members on to the board governing each local college and 
institute. Mr. Chairman, we think that that’s going to be a model 
that is responsive to community need, and it’s only by being 
responsive to community need that the new institutes can really 
serve students and the community. We think, Mr. Chairman, that 
the time is long overdue for students to have representation on the 
boards. And we think that’s best done again by having students 
elect their own representatives at the local level on to the boards 
governing each campus. 
 
And the same with faculty, Mr. Chairman. We believe that faculty 
and staff at the institutes deserve to have a role in the decision 
making process that the institutes will play. And hence we’re 
proposing two faculty and staff representatives on each board. 
And we also think that the former alumni of the institution, former 
students of the institution, ought to be represented by electing one 
representative on to the board. That would make for a truly 
responsive board — responsive to community, faculty, and student 
needs, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We think that there’s also a need for each local board to have a 
province-wide perspective. And hence we are suggesting that the 
minister have the right to appoint three people, and they do not 
need to be from the region in which the institute and college are 
located. They can come from various parts of the province to bring 
a province-wide perspective to the board; or to bring the 
perspective of a special-interest group, whether it be the native 
community or the business community or any other special 
interests that the minister thinks it’s important to have represented 
on the board. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, we think it’s important that employers who 
use institute services are represented on the board, which is one of 
the reasons why we’re suggesting in this Bill that one of the three 
minister’s appointees be an employer who uses the services of the 
institute. We think that’s a responsive model. 
 
We say, on this side of the House, that not everything can be done 
at the local level — not all decisions should be made at the local 
level. Decisions like the bargaining of a collective agreement or 
ensuring that credits are transferable between institutes or ensuring 
overall co-ordination between the various institute campuses in 
this province, is best done by a central co-ordinating 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3729 
 
 

council. 
 
But we believe that council should not be appointed by the 
minister. We believe that each of the local boards should elect two 
representatives to sit on that council, and presumably then the 
minister can add two of his own. We think that’ll be a truly 
responsive model to the system. 
 
That’s what we mean by autonomy, Mr. Minister. That’s what we 
mean by granting governance — not one central provincially 
appointed board, all of the members of whom are appointed by 
you. That’s not what technical institute staff and community 
college staff and students and community groups interested in 
seeing autonomy for this post-secondary education part of our 
system meant, Mr. Minister, when they talked about autonomy 
and governance. 
 
And what you have done is taken their ideas and scrambled them 
so badly that they’re hardly recognizable any more, and we 
therefore ask you to withdraw your Bill, or at least accept this very 
important amendment to the Bill, which I think gets right at the 
heart of how we deliver quality education in this province. It 
means we have to have a system that’s responsive to community 
and student needs, and the system you’re putting in place isn’t 
responsive to either the needs of students or the community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, the points that you essentially 
raise in the debate here on this issue — and it’s one we gave some 
fair degree of thought to before we made the decision on the 
model that we did, and I might say we had some rather strong 
input on the single institute model — the issue comes down to 
these three things essentially. What should the structure be? Then 
who might serve on that structure? And thirdly, I think, and the 
element I think you and many out there across the province, 
including those in the media I might add, have consistently 
missed, and that is looking at this in isolation as opposed to seeing 
how does the institute fit in with the entire post-secondary 
education spectrum. I repeat that for the hon. member. 
 
The other point that I think you’re missing on this is that you are 
looking at the piece instead of the whole. And by that I mean 
when you make these comments about the board structure, I think 
you’re not understanding how this institute will fit into the entire 
spectrum of post secondary education across the province. By that 
I mean, how does it interrelate with the universities, the institute 
part of it, and as well the regional college network which is the 
other vital link that I think addresses your concern very much so 
relative to decentralization. And I think that either you forget that, 
or you don’t acknowledge what that is meant to do. 
 
And the fourth reason why I say we chose this structure, because 
we could have that integrated approach, is for the very reasons that 
you and I listened for three days at that Saskatoon forum — that 
whole notion of lifelong learning and the integration that’s needed 
across the system and, I might add, the linkage even that’s needed 
with the K to 12 system. 
 
To elaborate a little bit further, we chose the only board

model because this is an institute for the entire province. It’s to 
serve the entire province. And rather than have four centres, each 
one with its own board as you would suggest, trying to be all 
things to all people, and in so doing not being able to all buy the 
latest and the best equipment, or not all being able to have the best 
staff in every area, we decided to go with the one model and have 
each established as a centre of excellence so that you could 
concentrate your resources, whether it be for equipment or other 
technology, at given centres. As well, it would lead to 
co-ordination as opposed to duplication. 
 
And thirdly, it would serve not just a provincial focus but indeed 
. . . or not just a local focus but a provincial focus. And that 
doesn’t mean to say that we won’t have people from those four 
campus centres where the community colleges and the institutes 
are located on this board, because it would be very much my view 
that we would have, and I’ve given some commitments in that 
regard. 
 
And that fourth element is, of course, the notion of — and this is 
the one that you didn’t mention in your remarks at all, but if you 
don’t realize it, then I think you would see how your structure 
would be flawed — is how the institute connects like a pipeline to 
that regional college network. So that we take our programming at 
universities, our programming at these four centres of excellence 
in the institute side, and we feed it out to that feeder network 
called a regional college network. I think you’ve continued to 
disacknowledge or not to acknowledge that second companion 
piece of legislation and how they work together. That’s why the 
single institute model. 
 
The other thing I might say, if you’re worried that somehow I 
won’t have enough, or the government won’t have enough — or 
indeed in this case, more appropriately, the institute won’t have 
enough — advice, if you like, from across the province, this very 
day the advisory boards on institute education comprise some 70 
in this province. One out of every 600 adults in this province is 
this very day represented on an advisory board. 
 
And fourthly, you know I hear a lot of talk from the NDP about 
elected boards. But what is your track record when it comes to 
elected boards? And elected boards, particularly in education, 
what is the NDP track record? Was it about 1978, I think — we 
have a couple of past presidents of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association here who could probably give me the exact 
dates — it was about 1978 when there were elected collegiate 
boards, and the NDP government of the day blew them away. So I 
hear what you’re saying about elected boards, but in fact you have 
never practised it in reality. 
 
And the final point that I would want to make here relative to 
student representation and faculty representation is, I have in very 
recent day in fact just communicated or sent some communication 
to them — I doubt that they’ve even received it yet — relative to 
the undertaking that I will be putting in place to receive 
nominations from the faculty and from the students. I’ve already 
had some discussions with both bodies on this about having a 
representative, and clearly we will be having representatives and 
taking nominations from those two 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3730 
 
 

bodies so that a faculty member and a student will be on this 
board, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to bring to 
the minister’s attention, because I wouldn’t want him misleading 
the public in terms of what has happened to the collegiate boards. 
 
The collegiate boards in Saskatchewan were replaced. They were 
elected boards, but they were replaced and their work was taken 
over by elected public boards. So don’t give us any idea about 
having elected boards being knocked out. 
 
(1545) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did I hit a nerve? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Secondly, and I want to ask a question . . . The 
minister asks if I hit a nerve. I would just think that you should tell 
the truth and the whole truth on a matter like this, Mr. Minister. 
 
And the question I want to pose to the minister is: will you table 
the evidence or the documents or the representation that you 
referred to regarding submissions in favour of one single institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The submissions didn’t come by way of 
a poll such as you’ve conducted saying, would you favour this 
model versus that model versus that model? The rationale for the 
model came out of the myriad of comments about lack of 
flexibility, a lack of co-ordination, duplication. 
 
And you yourselves, I think, in the press release that you put out 
when you undertook the poll, or after you got the results back, 
talked about the need for a co-ordinating body. I don’t see that in 
your amendment here because you yourself recognize it would be 
of no use to anyone to have four separate institutes going off in 
four separate directions even with four separate boards, as opposed 
to being another Department of Education. 
 
And that is the kind of thing that we heard time and time again 
across the province. And it wasn’t as though we went out and did 
a poll, if you like, and I can come with you and show you that 62 
per cent favoured this one versus 22 per cent that one. But the 
message was there, clear, and those various kinds of observations. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the minister is sadly mistaken 
when he says that the central co-ordinating council isn’t provided 
for in our amendment. I’d just invite him to look at section 1.3, 
which says that: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council shall appoint a board of 
directors for the institute, to be known as the Technical 
Institute Co-ordinating council, consisting of two persons 
elected by each of the boards of the campuses of the institute 
and two persons selected by the minister. 

 
Mr. Minister, you know you are developing a model of 
centralization and decision making which, apart from having been 
adopted by Maggie Thatcher in Britain for 

the college system there, and apart from, I think, existing in New 
Brunswick, I am not aware of it existing anywhere else in this 
province . . . or, I’m sorry, in this country. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are developing a system, which is simply going 
to be a bureaucratic hierarchy that is going to be unresponsive to 
community needs or student needs. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, beyond that, I want to say to you that if you 
look at any other province in Canada, whether you take Quebec 
with it CEGEP’s (Collège d’Enseignement Général et 
Professionel) or whether you take Alberta where they recently 
moved towards autonomous boards for their technical institutes, 
it’s the principle of local control that has made the new college 
and institute system successful in those provinces. 
 
And what you are doing, sir, is choosing to abandon that principle, 
and I suggest to you, you’re making a very serious mistake in 
doing that. What we need is locally elected boards that will be 
responsive to student, faculty, and community needs, and not one 
centrally appointed board as you are proposing in this legislation. 
 
You are adopting a model that has proven to be unsuccessful in 
other parts of the world where it’s been tried. For the most part, 
that centralized model has only been implemented by right wing 
governments as a means of the Minister of Education in that 
jurisdiction attempting to continue to exercise his control and his 
tyranny over the post-secondary education process and his vehicle 
for interfering with academic freedom. 
 
And I say to you that we are not, as a result of proposing four 
locally elected boards, going to be interfering with the 
province-wide perspective that this super-institute needs. That’s 
why I suggested that you retain the power to appoint three 
members to each of the local boards that will bring a 
province-wide perspective to their work. That’s why we’ve 
proposed the central co-ordinating council in this Bill. 
 
But we say, Mr. Minister, that decisions with respect to things like 
staff hiring, program development, specific decisions about budget 
allocations and purchases, those sorts of things are best made at 
the local level. They’re best made with the input of local 
representatives from the community, faculty, and staff. 
 
And you have betrayed the people of this province, educators in 
this province, and the students of this province, by failing to heed 
a message that I and my colleague, the member for Prince Albert, 
have heard as we went around this province. Whether it was a 
meeting with college employees in Prince Albert, or a meeting 
with college employees in North Battleford, or a meeting with 
students and instructors at Kelsey Institute, or a meeting with 
SECTIS (Student Executive Council of Technical Institutes in 
Saskatchewan), the representative from the various student 
councils around this province, we heard the same message every 
time that they wanted local autonomy and they wanted the 
opportunity for locally elected boards. 
 
And I venture to say that you don’t have a single letter from a 
single letter from a single educational organization that supports 
this 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3731 
 
 

centralized model. If you do, I’d like to see you table it; and if you 
don’t, I’d like to see you withdraw this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think what we have, Mr. Chairman, is 
lots of support for changing the form of governance. And there are 
different views on the structure that one can use. What I found, 
quite frankly, when I went around the province, was the notions 
that I expressed earlier about the co-ordination, duplication, 
centres of excellence, that kind of thing. Obviously one could have 
gone to the model where you had each with its own board. 
 
What I found really among people is that they didn’t express the 
notion so much on the model of governance; they just wanted it 
out of the Department of Education so you had some flexibility 
and those kinds of things. And why would they say that, Mr. 
Chairman? 
 
Well what we put together here was we had four institutes and 
four urban community colleges and then things like ATTC 
(Advanced Technology Training Centre). Indeed what we had was 
10 different educational institutions and they, by the very nature of 
10 different institutions, how really could they plan in the face of 
no co-ordination, no body overall, how could they plan to make 
sure they were all headed towards the same common purpose and 
vision and goals? And how could they plan to serve an entire 
province with that kind of perhaps local focus as opposed to a 
provincial focus, Mr. Chairman? That’s why we’ve gone to this. 
 
I think the hon. member is somewhat over-reactionary in this 
rhetoric, and once again he went on for probably five minutes but 
didn’t mention that other key part in this new integrated system, 
the regional college network — the centres of excellence feeding 
out programming, not just serving, and not just having a board for 
around the city of Saskatoon, or the city of Regina or Moose Jaw. 
We want to serve Meadow Lake and Nipawin and Melfort and 
Maple Creek and Estevan and Weyburn and La Ronge — and the 
list goes on and on. That’s why we have this model, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Another amendment. Order, order. 
Amendment to section 9 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend subsection 9(1) of the printed Bill by adding after 
“members” in the last line: 
 
that adequately provides for regional representation on the 
board: 
 
(a)  at least two of the members of which are students of 
  and are representatives of students of the institute; and 
 
(b) at least two of the members of which are faculty or staff 
  of and are representative of the faculty and staff of the 
  institute. 

 
Moved by the member for Saskatoon University. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 

Mr. Chairman: — This is moved by the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Strike out subsection 9(7) of the printed Bill and substitute 
the following: 

 
(7)  The board may elect one of its members as chairman 
  and another of its members as vice-chairman. 

 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 10 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment moved by the member for 
Saskatoon University. 
 

Strike out subsection 10(2) of the printed Bill. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment moved by the member for 
Saskatoon University: 
 

Amend section 11 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by renumbering clauses (a) to (i) as clauses (1)(i) to (q) 
  respectively, and by adding the following clauses before 
  renumbered clause (1)(i): 
 
  (a) give directions to the institute on programs,  
   courses, functions or activities to be provided or 
   undertaken or discontinued by the institute,  
   including any core program specialities to be  
   provided at any campus of the institute, and where 
   they are to be provided or undertaken; 
 
  (b) establish policies or procedures for the approval of 
   programs, courses, seminars or other instruction to 
   be provided by the institute; 
 
  (c) give directions to the institute on educational,  
   operational, administrative, management or other 
   standards or procedures to be established or  
   maintained by the institute or any changes to any of 
   them; 
 
  (d) give directions to the institute on the establishment 
   of any accounting or information systems for the 
   institute or changes or additions to existing  
   accounting or information systems; 
 
  (e) set a global budget for each campus of the institute; 
 
  (f) ensure transferability of credits between 

  



 
October 30, 1987 

3732 
 
 

   campuses of the institute; 
 

  (g) negotiate with employees on behalf of all  
   campuses of the institute; and 
 
  (h) set tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the powers of the board, as you 
read out in the amendment, are the powers that we believe the 
board should have. 
 
The board does not have those powers right now. The minister 
exercises free rein with respect to everything from interfering with 
detailed budget decisions through to setting tuition fees and giving 
direction on specific courses and programs. We believe that’s the 
role of the institute board. Unbelievably the minister has not 
provided the institute board with those powers, and we believe that 
this amendment gets right at what we believe would provide for 
real board autonomy rather than leaving those powers with the 
Minister. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 12 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 15 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 15 of the printed Bill, 
moved by the Minister of Education: 
 

That paragraph 15(3)(a) of the printed Bill be amended by: 
 
(a) deleting the word “or” in subparagraph (ii); and 
 
(b) by adding the following after subparagraph (iii): “or; 
  (iv) The London Life Pension Plan DA 20046.” 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just to clarify the house amendment, Mr. 
Chairman. This was to ensure that everyone who was in a pension 
plan that it would continue, and in our drafting we missed the fact 
that there was one pension outside those mentioned in section 
15(1), and that was with London Life, and hence that’s the 
rationale for that in the Bill. 
 
Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if we could have leave 
to go back to section 14? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1600) 
 
Clause 14 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, this section of the Bill is very 
objectionable to us for a number of reasons. First of all, in section 
14(1) we believe that rather than saying “the institute may employ 
any officers or other employees,” it 

should say the “board may.” That seems to be a very unusual 
provision which in effect continues to give power to the minister 
with respect to the hiring of employees. 
 
We have very strong objection to subsection (3) of section 14 
which makes it very clear that, contrary to the provisions of The 
Trade Union Act, the legislation here is spelling out what the 
appropriate bargaining unit shall be, and specifically is putting 
academic staff in one bargaining unit and another staff in another 
bargaining unit, contrary to The Trade Union Act and the 
provisions in The Trade Union Act that require the Labour 
Relations Board to do that. 
 
We take strong exception to you spelling out, sir, in this Bill that 
the board may designate categories of employees of the institute as 
academic staff, and may designate individual employees of the 
institute as academic staff. You, sir, should not be giving the board 
the right to do that. That is not the role of the board of the institute; 
that is the role of the Labour Relations Board, and we take strong 
objection to that. 
 
We also take strong objection to the fact that you are spelling out 
here, contrary to the long-standing tradition in this province, what 
members of the management group of the institute are not eligible 
to belong to a trade union in the event that a trade union is formed 
by the employees at the new super-institute. 
 
You have no right by way of the tradition, the long-standing 
tradition of labour law right across this province, to determine who 
shall be outside the trade union and who shall be a member of the 
trade union. That is always done by the Labour Relations Board. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Chairman, since the minister chooses to ignore 
the authority and responsibility of the labour Relations Board, and 
chooses to rewrite labour law for himself, I move, seconded by my 
colleague, the member from Prince Albert: 
 

That section 14 of this Bill be deleted. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. An amendment to delete a clause is not 
in order. But being that the committee gave leave to go back to 
section 14 of the printed Bill, they can vote again on section 14. So 
the question before the committee is section 14 of the printed Bill. 
 
(1609) 
 
Clause 14 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Duncan Sauder 
Andrew Johnson 
Taylor McLaren 
Smith Hopfner 
Swan Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Maxwell Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Gardner 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3733 
 
 

 
Klein Kopelchuk 
Martin Saxinger 
Toth Britton 
 

— 24 
 

Nays 
 
Blakeney Kowalsky 
Prebble Atkinson 
Brockelbank Hagel 
Shillington Calvert 
Koskie Lautermilch 
Tchorzewski Trew 
Mitchell Koenker 
 

— 14 
 
Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 16 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There is an amendment to clause number 20, 
moved by the member for Saskatoon University that: 
 

Strike out subsection 20(2) of the printed Bill. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 20 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 21 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 31 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 31, moved by the 
member for Saskatoon University is: 
 

Strike out section 31 of the printed Bill. 
 
The amendment is not in order, and accomplish the same by 
voting against it. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 31 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 32 and 33 agreed to. 
 
Clause 34 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, we take strong exception to 
clause 34, particularly the section that again chooses not to 
recognize the rights that employees, in this case of the Advanced 
Technology Training Centre have under section 37 of The Trade 
Union Act. it’s another example of the Minister’s attempt to 
rewrite Saskatchewan labour law under the auspices of an 
education Bill. It’s another attempt by this minister to engage in 
union busting. We particularly object to the provision in section 34 
that states that any order of the Labour Relations Board 
determining a trade union as representing, for the purposes of 
collective bargaining, employees is ignored under section 34 of 
this Bill. And therefore, we will be voting against it. 

(1615) 
 
Clause 34 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 35 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 36 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 36 moved by the 
member for Saskatoon University: 
 

Amend clause 36(6)(a) of the printed Bill by striking out 
“seven” and substituting “three.” 

 
Mr. Prebble: — I want to know from the minister, very briefly, 
two specific questions. First, why are you giving this interim 
governing council such a long term in office unless it’s for the 
purpose of putting your staff on this new super-institute, because 
most of the members of the interim governing council are your 
departmental employees. 
 
And why is there no provision in this Bill for the interim 
governing council to work with the new board that you should be 
putting in place right away, Mr. Minister, so that there is a brief 
period of co-operation between the two, and then the new board 
takes over? 
 
Why does this council need seven months to go about its work, 
unless this isn’t just another attempt by you to control the way in 
which the new super-institute is developed? Because it’s your 
employees who are on this interim governing council. 
 
And will you provide this House your assurance that the interim 
governing council will not dismiss a single employee in the 
institute and college system during the period in which it has 
responsibility for running the new super-institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, why the . . . this interim 
governing council is structured as it is, and it’s been up and 
running for some good long time, since last May I think, when we 
embarked on this process; it reads that: 
 

The council shall continue to exist until the earlier of: seven 
months after the day in which the section comes into force or 
the commencement of the first meeting of the board. 

 
And the reason that it reads like that is merely for . . . to get around 
the unknown that we were dealing with as drafters of legislation, 
that unknown being, we didn’t know when this legislation would 
get passed. 
 
And we couldn’t say, you know, that the interim governing 
council shall cease to exist and the board shall start October 30, 
because we didn’t know what day legislation would be passed, 
and we had to cover all scenarios. 
 
Well we did not know what day it would pass. I mean, what day is 
this Bill going to get royal prorogation? We certainly didn’t know. 
So that is absolutely the reason. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3734 
 
 

But at the same time we want to get the new board in place as 
quickly as possible, and that’s why it’s the lesser of. 
 
And the third point is: yes, we intend to meld the two boards so 
that we do have a smooth transition, which I think is what you’re 
interested in as well. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The second amendment, moved by the 
member from Saskatoon University: 
 

To section 36: 
 

Strike out subsection 36(8) of the printed Bill. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this gets right at the heart 
of the matter. If this interim governing council is simply supposed 
to be a caretaking body, I want to ask the minister why you’re 
giving this interim governing council the right to designate 
categories of employees of the institute as academic staff 
members, why you’re giving them the right to designate individual 
employees of the institute as academic staff members, and why 
you’re giving them the right to change any designations? 
 
Why are you giving this interim governing council powers that are 
ordinarily held by the Labour Relations Board of this province if 
this interim governing council is simply supposed to be a 
caretaking body? Because if it is simply supposed to be a 
caretaking body until the new board takes over, rather than a body 
that continues to do your dirty work for you as Minister of 
Education, then you will remove this section of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — All I can say simply is, there’s no 
ulterior motives here. It’s not a case of dirty work, and I think 
that’s a bit of rhetoric and over-reaction. A caretaker board, an 
interim governing council’s got to pay the bills, if you like, and all 
we’re saying in this section is that the interim governing council 
has to have the same powers, if you like, as the real board when it 
gets up and running; nothing more, nothing less. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — One more question, Mr. Chairman. Just to . . . 
once more to the minister: why are you giving the interim 
governing council of this super-institute board, Mr. Minister, the 
power to make decisions that are normally made by the Labour 
Relations Board of this province? Will you explain that to this 
Assembly, because not only are you violating the long-standing 
tradition of Saskatchewan labour law that says it’s the role of the 
Labour Relations Board to make decisions with respect to who is 
in a particular bargaining unit, but beyond that, Mr. Minister, 
you’re actually giving the authority to do that to what you call a 
caretaker governing council? And I suggest to you that you are 
being highly deceptive with respect to the real intent of the interim 
governing council as you’ve established it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there is no ulterior 
motives. I’m not having anybody do any dirty work for us, etc., 
etc., and all I guess I can say, relative to all sections of this Bill 
where they have ascribed some 

ulterior motive, history will tell. And history will show that this is 
indeed a fine institute. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 36 agreed to. 
 
Clause 37 agreed to. 
 
Clause 38 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I just want to say to the minister that he has 
indicated that this bill will be coming into force on January 1. I 
hope he honours that obligation. I hope, Mr. Chairman, that he 
does not intentionally extend the date on which this Bill will come 
into force so as to try to ensure that the work done by 
Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union over the past 
several weeks to sign up members again of college staff, and of 
technical institute staff, will not all be for nought. 
 
Because he knows full well that trade union membership cards are 
only in effect for six months. He knows full well that if he delays 
the date of proclamation of this Bill that those trade union 
membership cards will become invalid. I want his assurance that 
he will not now unduly attempt to undo the work of Saskatchewan 
Government Employees’ Union. Clearly the members of the 
technical institute staff and community college staff of this 
province want to continue to be represented by a trade union. The 
minister knows that full well. I hope he will not unduly delay the 
proclamation date of this Bill. 
 
I want to say once again to the minister that we on this side of the 
House oppose this Bill strongly. We oppose it because it denies 
the legitimate rights of the employees of the institutes. We oppose 
it because it fails to respond to the need for locally elected boards 
in this province. And we oppose it because it fails to grant 
autonomy to the newly established board. 
 
And we hope now that the minister will at least live by his claim 
that he will treat the new employees fairly. We hope that at least 
some of the pressure we’ve put on him in this House will force 
him to do that. And we think this is a very sorry day for education, 
that this Bill is passing which we think sets this post-secondary 
education institution system back in our province by at least a 
decade. 
 
Clause 38 agreed to on division. 
 
(1629) 
 
Enacting clause agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Duncan Sauder 
Andrew Johnson 
Taylor McLaren 
Smith Hopfner 
Swan Swenson 
Maxwell Martens 
Gerich Gleim 
 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3735 
 
 

Hepworth Neudorf 
Hardy Gardner 
Klein Kopelchuk 
Martin Saxinger 
Toth Britton 
 

— 24 
 

Nays 
 
Blakeney  Kowalsky 
Prebble Atkinson 
Brockelbank Hagel 
Shillington Calvert 
Koskie Lautermilch  
Tchorzewski Trew  
Mitchell Koenker 
Upshall  
 

— 15 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act respecting Regional Colleges 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Before we get into committee on Bill 47, 
I’d like to introduce my officials if I could. To my right is the 
assistant deputy minister in the department, Elizabeth Crosthwaite, 
and to her right, Russ Cape, from the human resources branch; 
behind Elizabeth is, Jake Kutarna, director of the community 
colleges; to his left, Gordon Russell, human resources branch; and 
to my left, Larry Anderson, Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, as I’ve 
said before in this Assembly, we support one of the basic 
principles of this Bill which is to deliver first and second year 
university and technical institute programming to the rural 
community college system and to establish the rural community 
colleges as regional colleges. 
 
What we take exception to, Mr. Minister, under this Bill, is your 
decision to delete from the mandate of the rural community 
college system both responsibility for initiating community 
development programming, which was one of the important 
responsibilities under the old college system, and secondly we 
think it’s unfortunate that you have chosen to delete from the 
mandate of the rural regional colleges the offering of community 
interest courses. 
 
We think, Mr. Minister, that it is also unfortunate that you have 
chosen not to respond to the desire that many people in rural 
Saskatchewan have, to have elected regional college boards, to 
have our community college system run largely by elected rather 
than appointed officials. 
 
We think it’s time, Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said to the minister 
before on the debate on Bill 46, that local community education 
councils be established in rural Saskatchewan, that those councils 
be made up of representatives from any organization in the 
community that is interested in adult education and that those 
representatives, which will no doubt number from 

between 50 and 100, come together to elect the majority of 
members who sit on each of the rural community college boards. 
We think the time has come for that. 
 
Meetings that I’ve held with groups such as . . . in North 
Battleford, have favoured that idea. We think it’s also time, Mr. 
Minister, that the faculty and staff of the community college 
system have representation on that board. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other point that we take strong objection to in 
this Bill is that you have once again chosen to single out a group 
of educational employees — this time in our northern community 
college system — and deny them their trade union rights. 
 
Many of those employees, particularly the ones at Beauval, just 
joined a trade union, namely SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union), this summer. The certification order from the 
Labour Relations Board recognizing that union as the legal 
representative of the employees just passed on September 15, and 
yet you are telling those employees that they have to vote over 
again with respect to whether or not they want to join a trade 
union. And you are decertifying the union that they just joined. 
 
I have two questions for you, sir. And the first is: why is it that you 
are choosing to deny those northern community college 
employees their legitimate rights to belong to a trade union? And 
why are you saying to the employees in Beauval, who just got 
their certification order on September 15, that that certification 
order is invalid and that they have to vote again? Can you explain 
that to members of this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well relative to the situation with 
Northlands, I think the essence of the arguments are no different 
than what we debated in Bill 46, and I’ll be brief. Once again, the 
new Northlands Career College — we brought three together, very 
much a broadened, changed mandate — the same rationale as I 
described in Bill 46. 
 
Relative to your earlier question of, you know, the repriorizing and 
in so doing, repriorizing and having greater opportunity for adults 
across this province in the area of institute/ university 
programming. In so doing, yes, we have discontinued the leisure 
and the hobby courses, if you like. 
 
We don’t want to see those gone from the communities, and 
indeed, if I look at my own community — I also get the local 
newspaper from the community where I was raised, Assiniboia. 
What I see there is, indeed, community groups picking up that 
programming, whether it be the local photography group . . . I 
know I saw an ad in the paper in the Assiniboia Times listing a 
number of classes in that category of hobby and leisure that groups 
other than the community college or the regional college are 
putting together. So it is being done by the communities, so 
they’re not lost — the community. We, as a government, because 
of what the people told us, have decided to get out of the leisure 
and hobby, concentrate more on the institute and the university 
programming. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3736 
 
 

And secondly, that shouldn’t surprise us, because they were 
voting, if you like, with the hours of time they were spending in 
these classes. We’ve gone from a position of 80 per cent of the 
programming down to 5 per cent in that area over the last 10 or 15 
years. Simply, the interest was there for the more sophisticated — 
although I hesitate to use that word — programming. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 5, section 5 of the printed Bill has an 
amendment as proposed by the member from Saskatoon 
University: 
 

Amend section 5 of the printed Bill by renumbering clause 
(f) as clause (h) and by adding the following clauses after 
clause (e): 
 
(f) community interest courses; 
 
(g) community development programs; 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, just a question to the minister 
with respect to this. Obviously we believe that this ought to 
continue to be a part of the mandate of the regional colleges, 
notwithstanding their expanded mandate in other areas, which we 
support. 
 
But I say to the minister that he’s misleading this House and the 
public when he simply talks about the percentage of time that 
people were taking community interest courses. He knows full 
well that the reason why the percentages changed is because there 
are a lot more people now taking adult basic education courses. 
 
But his figures imply that there are less people than there used to 
be taking the community interest programs, and he knows that 
that’s not the case. There is just as much interest and just as much 
support for community interest programming as there was when 
the community college system began, and he knows that full well. 
And there are many communities in rural Saskatchewan that can 
only look forward to having community interest courses being 
offered in their communities. 
 
He knows that full well too, by deleting those interest courses they 
will have nothing being delivered by the community college 
system in their particular communities. And I think therefore that 
he’s being very unfair about misrepresenting the popularity or lack 
thereof of community interest courses. There is lots of support out 
there in rural Saskatchewan for them, and there is no good reason 
why they couldn’t be offered by the new regional college system. 
 
And so I ask the minister to acknowledge that in fact there has not 
been a significant decline in the number of people who take 
community interest courses. On the contrary, there are hundreds 
and hundreds of them that were offered by the college system this 
spring before you deleted them, and that you’re making a mistake 
by simply focusing on the notion of education for a job and

disregarding the notion that somehow education doesn’t have a 
role in our society for pleasure, for enjoyment, for personal 
development. You are saying that that part of the community 
college mandate is no longer relevant, and we disagree with you, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well just to have the facts on the record, 
because the hon. member has somehow suggested that . . . I don’t 
know whether he went so far as to say misleading the public, but 
the reality of these . . . and my officials have provided me with 
even more up to date numbers of what we had in estimates when 
we debated this very point three or four months ago. Community 
college participant hours by type of program per cent. Some 10 
years ago or more this figure would have been 80 per cent, Mr. 
Chairman, thereabouts. And what is it now? — 3.8 per cent. The 
facts speak for themselves. 
 
Secondly, as it relates to in your amendment, the desire for 
community development programs, in fact that’s covered off in 
clause (b) of section 5. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — But, Mr. Chairman, the reality is that the 
community development programs of most of the colleges have 
been waning. There’s a need for a new community development 
initiative to be encouraged by the province and to be funded by the 
province for the college system. 
 
But I want to come back to these numbers. I’ve no desire to hold 
this Bill up but, Mr. Chairman, I refuse to let the minister get away 
with the pretence that there is somehow a lot less support than 
there used to be, by quoting hours. 
 
What’s happened, Mr. Minister, is that the number of courses that 
the college system has offered has greatly increased, and I want 
you to give me the numbers for the number of community-interest 
courses in the province that are now being offered as compared 
with, shall we say, five or 10 years ago. Because I suggest to you 
that the number had not decreased at all, and that the number of 
total participants as compared with 10 years ago hasn’t decreased 
either. Will you acknowledge that? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We don’t have numbers with us for back 
between 10 years and now. All I can do is, based on what I have 
here, is read to you again. Hobby, leisure, recreation courses . . . 
From an 80 per cent volume of hobby courses in ’74-75, it was 5.3 
per cent of student instruction in ’85-86. 
 
I think . . . I’m trying to make the point is that, you know . . . I’m 
not trying to say that they aren’t important, but in this new 
repriorization we have said that, I think, based on what people 
were saying out there, is institutes, programming, and university 
was even more important. 
 
And that 5.3 per cent number, which is the number we used in 
estimates, I think, is now replaced, when we have the more recent 
number, by the 3.8 per cent. And our other recent data that we 
have with us is: in the hobby courses there was 14,594 enrolments 
out of a total of 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3737 
 
 

79,136. I think, there again, I would make the case. I don’t say 
there isn’t some interest there, but it’s a relative decline, number 
one; and number two, is that there’s more and more people 
looking for the more and more “sophisticated” programming. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 7, by the member from Saskatoon 
University, an amendment on section 7 of the printed Bill: 
 

Strike out subsections 7(1) to (3) of the printed Bill and 
substitute the following: 

 
(1) A board consists of (a) six members who are elected by 
  the members of the community adult education council 
  in the region; (b) one member who is elected by the 
  faculty and staff of the regional college for which the 
  board is established; and, (c) one member who is  
  appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 
(2) A community adult education council is to be  
  established in each region in the manner prescribed in 
  the regulations. 

 
(3) Any interested organization in the region is eligible to 
  be a member of the community adult education council 
  in that region. 

 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 11 has an amendment by the member 
from Saskatoon University: 
 

Section 11 of the printed Bill to be amended: 
 

Strike out “subject to the approval of the minister” in the first 
line of clause 11 (b) of the printed Bill. 

 
Mr. Prebble: — We don’t think the Minister of Education should 
have the right to determine remuneration and terms and conditions 
of employment of community college staff. We think that’s best 
done by what ought to be a locally elected board. Obviously the 
Minister doesn’t agree. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think what I would say here to the hon. 
member is, it’s not a question of us doing something in isolation 
here without — or not in co-operation and in conjunction with the 
board — but we’d just as soon have all the regional colleges 
operating

on the same wavelength because it ultimately comes a question of 
fairness for all and not having this board with one set of 
remuneration, if you like, and another one here. And let’s have 
some sense of fairness across . . . remuneration across the system. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 14 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 32 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I want to say to the minister, Mr. Chairman, that 
we strongly disagree with this clause in the Bill for two reasons. 
 
First of all, we do not think that the three community colleges in 
northern Saskatchewan ought to be disbanded. We do not agree 
with the proposed centralization in this Bill, where these three 
colleges will be centralized into one. 
 
This is in sharp contrast, Mr. Minister, to the direction you seem to 
be moving in the K to 12 system, where you’re going to be 
splitting up the centralized Northern Lights School division into 
separate divisions in the North, and yet here at the same time you 
are centralizing the decision making with respect to the 
community college system. 
 
And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, two questions. First of all, 
why won’t you agree to locally autonomous boards in the three 
local areas in northern Saskatchewan that are now being served by 
the current community college boards? Why won’t you agree to 
have those as elected boards? 
 
And why, Mr. Minister, are you refusing to recognize the rights of 
employees who work in that system by specifically singling them 
out and, in section 32 of this Bill, denying their rights under The 
Trade Union Act to belong to a trade union? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well why we’re doing what we’re doing 
here, once again, is to address the needs of the North, and what we 
think will be a situation that’s better for all of them. 
 
The basis for it is to provide a continuum of learning, the lifelong 
learning, a fully integrated system. The co-ordination and the 
strength that you get with the single institute, and that doesn’t 
mean to say that we won’t have, as we will have, the strong 
community network still. But the issue is to have them as part of 
that fully integrated system. 
 
I could have talked, and we didn’t get into it, in the institute Bill 
about the tremendous initiative relative to our native adolescent 
population and in terms of the agreement that we’ve just signed 
with Gabriel Dumont Institute in the native studies division. 
There’s some very 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3738 
 
 

exciting things going on there. This is part of them. 
 
The employee thing I think we’ve already debated earlier on in 
clause 1 of this Bill. I don’t know there’s much more I can add 
there. As I understand it this is being very well received in the 
North. And I think if there’s something that we can do that’s 
absolutely important economically and socially, it’s to have these 
people have access to a fully integrated educational system, and as 
well the initiatives that we’re undertaking relative to distance 
education are going to be tremendously powerful in serving the 
North to a much better degree than we have. 
 
So I’m excited about our initiatives relative to the North, and I 
think once again when you see them unfold, as we have described 
them, that you will be excited as well. 
 
Clause 32 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 33 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 33 of the printed Bill has an 
amendment moved by the member of Saskatoon University: 
 

Strike out subsection 33(4) of the printed Bill. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Very briefly, Mr. Chairman, the reason why 
we’re moving that this section be struck is because once again it 
violates employee rights under section 37 of The Trade Union 
Act. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 33 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 34 and 35 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Can I just ask a question to the minister, if he 
could indicate when proclamation for Bill 46 and 47 will take 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can’t give you a date at this very 
moment. Now that we obviously have the legislation in place, we 
can plan to do this in an orderly fashion — for example, Bill 46, 
look to structuring, taking the nominations from faculty and 
students to put the board together, get the melding of the boards, a 
ballparkish figure would be in the new year. I don’t want to be 
held by that particularly, but to give you some idea, sooner than 
later. We also . . . We’re in a hurry to do it right and so it is 
smooth. 
 
Mr. Chairman, before I report the Bill I’d just like to take this 
opportunity to thank my officials, not only the ones that have been 
here with us today, but the many officials throughout the 
department who have worked long and hard, probably some of 
them something close to two years as we put together this 
post-second education blueprint that’s led to this legislation. 
 
And they’re a tribute to dedication and integrity and a sense of all 
that we can be in this province, and I would want to take this 
opportunity to acknowledge them and thank them for their input.

And with that, Mr. Chairman, I move that the committee report the 
Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to provide for the Postponement of the 

Tabling of Certain Documents (No. 2) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Does the minister have any officials to call in? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — We have no objection to this Bill. You can 
proceed in any fashion you wish to. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1700) 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Notaries Public Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. Chairman: — A House amendment by the Hon. Minister of 
Justice, section 4 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 4 (b) of the printed Bill by adding a comma 
before “for” in the first line. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Section 5 of the printed Bill has been 
amended by the Minister of Justice: 
 

Amend section 5 of the printed Bill by striking out “October 
1, 1987” and substituting “a day to be fixed by proclamation 
of the Lieutenant Governor”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act respecting the Emission of Air 
Contaminants 

 
Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 6 has an amendment. Section 6 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

3739 
 
 

of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend section 6 of the printed Bill by adding “or” after 
clause (l). 

 
This has been moved by the Hon. Minister of the Environment. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 22 
 
Mr. Chairman: — An amendment of the printed Bill by the Hon. 
Minister of the Environment: 
 

Amend section 22 of the printed Bill by striking out “against 
this Act and is liable” in the line before clause (f), and 
substituting, “and liable on summary conviction”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 22 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 23 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill, as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill with the amendments be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 

Bill No. 47 — an Act respecting Regional Colleges 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to provide for the Postponement of the 

Tabling of Certain Documents (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title.

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Notaries Public Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill as amended be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act respecting the Emission of Air 
Contaminants 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendment be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move that the 
Bill with amendments be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


