













































August 19, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 19, 1987 

 

 

1901 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I'd like to take this opportunity to introduce 

two guests who are in the Speaker's gallery this afternoon. They 

are Mr. Hubert and Milda Weigers from Berlin. They are here 

visiting with their relative, Mrs. Jackie Bart, and they are visiting 

parts of Saskatchewan and parts of Canada. And I ask hon. 

members to please welcome them to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 

your permission I would like to welcome our guests from 

Germany in German. 

 

(The member spoke for a time in German.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

introduce to you, and through you to this Legislative Assembly, 

four very special people who have joined with me here this 

afternoon. They're my son-in-law and my daughter, Doug and 

Linda Parkman. And with them is my two grandchildren, Allyse 

and Jason Parkman. Jason Parkman was the boy who, three years 

ago, was severely burned in an accident at Hudson Bay, who was 

attended by the University Hospital in Saskatoon, and they did just 

such an excellent job on him that you wouldn't . . . you just have to 

say thank you to them for their care and their dedication for the 

fine job they've done. He's come along extremely well. He still has 

a lot of medical attention needed yet, but we're very proud to have 

him here and very proud to have him with us. And I'd like all 

members to join with me in welcoming him to the Assembly 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Disturbance at Pine Grove Correctional Centre 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A question for the Minister of Justice, Mr. 

Speaker. On Monday of this week, the day before yesterday, 

during Justice estimates we asked you a number of questions 

concerning the Pine Grove Correctional Centre, which is the 

facility for women inmates in the province. And at that time we 

asked you questions concerning training and other facilities that 

were available for women, and you tabled material showing the 

extent of overcrowding at that facility. 

 

It now appears, according to information we have, that the night 

before your estimates were considered, namely on Sunday 

evening, there was a disturbance at Pine Grove, and that you must 

have been aware of that fact during your estimates when Pine 

Grove was being discussed as it was for some 20 or 30 minutes. 

My question to the minister is: can you now confirm that in fact 

there was a disturbance at the Pine Grove Correctional Centre on 

Sunday night; and can you tell the House how that disturbance 

began, how many people were involved, and can you confirm that 

the riot squad was in fact called, and had to use tear gas in order to 

quell the disturbance? Can you give us a full report on that 

incident, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I can indicate to the hon. 

member that there in fact was a disturbance at the Pine Grove 

Correctional Centre. I believe it was Sunday night — I stand to be 

corrected — Sunday night or Monday that there was a 

disturbance. The exact details I do not have with me today. I will 

undertake to report back to the House the exact details of what was 

involved and how it was quelled. While one never likes to see 

disturbances at correction centres, those types of things do happen 

off and on and are dealt with by the staff in a normal way. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Are you able to 

confirm today, or can you make inquiries concerning the 

following information, Mr. Minister: that the disturbance resulted 

form the fact that one of the inmates at Pine Grove was the mother 

of two young children who were killed in the house fire at Vibank 

last Saturday night, and that she had not been informed of this fact 

until she overheard it from a . . . she overheard prison guards 

talking about it. Can you confirm that fact, and can you also 

confirm that, if this is true, can you confirm why the woman had 

not been properly notified of the deaths of her two young 

children? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I was not aware of that 

information. I will undertake to find out if that was in fact the 

cause of it, and report back to the House. But I was not aware that 

was the cause of the riot. 

 

Collection Agents for Sask Power 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and it deals 

with his totally inadequate explanation yesterday that he so 

arrogantly gave to this House as to why the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation has dumped Saskatchewan drug stores and other 

small businesses as locations where SPC customers can pay their 

monthly bills. This arrangement, Mr. Speaker, was very 

convenient for SPC customers, and seniors, especially, and it 

meant extra businesses for those businesses that acted as collection 

agents. So my question to the minister, Mr. Speaker, is: why did 

he dump those Saskatchewan drug stores and small businesses in 

favour of giving the business to trust companies and banks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as I explained yesterday, 

Saskatchewan Power does have a significant debt, something over 

$2 billion — I think 2.3 to be exact. The only way that that debt 

can be covered off, Mr. Speaker, is through the efficient 

management of the  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1902 

 

corporation, rate increases. And every time we talk about rate 

increases, we get the members opposite and the people of 

Saskatchewan — and rightly so — squawking about rate 

increases. 

 

There is a savings of something over $200,000 per year by 

eliminating . . . This savings comes from eliminating the use of 

commissioned depots, if you like, for the payment of power bills. 

There is an additional efficiency achieved through the automatic 

banking, through cash flow managements, by having the . . . 

electronically the deposits made immediately into the account of 

Sask Power. 

 

Now I know that $200,00 doesn't mean much to members 

opposite, but to the people at Sask Power, Mr. Speaker, it means a 

whole lot, and we have an obligation to run that corporation, to 

deliver the electricity to the people of Saskatchewan for the best 

possible rate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that these 

Saskatchewan small businesses were given less than a month's 

notice that this would be done, and there was no prior consultation 

with them. 

 

I would like the minister to explain why it was done on such short 

notice; why there was no prior consultation; why he has over 100 

million for a political boondoggle in the Premier and the Deputy 

Premier's riding; and why he doesn't have $200,000 that he's 

claimed he's going to save for small businesses. And will he 

reconsider this anti-small-business decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think history will show, I 

think history will show as we march down the road of Rafferty 

and Shand, that the boondoggle that she talks of, Mr. Speaker, will 

in fact be a very popular and positive economic development 

strategy for the — not only for the south-east of Saskatchewan, 

but for all of Saskatchewan. 

 

The same kinds of shouting and jeering was going on back in the 

days of Diefenbaker and Gardiner and the Squaw Rapids and all 

of that, and so governments, I think, have come to expect the kind 

of thing that we're hearing here today, relative to that 

development. 

 

As it relates to the question of notice, I don't know how much 

notice they had, and I don't know how much consultation went on. 

I will undertake to find . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The minister is 

taking a little long in his answer, but having said that, I would like 

to draw to the attention of the House that the member for 

Lakeview did in fact have five questions in her supplementary. 

Now the record will show that there are five different questions, 

with the final question. 

 

Now I bring that . . . Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order, 

please. I only bring that to the attention of the House so that we 

can have a more orderly question period and so that we don't have 

a supplementary  

consisting of three, four, or five questions, and then a minister 

taking five minutes to answer. I don't think you did in this case, 

but this is what happens. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — To answer question number three, the one 

dealing with what are we doing for small business, I think I'll turn 

that over to the small-business minister. 

 

To answer question number four, why do we turn it over to the 

banks and trust companies, I will simply add there that in addition 

to banks and trust companies, there's the category of credit unions. 

All banks, trust companies, and credit unions, will be fact be able 

to receive payments on behalf of Sask Power for those bills. In 

addition, there are in every case the opportunity to send through 

the post office, however unreliable it may be, the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I think that's sufficient, more than 

sufficient time for that. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I would like the minister to tell us 

whether or not he's aware that drug stores and small businesses 

were charging approximately 35 to 50 cents to collect Sask Power 

bills, and that banks and trust companies are charging 

approximately 75 cents to a dollar. I'm wondering if he's aware of 

that. And if he's aware of that, I want him to explain to this House 

why SPC customers and small businesses in Saskatchewan should 

suffer in order to you to transfer business to trust companies and 

banks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There were two questions here, I think, 

maybe three. But let me deal with the first one. Was I aware, was I 

aware that the drug stores and insurance offices and so on charge 

35 cents? Some of them did charge 35 cents; some of them 

charged $1. There were different rates and different situations. 

Some of them charged nothing, Mr. Speaker. Some of them 

charged nothing. 

 

But the second question: why are we doing this dastardly thing to 

the small business of Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, she can't have it 

both ways. She beats on us to get the control on the debt situation 

in power — well not only her, I don't want to personalize this; all 

the folks opposite do that, Mr. Speaker. We have an obligation, 

Mr. Speaker, to manage this company, to deliver the electricity at 

the most best rate that we possibly can, the best rate that we 

possibly can. We intend to do that, and 200,000-plus is significant 

in my view. It may not mean much to members opposite, but to 

Sask Power it means a whole lot. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister. And, Mr. Minister, you want to down-play the loss to the 

small business of the commissions from SPC. I want to put this in 

perspective for you. A small business which now has maybe 100 

people in to pay their bills in a month will have to retail about 

$45,000 worth of taxable items in order to compensate for the loss. 

And I say $45,000 worth of taxable items in order to gain the kind 

of revenue through the paltry little system you've got for the EH 

tax, he's got to sell $45,000 worth of goods. My question is this, 

Mr. Minister, is this your commitment  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1903 

 

to small business, and do you think that's fair? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I know, Mr. Speaker, that members 

opposite won't want to hear this, but I know lots of small 

businesses that are very, very happy with the fact that we took the 

sales tax off things like clothing and have targeted several areas of 

tax relief for small business. Members opposite don't like to hear 

that. Members opposite don't like to hear the fact that we took a 5 

per cent sales tax off power bills, Mr. Speaker, about four or five 

years ago. I don't remember just when that happened, but 5 per 

cent off power bills. Now that's significant, and that's something 

that small business appreciates, Mr. Speaker. Small business 

appreciates the kinds of things we've done in the area of safety 

nets relative to interest rates. While those guys were in office, Mr. 

Speaker, small business was hooked with 20 and 21 per cent 

interest rates. They didn't care. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. That also goes for 

the member for Regina North . . . or Moose Jaw North rather. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the minister refuses to 

answer. I have a new question for him, and I have a positive 

suggestion as well. You claim that the decision to dump small 

business as the SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) collection 

agencies will save you about 200,000. Well I say to you, Mr. 

Minister, that's less than what you're paying the former president 

of the PC Party, George Hill, to mismanage this power 

corporation. 

 

I want to know: will you agree today to dump George Hill and to 

keep the Saskatchewan drug stores and small businesses as the 

collection agents. It sounds like a good swap to most 

Saskatchewan people. Will you do it today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We know how sincere they are when they 

talk about the NDP being the protector of small business. We've 

heard the member for North Battleford and his tirades against 

small business in that town, and we've heard the member for 

Riversdale talking about their views of small business relative to 

privatization and how even the New Democratic Party may be for 

sale, and we've heard now the views of . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well, let's go back to the Regina Manifesto, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order! Order. 

Order. I think it's a good time to go to another question. 

 

Increases to Driver's Licence and Registration Fees 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Agriculture, and it deals with an announcement by the 

Minister of Highways, last Friday, that there'd be a 100 per cent 

jump in the cost of Saskatchewan drivers' licenses and a 

significant increase in most registration fees. And it came on the 

heels of an announcement, or a release, that Saskatchewan already  

has the highest and most rapidly growing inflation rate in Canada. 

 

The minister has instituted these increases under the guise of 

instilling more equity in paying for our road system, but we don't 

find equity. The statement shows that a private vehicle, 1983 Chev 

half-ton, zero per cent increase. If it's a farm plate on the vehicle, 

exactly the same vehicle, 1983 Chev half-ton, it goes up by 25 per 

cent for already hard-strapped farmers. And I think it would be 

more equitable, if you want to put equity into the system, to have 

the 7 cent per litre tax on gasoline go directly into our road system 

instead of using it to pay off the massive deficit. 

 

And I want to know from the minister, the Premier, what the 

criteria is for setting these great increases and the increased rates 

on registration. There seems to be no equity there at all. What is 

the criteria? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member put 

his finger on a couple of the important issues. First of all, that 

Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada where individuals 

receive a refund on their provincial fuel tax, and it's a significant 

amount of money. Now when you look at our taxes compared to 

other jurisdictions and then you subtract the fuel tax, that the hon. 

member will know that it is a significant reduction. And the 

application for farmers is right off the top in terms of a fuel tax 

rebate, a royalty rebate that goes to farmers, plus they don't have to 

pay the fuel tax because we deduct it right at source. 

 

Secondly, I could point out that even with some revenue increases 

as a result of these taxes, only 66 per cent of the total cost of our 

highways is covered through any kind of user fees or any direct 

taxation. So obviously we're looking at 35 or more percentage that 

has to come out of general revenue anyway. 

 

So the combination, Mr. Speaker, protecting our people here, on 

one hand, that aren't protected any place else in Canada like this; 

and secondly, making sure that some of the people that use the 

roads and highways do make a contribution, I believe is a 

reasonable criteria. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the issue here is not 

one of gas tax in this particular question. The issue is, by the 

minister's own figures, that the government is going to raise $18.6 

million in these new registration fee increases and increases to 

driver's licence. But he only says that $10 million is going into the 

road system in Saskatchewan. I suppose the other 8.6 million is 

going to paying off the debt. 

 

Can you assure us that these increases — and we're not talking 

about the gasoline tax; we're talking about these increased taxes on 

the people of Saskatchewan — will every penny collected go into 

the road system in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1904 

 

knows from looking at the budget, and certainly he can find out 

with respect to estimates, that our contributions towards highways 

are up and increasing and have been extremely large in terms of 

their growth. And the impact of this, obviously, is much smaller 

than the total budget in Highways. I mean, the additional amount 

of money — $18 million — is significant;; looking at over a $100 

million budget with respect to Highways obviously will take this 

and everything else that we might be able to find to make sure that 

we can have continued growth in expenditures with respect to 

roads and highways. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Supplementary to the Deputy Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. In regard to the registration of vehicles within the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, can the minister confirm for us 

that previously Sask Power used to register the vehicles directly 

and have now been instructed to register their vehicles with a 

private firm in the city of Regina, therefore costing the taxpayers 

even more dollars than the $18.6 million increase in taxation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know that . . . I don't 

know that to be a fact, Mr. Speaker, but I will check into it and 

inform the hon. member. 

 

Water Levels at Cumberland House 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my question is the minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation. As the minister 

knows, the people of Cumberland House have been building a 

weir in the past week to help up their water levels so that there is 

better transportation and also to provide more clear drinking water 

for their children. This issue has been going on for some time. The 

people of Cumberland have been negotiating with your staff for 

the past four years, and they're becoming very, very, very 

frustrated. They want to see some action from you; they want to 

know what you're going to do. What are you going to do, Mr. 

Minister, to rectify a situation of compensation for the people of 

Cumberland House and also to resolve their lower water levels? 

Why are you not moving on this? What is the reason? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member of course 

is right. The people of Cumberland House have become very 

frustrated and, I think, justifiably so. This issue has been laying 

around for about 20 to 25 years, Mr. Speaker. It's not a new issue. 

 

The details, of course, I don't have in front of me, but in a general 

way, what has happened is that there was a lawsuit launched 

against power and the government and the water corporation 

several years ago to the tune of about $200 million for damages 

relative to the development of, I believe, the Squaw Rapids power 

generating plant. 

 

It has been, as I say, going on and on for about 20 years without 

any resolution through the courts. Last summer all parties to the 

dispute agreed to seek a mediated settlement. A mediator was 

agreed to in the name of Val Longworth of Prince Albert, and that 

process has been  

going on, I think, since last summer. And if I recall correctly, Mr. 

Speaker, the next meeting of that mediating group, if you like, is 

set for early in October. 

 

So that, I think, is the process as it's unfolded to date. And 

certainly since last summer, Mr. Speaker, there have been some 

positive steps. And I hope, I sincerely hope, that this mediation 

process does in fact bear fruit because they, at Cumberland House, 

do have a water problem — no doubt about that. And it deserves 

the immediate attention of those who are responsible for those 

kinds of things. 

 

But it's very difficult when all of these matters are hung up in 

court. And following that, the mediation process is supposed to be 

used to resolve these problems. And we hope that the mediation 

process does in fact work, and work quickly. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — A supplement to the question. Mr. Minister, at the 

last mediation meeting, the people from Cumberland reported that 

the government representative, the lawyer, seemed unprepared and 

had not been, you know, following up on issues that were 

presented before, and they deeply were concerned. 

 

They said, it seems to me that the government is deliberately 

dragging their feet, that they are just not willing to seriously deal 

with the question. They said, we've had this specific legal case 

now for four years with this government. What are they going to 

do about it? When are you going to provide specific direction to 

your staff so that the meeting in the near future . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I know that the hon. 

member obviously has a great deal to say on this topic; however, I 

do remind him that it is a supplementary, so I would ask you to 

please get to your question. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Will you make sure that in this fall meeting that 

you will direct your staff to make sure that they will come out with 

some of the solutions that the people have been asking for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously, for a mediated 

solution, the solution is going to have to be one that all parties 

agree to. And I hope that that can and will be the case. 

 

I have . . . Obviously I don't fit in on the meetings that are taking 

place with the mediator. And I have a lot of difficulty in believing 

that the government lawyer would in any way be dragging his feet 

because we were very sincere in our desire to have this matter 

resolved when we agreed to the mediation process. 

 

And we do hope it works, and as far as we're concerned, the 

sooner the better. This is in no way designed to do anything but 

come to a resolution of the problem. And I point out, Mr. Speaker, 

that this has been going on for 20 to 25 years, and we were the 

people, Mr. Speaker, that brought this thing to the point where 

there is a chance to resolve it. 

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1905 

 

Cumberland House Weir 

 

Mr. Goulet: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 

Environment. The people, of course, have been very concerned 

about the environmental damage that has been done in their area, 

and they recognize the implications of the weir. 

 

What they're asking, Mr. Minister, is this: will the minister look 

into their situation and support them in making sure that the 

controls on the weir are up to satisfactory levels in regards to the 

environment? Will the minister go ahead and do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, and to the hon. member, I 

appreciate your question. And you say, will I make sure that the 

controls on the weir meet specifications. Let's put things in 

perspective here. There has been no weir approved for 

construction. A community has taken it upon itself to proceed to 

build a weir or a dam or whatever you want to call it across the 

Tearing River. The department has advised that the project has not 

received legal approval because no one has asked to go ahead and 

build it. 

 

So you can't, on one hand, have a community take things into its 

own hands and proceed on an illegal project and then come back 

to the department and say, are you going to make sure that what 

we do is right? I believe that's an unrealistic approach, and one that 

we cannot deal with. What we really must do is have some 

co-operation from that community to seek to proceed with the 

legal project first; then perhaps we could give them advice. Under 

these circumstances we cannot. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting Veterinarians 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On behalf of the hon. member, I move 

first reading of a Bill respecting Veterinarians. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The 

Land Titles Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I adjourned debate on this Bill 

when it was last before this Assembly on the basis that we 

required some time to consider the Bill in light of the minister's 

explanation. And I'm pleased to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we've 

done that. 

We've consulted with persons directly involved in the point of the 

whole Bill, and I'm pleased to say that we're prepared to support 

the legislation, and will be doing so at the appropriate time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 39 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps for the 

benefit of some of the members of the opposition who may not 

have been here the last time the officials were introduced, perhaps 

I could take the occasion now to do so once again. This is Bill 

Clarke, deputy minister of the department; Keith Rogers, acting 

deputy minister who handles details on the Culture and Recreation 

side; Doug Cressman, seated immediately behind me, assistant 

deputy minister who handles affairs on the resources side. This is 

Ross MacLennan, executive director of operations; and Brian 

Woodcock, acting assistant deputy minister, administration. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I have a few questions that I 

want to clean up from the last time we were in here, and then I 

want to move into the fisheries portion of your department. 

 

I guess the first thing that I will do, Mr. Minister, and I want to get 

you to confirm this, and it's regarding the Blackstrap ski resort. 

You indicated that there was $48,000 spent last year on the 

Blackstrap resort. Could you indicate how much of that $48,000 

went into the chair-lift repairs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I'm 

advised that in ’86-87 the actual amount spent on chair-lift repairs 

was $5,703. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I now want to turn 

to another item that we were discussing and that was Rowan's 

Ravine on Last Mountain Lake, and I was questioning you on the 

fact that you were charging individuals to park their boats at the 

boat . . . overnight at the marina. Mr. Minister, you indicated at 

that time that it's the first time that you have charged for that 

marina because it was brand-new. I wonder if you could indicate 

how much the Department of Parks, Recreation and Culture spent 

building that marina — the capital costs involved in the complete 

new marina. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I'm advised 

that since 1985 we have spent $1.4 million in Rowan's Ravine, on 

the marina. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — And could you indicate, Mr. Minister, for the 

committee, what was the length of the contract that the individual 

received to operate that marina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that it's just for 

this current season. 

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1906 

 

Mr. Thompson: — And what is he paying to rent that for this 

season? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That figure, Mr. Chairman, is 5 per cent of 

gross revenue. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you indicate that the 

individual is paying 5 per cent of his gross revenue. I would 

suggest to you, sir, that that is a pretty good deal. The taxpayers of 

this province have put up a million and a half dollars to build a 

new marina, and then you lease it out to an individual. 

 

I'm just wondering, if we checked into it like I did . . . If I have an 

opportunity to check into the Besnard Lake camp grounds and the 

Little Amyot Lake, I might find the same individual who is a 

president of a local Conservative riding, because I say to you, Mr. 

Minister, that when the taxpayers build a marina for the public at a 

cost of $1.5 million, and then lease it out, and all he has to pay is 5 

per cent of the gross earnings, that's a pretty good deal. There's 

absolutely no way he can lose on that. And I say to you, Mr. 

Minister, and to the rest of this committee, that the only losers are 

the taxpayers of this province. 

 

I want to now turn to Besnard Lake. And could you indicate to 

me, Mr. Minister, what is involved in the Besnard Lake camp 

ground? Is it an electrified camp ground? And if not, could you 

indicate if there's a fish filleting shed there, and how many tables 

that are involved in the Besnard Lake operation. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could clear up 

some reference to Rowan's Ravine prior to giving an answer on 

Besnard Lake. Indeed Rowan's Ravine was constructed through 

the New Careers Corporation, whereby we took people who 

otherwise would have been on welfare and we gave them 

on-the-job training, we gave them class-room experience, job 

search skills, and then they built the marina out there. 

 

So I think it would be a wee bit unfair to say it cost the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan $1.5 million. What we did in fact do was to have 

a job creation program which is ongoing and has been well 

accepted in Saskatchewan and benefited people who otherwise 

would not have had employment, who would not have had 

training, and who would not have received any necessary 

on-the-job training skills to further their careers and make 

themselves employable. So I just wanted to point that out to the 

hon. member. 

 

On Besnard Lake, Besnard Lake camp ground, which you brought 

up, there was only one bid and that was received from Red's 

Camps. The hon. member made reference to some political 

affiliation the owner-operator of Red's Camps may have. I don't 

know if the president of a local constituency. I am aware that they 

may have a political affiliation, certainly. You've brought that to 

my attention before. I don't know that the people in question, one 

or other, is in fact a constituency president. I do know there was 

only one bid received, and it was received from Red's Camps, and 

that bid we discussed once before. 

I should point out that the Besnard Lake camp ground in 1985-86 

suffered a net loss of $32,000; ’86-87 suffered a net loss in excess 

of $34,000. What we have by way of inventory at Besnard Lake 

for campsite, day use: 39 non-electrical sites, 2 playgrounds, 30 

non-designated overflow sites, a one-kilometre beach, and one 

boat launch. There are sundry tables, barbecues, bins, faucets, 

docks, and a fish-cleaning shelter. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, is there a power plant involved 

there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, I believe there's no 

permanent power plant there. I'm just looking through to see what 

there is: non-modern toilets; there are five flush toilets. Any power 

that would have been brought in would be brought in on a 

temporary basis, I'm advised, from the region. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it is a very large site, and 

if there's flushing toilets, then I would assume that there is power 

available to operate them. 

 

And I was not going to go any farther on this and was not going to 

bring any names out, but you indicate that you are not aware of 

who the individuals are that you leased the facilities out to. And I 

say to you, that is a very large campsite; you leased it out for $110 

a year. You say that that's the only bid that you received. 

 

But I want to — just for your own information, seeing that you do 

not have this, I have an updated list as of July 3, 1987 of the 

presidents — of the constituency presidents for the Conservative 

Party. So I just want to . . . for your own information, Mr. 

Minister, the individual that leased the campsite for $110, a Mr. 

Ron MacKay of Box 67, La Ronge, is also the president of the 

Conservative association riding, and I have that here, and it's 

updated July 3, as I said, 1987. That's for your own information. 

 

And I also have one for the Little Amyot Lake, and that also has 

been leased out to a Conservative president of the Athabasca 

riding, one Jeannie Lavoie of Beauval. She is also the president of 

a Conservative riding. That is as far as I have gone to check into 

that, Mr. Minister, but that was for your own information. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that the type of privatization that is 

being carried out by your government has to come to a stop. The 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan have put up millions of dollars for 

public campsites to serve the public, and they are now being 

turned over to individuals like I have indicated to you. And when 

we can take the type of money that we are spending, and I talk 

about the million and a half dollars that you pout out at the 

campsite to build the boat marina . . . And you indicate there was a 

job training program, and I think that's good. And I sincerely hope, 

Mr. Minister, that the individuals who were trained in constructing 

that site were kept on and are still working this summer. I most 

certainly hope that they are still working, that it was not just a 

short-term job. 

 

But when we spend this type of the taxpayers' money, I think that 

that is wrong to privatize and lease it out to  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1907 

 

individuals, like you are doing. I'm sure that the department, had 

they have continued to operate, and it was the department who 

built that marina at that cost, hired the individuals . . . and I'm sure 

that the department could continue to operate it just as efficiently 

and make sure that the individuals that were trained continue to 

work. 

 

But I just say to you, Mr. Minister, that I think that you have to 

take a serious look at privatization and slow down on it. You're 

going too fast and it's something that . . . it's an asset that we have 

in this province, and you should not be selling it off or leasing it 

off to private enterprise. I believe that it can be operated, in the 

best interest of the public, by the department. You have the 

individuals that know how to do this and should be doing it. 

 

I have one more item before I turn to the fisheries, Mr. Minister, 

and it regards wood permits at Green Lake. And there has been a 

lot of land cleared in the last number of years by the government 

farm at Green Lake, and there has been literally hundreds of 

thousands of cords of solid poplar wood that has been piled up by 

brush cutters. Individuals at Green Lake have asked to go in and 

take that wood out of the piles and use it in their stoves — and 

there are many individuals in Green Lake who burn firewood. And 

there is literally hundreds of thousands of cords that were piled up, 

large stands of good poplar trees or aspen, and they were told that 

they could not harvest that stuff, and it was all burned. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that it's a fact. I drive by there 

every time I go home, so I know that it's been burned. And I ask 

you, Mr. Minister, why your department would not issue wood 

permits for the individuals in Green Lake so that they could 

harvest the wood for themselves, and also could use it 

commercially to sell it to other communities surrounding Green 

Lake? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, if I may revert to some 

comments the hon. member made earlier with respect to the 

direction we're taking with privatization. And I want to say, Mr. 

Chairman, at the outset, with all sincerity, that I have nothing but 

the utmost respect fore the member opposite. And as he knows, 

I've demonstrated that, in previous estimates in the last five years. 

I know that he is not, and I want to say this sincerely, I know that 

he is not trying to play a petty political game when he criticizes the 

two particular camp grounds, Amyot and Besnard. 

 

So what I have to say to the hon. member is the Bernard lease, 

when it was put out, was given to the only person who bid. Now 

that person . . . and I accept if you say he's the president or his 

wife's the president — Ron and Ev; I don't know who's the 

president . . . Ev . . . he is. Ron is a PC president of a local 

constituency association. I don't think, Mr. Chairman, that should 

disqualify that individual from putting a bid in. It was the only bid 

received, therefore, we went with the bid. And the fact is, it was 

losing about $35,000 a year of taxpayers' money which we're 

saving this year. And by all accounts, the reports we're getting, it is 

being well run and well administered. 

 

So with that I'll leave that point and move on to Green  

Lake, which is operated under Central Farms. I don't know if the 

hon. member's aware or not, but we don't administer policy on that 

particular organization — on Central Farms — and we don't 

control what happens to that wood under The Forests Act. But I 

would tell the hon. member, the officials and I would be delighted 

if we were administering that poplar under The Forest Act. And I 

think that would go a long way to improving a situation and to 

bring about the kind of suggestions you have made which I think 

are good suggestions. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if I could 

get a commitment from you today to get in touch with the 

department centre involved, and make sure that there is no more 

clearing of that land, of the government farms, until the wood that 

can be used for firewood is taken out of there prior to. 

 

Not only does it help the individuals who use that wood, it also 

creates many jobs where they can go in, cut it, and take it out. 

Then you can move your equipment in there and your brush pilers 

and your brush cutters, and do the job — and I say to you, it would 

be a lot better if it wasn't brush cut and piled. Then they have to go 

in there and take it out of the piles. It would be better if they could 

go in and cut the timber that's out of there, either the spruce for the 

mills or the aspen for firewood. 

 

And I also indicate to you now, Mr. Minister, that aspen is going 

to become a sellable item at Prince Albert now. So there is just 

hundreds of thousands of cords that have been literally knocked 

down and burnt up, and this should come to a stop. And I ask you, 

Mr. Minister, for your commitment to go in there and see that this 

is looked after properly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm willing to make 

that commitment to the hon. member. We will in fact 

communicate with the Department of Agriculture. We will 

endeavour to make sure that the wood that is cut is put to the best 

possible use. 

 

The hon. member is absolutely correct; there is a much increased 

value placed on aspen now than in previous years because of 

advanced technology coming into the wood industry. and we'd be 

more than pleased to try and help you with that particular problem. 

It makes sense to you and your constituents, and it makes sense to 

us, so I think we can do something. 

 

Something I should mention to the hon. member. When we spoke 

about those career corporation trainees, one-third of those people 

who worked at Rowan's Ravine now have permanent jobs. The 

others are either working with the career corporation or they are in 

training at this particular moment. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I'm 

pleased to hear that they're continuing to work. And I'm assuming 

that your officials will get in touch with the officials in Green 

Lake and try to resolve that problem. 

 

I now want to turn to the commercial fishery and tourism fisheries 

in northern Saskatchewan. That pretty well will be my final item. 

Some of my other colleagues will have some items before we turn 

on to Culture. I have one item  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1908 

 

on Culture that I will discuss with you before I sit down and take 

my place, Mr. Minister, and I forewarn you that that will be 

regarding a letter that I sent to you regarding the hockey arenas. 

 

I now want to turn to the commercial fishery in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. And one of the questions I would 

like to have answered: is there a royalty on commercial fish caught 

in Saskatchewan and taken out of the province? Is the department 

collecting a royalty on any of that fish? 

 

I now want to continue. And I have written letters, Mr. Minister, to 

the freshwater fish marketing corporation indicating my 

displeasure with the way they operate in this province, and I've 

sent you copies of the letters. And as of to date, I haven't had any 

response from yourself. 

 

But I think it's time for your department to take a serious look at 

how we are operating the commercial fishery in northern 

Saskatchewan. Maybe I'll just let you answer that one, and then I 

can continue with this, Mr. Minister. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, a two-fold question. The first 

part — is there a royalty charge in the province on fish? Yes, there 

is — one-half cent per pound on white fish, one cent per pound on 

trout, one cent per pound on wall-eye. 

 

And the letter to which the hon. member referred was addressed to 

the freshwater fish marketing corporation, and I was c.c'd. 

 

We haven't seen a reply to the hon. member from FFMC 

(freshwater fish marketing corporation) yet, I'm advised by 

officials. We were waiting for that, to see what the response was, 

so I could react to their response to you. And I'll be more than 

pleased to do so whenever I receive their response. I share some of 

your concerns with FFMC, by the way. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I would ask 

you to follow up on that letter, because I have not received an 

answer. And the corporation is playing games with Saskatchewan 

as far as their terms of the agreement in the freshwater fish 

marketing corporation. And I would ask your help. I have 

continually tried to get answers from the corporation as to how 

many mullets the corporation are processing every year, and they 

just will not answer that question. And I think you, as the Minister 

of the Department of Parks and Recreation, should take that up. 

That's why I sent you a carbon copy. I did not really expect to get 

an answer from him, because this is the way they're operating. 

They continually refuse to indicate to the fishermen, who are 

producing the fish, just how many pounds of mullets they're 

selling each year. 

 

And I want to give you some reasons why they're doing this. And 

we just have to take a look at how they operate in this province. 

The commercial fishermen in northern Saskatchewan are allowed 

to bring mullets in once a week. And his is a hardship on the 

commercial fishery and the fishermen who are fishing that species. 

They have to set their nets on the weekend because it's only on 

Monday that they accept — and I believe it's 200 boxes, and the 

boxes contain 60 pounds to the box — 200 on Monday. So 

commercial fishermen have to put their nets in, into the sucker 

grounds, pull their nets in on Monday, because they really don't 

know who's going to be bringing in and what amount of fish is 

coming in. 

 

On many occasions, I've seen fisherman come in with 30-40 boxes 

of mullet and have to throw them overboard out into the lake 

because the quota had already been filled by fishermen who had 

got in there ahead of them. And this is a big industry in 

Saskatchewan. We produce literally millions of pounds of mullets, 

and most of it is thrown overboard or into the bush and, literally, 

destroyed. 

 

And there are countries who are asking for this product. Africa has 

been asking for it and has been asking for credit. But the 

corporation refuses to give credit to Africa. And this is where I 

think you have to also step in. 

 

I'll just sit down there. The minister is busy with his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I've just 

been advised that the Buffalo Narrows area — and it's the only 

area the FFMC use for this particular species — amounts to about 

250,000 pounds per year. 

 

If you are having some difficulties with responses to questions 

from the FFMC, and if you feel my office could be of some 

service to you, be more than pleased to do that for you. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That's not what I'm 

concerned about, Mr. Minister, is how much is being purchased at 

the Buffalo Narrows plant. What I want to find out is how many 

pounds of mullets that the corporation in Winnipeg is accepting 

for a full year. They take 250,000 pounds from the Buffalo 

Narrows area, but they may be taking another million or two 

million pounds from Manitoba, from Lake Winnipegosis or Lake 

Manitoba or Lake Winnipeg. 

 

This is what I want to find out, and this is where we get into the 

secrecy with the corporation. They will not indicate . . . if you look 

at my letter, I specifically asked that question: how many pounds 

of mullets is the corporation purchasing and selling in one year? 

And I feel the way that they are operating . . . I feel that the way 

the corporation is operating that they're playing games with the 

commercial fishermen in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I have given you examples . . . Mr. Chairman, I am not going to be 

continuing to talk if the minister is not going to listen to the 

question. 

 

What I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, is that the corporation, 

they're saying to the commercial fishermen in Saskatchewan, we'll 

take your mullets in a certain region and we'll take them one day 

out of the week. Then all of a sudden they come along in July — 

the hottest month of the year — and August, and they'll say, well, 

we can take all the mullets you can produce for three weeks. And 

that means that some of the other fishermen who are  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1909 

 

producing in other provinces are on holidays. It's the toughest part 

of the year for any commercial fisherman to operate. He has to ice 

that fish; he has to fish his nets twice a day because of the warm 

water. 

 

Not only that, we're taking that sucker, or mullet, which it's 

referred to, and holding it for 48 hours at the fish camps. Then 

we're putting it in a truck and we're transporting it 800 miles to 

Winnipeg to be processed. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, you 

have to put a stop to this because there's no way you can take fish 

and transport them 800 miles for processing after they've been 

kept for 12, 24 and up to 48 hours at the fish camps. It just stands 

to reason. 

 

Then they'll come back and say: well, we're throwing away fish 

that's coming out of that area. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that 

what we have to do is indicate to the corporation how much of 

these mullets are you selling, and why are you taking them in 

July? Why are you not taking them throughout the year? Why do 

you come up with this here three weeks in July? And we have to 

get some answers to that. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, that we have to take a look at 

processing this product right in this province. There's no way that 

we can continue to fish our commercial fish in this province and 

take it 800 and 900 miles by truck for processing to Winnipeg. 

And we lose all the processing jobs, and these are important. 

 

I say, Mr. Minister, that what has to take place is you have to 

negotiate with the corporation and say, look, that's fine, you be the 

central selling agency. There's no problem with that. They can be 

the central selling agency, but we're going to process our own fish 

here in Saskatchewan, and you can sell the processed fish. 

 

I want to leave it at that and let you comment on that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, there's no question that if 

we were handling our own processing in Saskatchewan there 

would be some jobs attached to that. We do have processing in La 

Ronge, and it's of a somewhat limited nature. 

 

In the last couple of years, as the hon. member is aware, we've had 

some negotiations with FFMC (freshwater fish marketing 

corporation) so that we can directly market fish within the 

province for internal consumption. At one time everything went 

out of the province, and then it had to be brought back in for use 

within our own restaurants, which was kind of an absurd situation. 

We've managed to at least change that one. 

 

There are other concerns we have with the FFMC, and some 

negotiations are ongoing. What I will undertake to do for the 

member is write a letter to the FFMC, which will be done this 

week, and you'll receive a copy of my letter to them. I will ask the 

specific questions which you have asked me, and obviously when 

the reply comes back I'll furnish you with a copy of the reply, too. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I just to 

close off on that and indicate to you that I  

think that the commercial fishing industry in this province can be a 

lot bigger than it is right now. We have a product up there; we 

have millions and millions of pounds that we are throwing away 

each year. We have fish that I see on sale in the supermarkets here 

in Regina that we literally throw away and never have an 

opportunity to sell. 

 

I specifically talk about the ling cod or the maria, and we literally 

throw millions of pounds of those away. And I go into a super 

store here, a super outlet, and I see where they have ling cod tails 

and ling cod steaks and trout heads, which is a delicacy, and 

they're selling them right here in Regina. Then when I check it out 

and see where it's coming from, it's sure not coming from the 

fisherman in northern Saskatchewan, it's coming from some other 

place. 

 

And I think we have to have control of the fishery, and you, Mr. 

Minister, as minister in charge, can play a major role in that. Well 

what I'm saying to you is that when you write your letter and you 

ask for the information, that you have your department work 

towards processing in this province. I think if we can process our 

product, the corporation most certainly can do the selling. And we 

can do our selling too. As you've indicated, you have changed the 

laws where we can now sell within the province, and that's a start; 

but it's only a beginning. 

 

Mr. Minister, before I move to the other item, I want to indicate to 

you that, as I said before, the commercial fishing in this province 

is a very important industry, and there has always been a conflict. 

And I've seen more of a conflict now between the commercial 

fisherman and the tourist operators, and I think this is something 

that we have to work through. 

 

The resource is used by the commercial fisherman, by the tourist, 

and it's also used for domestic uses. And I think that we have to 

make sure that they all work together and that they all realize that 

there is lots of room for all three industries. 

 

But most certainly what we can't have, and we have to take a 

serious look at this, is the type of tolerances and split limits and 

those items that are being imposed upon the commercial fishing 

industry. More and more you see lakes are being set out with a 

split limit or a set limit — a species limit. This is a hardship on the 

commercial fishing industry. It's not a hardship on the tourist 

operator because you don't separate those. I think that what we 

have to do is get the commercial fishing industry and the tourism 

industry working closer together. And I've talked to many tourist 

operators and commercial fishermen and I try to bring them 

together and say lookit, there's room for both and we have to work 

together. There's no reason why . . . and we've had this happen on 

Dore Lake, and you can take a look at Canoe Lake where we have 

good strong commercial industries and we also have tourism. And 

you can go to Stony Lake or Delaronde Lake or any of the other 

ones in the southern part, and they've always operated together. 

 

But now we're getting some of our smaller lakes up north, and I 

give you an example of Porter Lake, which was a large limit in the 

Patuanak area, and now the tolerances were put on. And now last 

year they completely closed  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1910 

 

that lake off to the local fishermen because a tourist operator has 

put a couple of cabins on that lake. And I think that's unfair. And 

that individual came up to me and he said, you know I'm even 

afraid to go back in there and trap in the spring and the fall. And 

that's been his trap line and his father and his grandfather's trap 

lines for 100 years. And this is a situation that we have in northern 

Saskatchewan. These tolerances, lakes are being shut off and 

they're being catered to an individual who goes in there and sets up 

a cabin. I think that when somebody goes in there and sets up a 

cabin or a tourist industry, they have to be told and they should 

realize that that resource has always been available to the native 

people in northern Saskatchewan. They've always used it, not just 

for commercial uses, but they've used it domestically. And we're 

getting farther and farther apart and there's animosity building up. 

And I see it all over, and I think that we have to take a serious look 

at this. 

 

I would ask you and your department officials to use good 

judgement when you're dealing with operators that are coming in. 

Get the commercial fishermen together, the tourist operator 

together, and let's get them working together rather than fighting 

each other and causing the type of problems that we have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman the hon. member makes a 

good point — the last point in, more or less, his summation, that 

what has happened is some animosity has crept into northern 

Saskatchewan and the ongoing arguments between commercial 

fishing versus tourism fishing. He's right; the tourist operator is not 

going to lose anyway because he has the people within the camp 

and they've already paid to be there. And some of the commercial 

fishermen are hurting. The hon. member, himself, is a commercial 

fishermen; he speaks with some authority on the subject, and I 

accept that. 

 

What I can tell him is that we do intend to put the white paper out, 

that has been in the process for some time, for public discussion. 

We intend to address the allocation issue. And as the hon. 

member, and I'm sure all members can appreciate, it is not going 

to be an easy issue to address because there are just so many 

diverse concerns in the North — the operator, not all the operators 

— some operators versus some of the commercial fishermen. 

 

He's right about the tolerances, and we have some real serious 

concerns about tolerances on some of the smaller lakes that are 

inadequately supervised, with lack of personnel to be there, and 

we just don't know very often what is being taken out of those 

lakes. So we do have those problems; we're well aware of them. 

We take your advice and we will be tackling the allocation 

problem this fall. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate 

that. I have one more item that I want to close on, and then I will 

go to the item I have on Culture and Recreation. 

 

The last item I have is the transportation subsidy that we had in 

northern Saskatchewan for the commercial fishermen for the last 

10, 12 years. This year, in your  

wisdom, you decided to reduce that subsidy to 60 per cent of the 

fly-in costs. You also completely eliminated the transportation on 

pickerel. 

 

And I say, Mr. Minister, that when we talk about the commercial 

fishing industry being an important economical activity in 

northern Saskatchewan, and you agree with that, and then your 

department will cut off the subsidy that we've had in place for all 

these years. 

 

And commercial fishermen are no different than farmers in the 

South. As a matter of fact, they're caught in the price squeeze, too. 

Their gasoline is, in some cases, 100 per cent higher to operate 

their motors and their equipment than it is to operate a tractor on 

the farm. And repairs and everything — everything costs a lot 

more up in northern Saskatchewan. And that subsidy was put on 

originally for a fly-in transportation subsidy, and that was the key 

to it. 

 

And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would reconsider the 

fish transportation subsidy. I think that it was an important subsidy 

that the commercial fishermen in northern Saskatchewan looked 

forward to, and it's the only way that they can survive. 

 

When we talk about tourist operators coming in and operating and 

causing friction . . . And the commercial fishermen are having a 

hard time to keep their boats going and the motors, to buy new 

nets and equipment. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, it's a tough 

business to be in, tough at any time when you're up in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And many of these fishermen spend many months out of the year 

living in tents out in the lake fishing, fishing fish, and that's their 

living. And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would 

reconsider that transportation subsidy, take a serious look at what 

you've done. You've reduced it 40 per cent. You now pay 60 per 

cent. 

 

And you also have taken the complete subsidy off of pickerel, 

because the pickerel is a fish that the fishermen receive the most 

money for. And I say, when you look at other subsidies that you 

have in the province, you don't look at one type of grain or what 

kind of land the farmer has. And I say you . . . And I'm asking you, 

Mr. Minister, to reconsider that and put that subsidy back in place 

and also put it back on the pickerel. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, two or three points I'd 

like to make. A subsidy is price sensitive, and the program hadn't 

been looked at for 10 years. And the fact is right now the wall-eye 

is fetching the highest price it's every fetched. So we took a look at 

this and said, well maybe it's time to take subsidy down there. We 

also did drop the subsidy from 90 to 50 per cent on certain other 

species. 

 

But I'd like to point out to the hon. member that the program right 

now is definitely directed to the North. Prior to this year and the 

new guide-lines that came in, we were paying a subsidy below the 

54th parallel. We're not any more. So it is directed to the North. It 

is ongoing and yes, we're looking at it. 

 

And if the prices do fluctuate on fish, then we'd be duty bound to 

reconsider the subsidy for future years. 

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1911 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that you're not 

paying the subsidy to anything other than fly-in lakes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It's anything above 54 degrees a subsidy 

would be paid to. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well my concern is the flying subsidy, and 

you know, I'm not concerned about the 54th parallel or anything 

like that. My concern is, and it's the big problem to the commercial 

fisherman who has to fly his fish out. I believe that you have taken 

off the flying subsidy in the Patuanak area, and Dipper Lake and 

areas like that. Most certainly if you haven't taken it off, you have 

reduced . . . You've eliminated pickerel, and that is one of the big 

pickerel areas. So that goes right against the fishermen of 

Patuanak, and that's the places where you have to come out with 

that fish transportation subsidy, especially for flying. That's the 

most important part. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the program applies 

to all lakes, fly-in or otherwise, north of the 54th parallel, other 

than, as you correctly pointed out, for wall-eye. But they are 

getting a good price for wall-eye right now, notwithstanding that 

they do have high costs in the North. As I said, it hadn't been 

looked at for ten years, but once again these things are ongoing. 

 

The hon. member mentioned agriculture. He's absolutely right. 

We've seen fluctuation, and right now we are at a low ebb in 

agriculture. The fish seem to be coming up; I hope it continues; I 

hope they get double the money for their fish. If not, and the fish 

prices dip again, then we will have to look at the program. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you can get the 

processing into this province, I think you'll see a great 

improvement, and there will be larger returns to the commercial 

fishing industry. 

 

Mr. Minister, that's really all I have with Parks and Recreation. I 

now want to turn to a letter that I wrote you on June 24. At that 

time I was asking you if you would consider a new capital grants 

program for Saskatchewan, and that was to increase the size of the 

skating rinks in Saskatchewan. You have not responded to me, as 

of yet, but I want to . . . if you have I haven't seen that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I've got the response here if you'd like it. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Okay, I haven't seen the response. But I still 

want to bring this item up, and I indicated to you that in 

Saskatchewan — and it was brought to light when we had the 

serious accident down at the Agridome — and I think, and 

research that I have done indicates clearly that the type of 

accidents that happen in Saskatchewan and in Canada with our 

regulation size rinks does not happen in Europe where you have 

Olympic-sized arenas. Now the difference between the rinks in 

Saskatchewan and the European rinks, or the Olympic-size rink, is 

the fact that our rinks — and the Agridome falls into this category 

— is 200 feet long and 85 feet wide, whereas the European and 

Olympic-size rinks are 210 feet long, and some of them  

are 215 feet long, and 100 feet wide, so you have that extra 15 feet 

in width and you have the extra 10 to 15 feet in length. And in the 

European rinks and Olympic rinks the goals are moved out farther 

from the boards, and it gives the individuals more manoeuvrability 

behind the rinks and causes less accidents. 

 

And if you'll take a look at the European style of skaters that we're 

getting into Canada and who are playing in the NHL, you'll see 

that they're skaters — they're individuals that come over here as 

skaters because they have the room, and they've been brought up 

to play hockey in an arena that gives them the skating room that 

they have. 

 

You have put out many millions of dollars in the last four years to 

build a couple of skating rinks. One is the Saskatoon arena where 

you have put $25 million into. The other one is out at Notre Dame 

College where you have put $10 million into that arena, and I 

think this is where you really have to take a look at the difference. 

If you go out to the Notre Dame rink, you'll find that when they 

built that rink they built it to the Olympic size. It is a bigger rink 

than the Agridome in Regina. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you're putting $25 million into 

the arena in Saskatoon, then I think you should negotiate with 

Saskatoon and say, lookit, we feel that if we had an Olympic-size 

rink in here it would be a lot safer for our hockey players and 

provide a better quality of hockey. And you can negotiate with 

them because you're putting that kind of money in. You didn't 

have to negotiate with Notre Dame; they built an Olympic-size 

rink and it's pretty nice to see these hockey players out there where 

they've got some room to move around. 

 

I say, Mr. Minister, that you have to take a look at a program 

where you take the initiative, and your department and yourself 

can be a leader in this, and say to the individual communities, 

lookit, we'll put up X number of dollars in a grant if you will 

expand your rinks, if you will lengthen them out a bit and widen 

them out. 

 

And then we can take a look at different rules, and we can be a 

leader in that. You take a look in European hockey, and I say to 

you, Mr. Minister, they don't . . . when the puck goes over a red 

line in European Olympic hockey, the whistle is blown. But if you 

take a look at our junior hockey leagues and our minor leagues 

and the NHL, they just race down to the end, crash into the boards, 

and that's where we get our serious injuries and a lot of violence 

— a lot of fighting takes place. 

 

So there's many changes that can take place in hockey. We might 

think that we've come as far as we can go and that everything is 

perfect because we are a leader. But more and more we're seeing 

the European style of hockey that's coming into Canada because of 

the Europeans and the Czechoslovakians coming over here, and I 

think that, Mr. Minister, your department can take a leadership 

role here and provide grants to communities. 

 

I know some of the arguments will be: well, we need the seating 

capacity. And I don't think that we can take a look at the 

economics when we should be taking a look at the safety of our 

hockey players — both young and old — and  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1912 

 

providing better entertainment and less violence by building 

Olympic-size arenas. So I guess my request to you, Mr. Minister, 

is to take a serious look at that and to go to your cabinet colleagues 

and bring out a program, a capital program, that will allow our 

communities — and would create many jobs — to expand the 

arenas. Expand in length and expand in width, and we will come 

up with a lot safer sport and a more entertaining sport. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, to take that proposal that I have 

brought forward in my letter, and what I have said here today, very 

seriously, and hopefully that Saskatchewan once again can 

become a leader in another area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I did have a response 

to the hon. member. I believe it went to The Northerner newspaper 

August 7. I'm not sure if it did go direct to you or not. I'll check 

with my office. You'd written one to me in The Northerner and I 

replied, saying that I agreed with you on the subject. And it'd 

certainly allow more room to manoeuvre if our rinks were indeed 

bigger. I agree 100 per cent with you. 

 

You talked about rules. Yes, we've got some discussion ongoing 

with SAHA (Saskatchewan Amateur Hockey Association). We're 

also in touch with SaskSport, and the officials are discussing this 

with them. The whole area of violence, and violence in hockey, 

and violence in sport in general, is on the agenda to be discussed at 

the next meeting of provincial and federal sport ministers which is 

to be held in September. I won't be attending that meeting because 

of commitments in the legislature, but my deputy minister will be 

there, and he will be taking a strong line on rule changes that we're 

in mutual agreement upon right now. 

 

As it relates to the rinks themselves, there are some 460 rinks in 

the province in varying states of repair or disrepair as the case may 

be, with different types of structures. To undertake a capital 

program would be extremely costly. Firstly, I think, it would take 

very careful inspection of what is there, because to start 

restructuring those rinks would be a very expensive venture. It 

would almost be cheaper to rebuild them in some cases. But it is 

not out of the question that when — and it will — the economy 

improves and we can put more money to that type of capital 

program, it should be a priority. 

 

We have had a recreational capital facilities program, a five-year 

program we put in place in 1982, whereby municipalities and 

other groups could apply and receive fairly sizeable sums of 

money towards recreational facilities under their jurisdiction. How 

they choose to spend it is up to them. Some of them have used it 

for skating rinks and made improvements to them. 

 

I can't disagree with you. If the money were there, I think it would 

be an excellent project. Given the current financial economic fiscal 

outlook, it isn't there this year and I rather doubt it will be there 

next year. But it's something that certainly we should be working 

towards. I think the accidents that have taken place in the past, to 

some degree, may have been prevented with the changes you've 

suggested. Also bringing the lines forward a few feet so there's 

more space behind the goal in the end line,  

I think that makes eminent good sense. The suggestions you've 

made as to high sticking from behind, I agree. Those kind of 

things are rule changes that we can discuss with the various 

amateur sports bodies, and discuss fairly forcefully. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In closing off, I 

would just indicate to you that yes, maybe times are tough, but I 

think this is a time when we should move on this. 

 

What we're talking about here is safety. We're talking about a 

better sport, and we're talking about creating jobs. You talk about 

the 400-and-some arenas that need repair; this is the time for your 

government to bring out a special grant program specifically to 

lengthen and widen our arenas, to bring them up to Olympic-size 

levels. 

 

And I think that we should not look at how serious the problem is 

here — financial problem — because that should not be 

considered when we're looking at the safety of our young hockey 

players and old alike. I think that is the key. And we will be setting 

the example for the rest of Canada. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that we've always been leaders, 

and we can continue to be leaders. We can borrow money for 

other things; I think we can borrow money for another capital 

grant to specifically zero in on the safety and the betterment of 

hockey in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, that's all the questioning I have right now. My other 

colleagues will have a few questions to ask, so I will turn it over to 

them. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. Minister, 

the last time we got together was July 23, and I had a number of 

questions at that time, mainly concerning privatization that's 

taking place within the Saskatchewan parks. 

 

And I'd like to start off by asking a few questions in relationship to 

our exchange on July 23. At one point on that day you mentioned 

that the proposals . . . or the advertisements that appeared in papers 

had called for proposals for the development of say, The 

Battlefords Provincial Park. 

 

And when I asked you what the status was, you said that they had 

been deferred. Could you tell me what you mean by that, Mr. 

Minister? What does "deferred" mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would. But first of 

all I'd like to correct something that appears in the record on July 

23 on page 1340 in response to a question from the hon. member 

from The Battlefords. He asked, who had the contract to lease out 

golf carts, Battlefords park, and what was the agreement? 

 

The information that was passed over to me was that Valley West 

Sales had the contract last year. In fact, Valley West Sales Ltd. 

was one of the companies who bid on the contract for ’87. The 

company who held the contract for golf carts at Battleford golf 

course in ’86 was  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1913 

 

H.D. Golf Carts Ltd., and they held the contract from 1982 to 

1986. 

 

The other information I gave you regarding that was accurate. I'm 

sorry, that piece was just handed; it was just a slip. I don't think it 

will make any difference to the information you requested. 

 

I have some information you requested that day that I agreed to 

provide to you, and I'll send it over to you now. 

 

And in response to "deferred", yes. Several projects were put on 

hold and they were being re-examined. And we're looking at 

projects which would involve capital infrastructure during this 

fiscal year. We've made a decision, as of Friday last week, to 

proceed with certain projects, so they're no longer being 

re-examined. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister tell me then the current status 

of The Battlefords Provincial Park in terms of whether there's 

being development proposals called for again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, that is the plan. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister tell us as to the number of 

responses that were generated by the advertisement the first time 

development plans were called for, and who the individuals or 

companies were that contacted the department in response to the 

advertisement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I can advise the hon. member that the 

proposals are in the hands of Tourism and Small Business, not 

with us. And off the top of my head, I believe there were five 

proponents who were interested, who expressed interest, five, 

either individually or groups. But Tourism and Small Business is 

handling that, so you'll have to ask that particular minister in his 

estimates. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Has there been a change? I understood that your 

department had been handling the development proposals. Since 

you deferred it, now have you changed it to another department, so 

that now Tourism and Small Business are responsible for 

privatization within the parks and Parks department no longer is 

responsible for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Tourism and Small Business has always 

done the tendering and the handling of the proposals. If it's a 

venture within a park, we would set out the specs that we would 

require. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Yes, I understand. The minister indicates to me 

that they are advertised that way. I understand that. 

 

Can you then tell me what the situation is with the rental of golf 

carts, the contracts for rental of golf carts in the provincial parks? 

Is that handled by Tourism and Small Business as well, or is that 

handled by your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, the development projects are the ones 

that go out, tendered in the newspaper, both departments' names 

on them. Tourism and Small Business handle those aspects. The 

ongoing, day-to-day affairs within the park, we would handle 

ourselves. 

Mr. Anguish: — Well then will Tourism and Small Business all 

of a sudden have a heightened role in terms of our provincial park 

system, once the developments are proceeded with, or 

development proposals start to come in? 

 

If a development is put into place, such as a hotel and a swimming 

pool and a privatization of a golf course, then in fact your 

department will no longer have responsibilities; that that'll then be 

the responsibility of the Department of Tourism and Small 

Business. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I think I can clarify 

that to the hon. member. The proposals, when they come in, are 

examined by Tourism and Small Business because they have the 

expertise on the business side. So they use their people to examine 

the proposals, examine the viability; they check financial details 

and various things like that. 

 

Once a project is approved and it's off and running, when it's 

inside the park, it would be subject to The Parks Act, the 

regulations, and enforcement by people in our department. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I would hope that your department, Mr. 

Minister, has close consultation with Tourism and Small Business. 

And with your close consultation that you have with the other 

department, could you tell me when you expect to make a decision 

on the development proposals for the provincial parks that have 

been advertised in newspapers across the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, with specific reference to 

Battlefords — I believe that's the one you're probably most 

interested in right now — there will be a bidders' conference on 

August 27, and the closing is on September 14. And we expect the 

award would be made about four weeks after that closing on 

September 14. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Is that bidders' conference open to the public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, it is. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister tell me the location of that 

conference on August 27. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I can advise the hon. 

member that the intention is to hold that in the clubhouse in the 

park . . . in the golf course. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Does the minister also, if you've been in that 

close consultation with the Department of Tourism and Small 

Business . . . as to who the respondents were on the first call for 

development proposals to The Battlefords Provincial Park and 

other parks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I can advise the hon. member the bids 

hadn't closed at that point. It was still open, so we really don't 

know how many people were interested. 

 

I had heard verbally there were five proposals, groups or 

individuals. But we don't know how many there would have been 

because it was stopped and the bids never  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1914 

 

were closed, so we don't know how many would have been 

received. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, there are some other 

questions that I had back on July 23 that are not involved in your 

information here. One of them that you gave your undertaking was 

that you would tell us how much money the provincial park golf 

course at The Battlefords Provincial Park lost last year. Did it lose 

money, or did it make a profit on the golf course? That's the 

question. Your answer was: 

 

We'd be pleased to look up the information relative to The 

Battlefords provincial park golf course and get it over a 10-year 

period, or longer if you prefer, and we'll send that information 

over to you. 

 

That's on page 1340 of Hansard on July 23. And I do not see that 

information. It's almost three weeks late. You haven't sent it to me 

previously. It's not in the information you provided for me here 

today, and I'd like to know from the minister when you're going to 

provide that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, if one of the pages would 

be kind enough to photocopy this for me right now, I've got it for 

the hon. member from 1977-78 year — that's one, two, three, four, 

five, six, seven, eight — that's nine years. I don't have this current 

year yet, obviously. Fair enough? 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I appreciate that. The other question that I had 

asked you, and it's on page 1342 of July 23's Hansard, and I 

asked: 

 

Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, if an employee of the park 

does the servicing on the golf carts at The Battleford 

Provincial Park golf course? 

 

Your response to me was: 

 

Mr. Chairman, I don't know who does it. Upshot's 

responsible for it. Certainly I can direct officials to contact 

Upshot and find out who's doing their maintenance for their 

golf carts. 

 

And I notice, Mr. Minister, that that information is not in the 

package that you provided for me. If you do in fact have that 

information here today, I would also appreciate in knowing what 

the arrangement is for maintenance and what is meant by 

maintenance on golf carts. 

 

Again on July 23 you told me that Upshot's bid was superior to the 

bid of Valley West Yamaha Sales Ltd. in the fact that they did 

maintenance daily. I find it hard to believe, Mr. Minister, that 

maintenance is required daily on golf carts, unless you call filling 

with gas and checking oil, maintenance. And I'm sure that anyone 

could perform that service. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that when you say that the Upshot 

Enterprises had the best bid, and maintenance was one of the 

reasons you used, it seems to me rather strange that Valley West 

Yamaha Sales Ltd., who are in the business and have been for 

some time . . . they have a  

service shop, they have technicians that are trained in the type of 

equipment that's at the park in terms of the golf carts that are out 

there, whereas Upshot Enterprises have no previous maintenance 

experience whatsoever in providing maintenance on the golf carts 

at that location. And it would seem to me that they would have to 

especially hire someone to do the maintenance on the golf carts 

because I know that neither of the two principals involved — Mr. 

Morin or Mr. Hamilton — are able to do any extensive 

maintenance on the type of golf carts that are there at The 

Battlefords Provincial Park golf course. 

 

(1545) 

 

So I'd appreciate if you could tell us a little bit about the 

maintenance schedule — who's doing it at the current time, and 

who's paying for it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — In the lease document, I can tell the hon. 

member, daily maintenance of gas and oil is done by the lessees. 

And that's not new; that's been in previous lease agreements. The 

owner, however, agrees to be responsible for all repairs and 

overhaul costs for all of the golf carts covered by the agreement. 

That is the responsibility of the owner. The responsibility of the 

lessee, as has been the case in previous lease agreements, is the 

lessee just for gas and oil, that type of thing. 

 

And if you'd care for a copy of that particular agreement, I can 

have this one copied and sent to you. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What agreement are you referring to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — This is the lease agreement for golf cart 

operation. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I would appreciate that you would send 

that over to me. 

 

Now, from what I understand you saying, that a park employee . . . 

It has always been a sort of standard practice that a park — I'll just 

wait for a minute until you're done there, Mr. Minister — that it's 

always been standard fare that a park employee would put the gas 

in and check the oil daily on the golf carts. Is that accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, I'm advised that's accurate and has 

been the case in the past. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well then what is the daily maintenance 

schedule that Upshot performs that you found their bid so 

superior, in terms of maintenance, to that of Valley West Yamaha 

Sales Ltd.? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Upshot has assumed responsibility — and 

I don't check them on a daily basis — but they have assumed the 

responsibility to do checks themselves on anything major, and 

they are doing that. And I'm also advised that the maintenance this 

year has been better than ever before, with fewer problems on the 

carts. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Who is doing those checks for Upshot 

Enterprises? Upshot Enterprises themselves are doing those 

checks daily, or do they have someone at the park  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1915 

 

doing the checks on a daily basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — As in previous years, if a cart breaks down 

or any problem is detected, Upshot is informed and it's their 

responsibility to get it done as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — So then there is no daily maintenance schedule 

as you outlined in Hansard on July 23? In fact we should find the 

page here so we can be a little more accurate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on page 1342 of Hansard on July 23, I asked you if 

the only reasons were monetary reasons, as to why the contract 

was awarded to Upshot, and you said, and I quote, Mr. Chairman: 

 

Mr. Chairman, not only was it a superior bid in terms of 

economics, but the details were better as well — newer 

equipment, (which isn't true), and the maintenance schedule 

that Upshot offered was daily. The other proponent offered it 

weekly. All in all, it was a superior bid. The department 

advised to go with the best bid. We did. 

 

What is the daily maintenance schedule of two individuals who've 

had no previous track record in this type of business? What was 

the daily maintenance schedule that was better than someone who 

said they would do the maintenance weekly, and has been in the 

business for some period of time — are a sales agent for that 

particular type of equipment? Can you tell me what the daily 

maintenance schedule is, that you said was one of the reasons on 

which you awarded this contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, (1) the maintenance is 

better this year than it's ever been before; (2) there are fewer 

breakdowns this year than ever before; (3) they did supply newer 

equipment; (4) if they personally do the inspection every day, I'm 

not standing there in the park looking at them. All I know is, they 

are fulfilling their contract to the very letter of the contract. We 

have better service, a better agreement than we ever had before. 

That's the bottom line. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I suppose the . . . I'm not questioning whether or 

not the service, and the repair rate, and the performance of the 

carts is better than ever before, because the person who had the 

golf carts there before, the company, is no longer there. There 

were two companies that bid to put the golf carts in place for this 

golfing season, and I maintain to you that either one of them could 

have had as good a maintenance schedule and as good a record in 

terms of having the carts up and operating. So it's not a question as 

to Upshot being better than the year before. It's a question of 

fairness in the tendering practice whereby you say, Mr. Minister, 

that the maintenance schedule is one of the reasons for awarding 

the contract to Upshot. And you can't tell me what the daily 

maintenance is. 

 

I maintain to you again, Mr. Minister, two individuals from 

Upshot Enterprises, who said that they could do the maintenance 

daily, have no previous record. They do not have the expertise to 

do the maintenance and major repair themselves, as opposed to 

Valley West Yamaha  

Sales Limited, who, in fact, are in the business, do the work on a 

regular basis in a dealership that they have in the city of North 

Battleford. And it's not a question of whether it's better this year 

than last year, it's a question of fairness in the tendering process. 

 

Mr. Minister, what I would like from you is to go back to the 

whole bidding procedure, and fairness in tenders that are 

submitted to the province of Saskatchewan, in particular, in this 

case, to your department. I asked you on July 23 if you would 

table in this legislature the bid proposals that were put forward to 

the department by Upshot Enterprises and by Valley West 

Yamaha Sales Ltd. And at that time you said you would not do 

that. 

 

You maintained to me, Mr. Minister, on page 1342 of Hansard on 

July 23, that the department was going to go with the best bid. I'd 

first off like to know who in the department advised you to go 

with that bid. Secondly, Mr. Chairman, you say on page 1343 of 

Hansard on July 23: 

 

Mr. Chairman, all the information given has been completely 

accurate. 

 

And the first act you performed today, Mr. Minister, standing in 

this House, is to tell me that something you told me on July 23 

was in fact wrong. Now how do you expect us to believe that 

everything else that you've told us is absolutely true. Will you give 

to us in this House, table in the legislature, the proposals that were 

put forward by Valley West Yamaha Sales Ltd. and Upshot 

Enterprises in regard to their bid to supply the rental golf carts at 

The Battleford Provincial Park golf course. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Obviously, Mr. Chairman, there is no 

stone which this member will leave unturned to try and take cheap 

political shots at a former member of this Legislative Assembly. 

And that's the bottom line. The bid was better; we're getting 27.5 

per cent a gross instead of 25 per cent. We get a $10,000 

minimum guarantee. 

 

And I should point out, when he says Valley West had a track 

record, what track record? They never had a contract with 

anybody to do golf carts. So that's absolute nonsense. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — It's not nonsense. Valley West Yamaha Sales 

Ltd. are the dealer for Yamaha golf carts in the city of North 

Battleford. They have a track record in terms of knowledge of the 

equipment. They have knowledge of the servicing schedules and 

repair schedules of Yamaha golf carts and other golf carts. They 

have a physical shop. 

 

It's not necessarily a political shot. What I ask you, Mr. Minister, 

is instead of getting coaching from the member from Weyburn, 

the Minister of Education, maybe you could listen to what I'm 

asking you. What I asked you was: will you table in this 

legislature the bid documents that I have asked for repeatedly in 

this legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, once again, here we have a 

member standing up, saying that the only contracts that are ever 

done are done on the basis of politics. It's patently false. It's been 

shown that way before. We broke their precedent. We know how 

they  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1916 

 

awarded contracts, and we know you had to be a friend of that 

party if you wanted to business with that particular government. 

It's not our fault if in some cases the only bid that comes in, comes 

from a well-known Conservative. We're supposed to discriminate 

against that Conservative and say, hey, you're a Conservative; you 

can't do business with the government. That's nonsense. 

 

Mr. Chairman, all we have is a case of muck-raking for the sake of 

muck-raking. He has nothing upon which to base this. It's 

scurrilous. I just wish he'd make some of those kinds of remarks 

outside the Assembly to Mr. Morin and his solicitor. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I don't know how any one could interpret me 

asking for the tender documents the bid proposals were made, as 

being scandalous. I think that you have no credibility in this 

legislature, no credibility whatsoever. You misled this legislature 

on July 23, and you continued to mislead this legislature by giving 

a warped perspective of what's being asked of you. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you table in this legislature the bid proposals put 

forward by Upshot Enterprises and Valley West Yamaha Sales 

Ltd. in response to the rental of the golf carts at The Battlefords 

Provincial Park golf course? What are you trying to hide? Those 

are public documents. Put them forward in this legislature; let the 

public make the assessment whether you're providing political 

favouritism to your friends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, they are not public 

documents. I beg to advise the hon. member, and I've read the 

details into the record before. If he wants me to read them again, 

I'd be pleased to read them. 

 

During the years when those members, or some of them — there's 

a few survivors from the former cabinet who sat on this side of the 

House — they consistently refused to table documents; they said it 

would create a precedent. 

 

They had one minister who said it wasn't in the best interests of 

the public. I don't know what interpretation to put upon that 

particular remark. I would assume, I would assume he meant it 

could prejudice future bids, and he was just being upright, 

forthright, and honest. 

 

And I'm going to say the same thing. I don't intend to create the 

precedent by being the first to table the documents in the House. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — The documents are public documents. The 

minister has acknowledged previously that. In fact, the bid 

proposals were opened in public, therefore are public documents. 

 

What I ask the minister is: where are these documents now? 

Where are they physically kept? And I'm not talking about the 

contract; I'm talking about the bid proposals. Where are they 

physically kept? And where can an individual get access to sit 

down and look at those documents, which are public documents? 

 

And this legislature, and people in the province, have the  

right to public documents. What are you trying to hide by now 

sheltering those documents and not revealing them to the public of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the documents were 

opened in public; it was an open tender. He could have been there 

and take a look at them if he'd wanted to be there at the time. And 

given his enormous interest and his enormous dislike for the 

former member from North Battleford, I'm surprised he wasn't 

there at the opening when they were done in public. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I have no dislike for the former member 

from The Battlefords. What I have is a great dislike for the 

Progressive Conservative Party in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Could you tell me the . . . Mr. Chairman, could 

you keep the hon. minister quiet while I'm asking a question? I 

think that decorum in this legislature is very important. And if he 

can't hear the questions I'm asking, of course he can't respond 

accurately, because he can't hear the question. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Would you allow the member 

from Battlefords to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 

appreciate that. 

 

Could the minister tell me the legal procedure that a bid document 

would go through so that it's public up until the time that you 

examine it or your officials examine it, and all of a sudden it's no 

longer a public document. Would you describe that procedure to 

me, Mr. Minister? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I am advised that the documents are the 

property of the people who submit them. They're not our 

documents. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Is the minister saying that these documents are 

not public documents? You'll stand in this legislature today and 

say that bid documents are not public documents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe I've said that three times now, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me where these 

documents are located so a person can physically go there and 

examine these documents? Where are the bid documents stored? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Probably in the place of business of the 

proponents who put them in. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Are you saying now that you've destroyed the 

bid documents; you no longer have the bid documents? Is that 

what you're telling this legislature, Mr. Minister? 

 

Did the minister hear the question? 

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1917 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Are you telling me then that you do not have a 

copy, your department does not have a copy of those documents; 

you've destroyed them? Is that what you're telling me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We retain copies, Mr. Chairman. They are 

not public documents. They are the property of the people who 

submit them. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I find that very, very strange, Mr. Minister, 

that you can't tell me then, where those documents are located. 

Tell us physically where they're located within your department, 

tell us the physical location, and which public employee in the 

province is responsible for the safekeeping of those documents. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, what we are doing, what I 

have been doing, is simply standard practice. There's no precedent 

to do what the hon. member is asking for. If he'd like to see the 

original document, go and see Myles Morin or go and see Valley 

West and ask to see their documents. I'm sure they'd let you look 

at them. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Valley West has in fact shown me their 

documents. What we want to do is be able to make a comparison, 

because you already, as I've said previously, misled the House on 

July 23 in this legislature. And then, granted a credit to you, you 

corrected yourself today. 

 

But we no longer want to take your word or the word of any of the 

members opposite that what you say is factual and correct, 

because there are far too many examples of being misled. There 

are far too many examples of unfair tendering practices in the 

province of Saskatchewan, so that almost anyone who gets a 

contract with the government has to be a Progressive Conservative 

member. 

 

The Premier was saying the other day in the legislature that the 

memberships are going up and up. Well of course the 

memberships of the Conservatives should be going up and up, 

because nobody can deal with the government unless they have a 

Conservative membership. But I maintain to you that they'll drop 

very rapidly as soon as the next election's over, because people 

don't want anything to do with the Progressive Conservative Party 

in the province of Saskatchewan any longer. 

 

You've put great disregard for the public tendering process. You 

don't care about fairness of government any more in the treatment 

of Saskatchewan people. In fact, going back to the issue of 

Conservative memberships, there was a point in time where the 

undecided votes in the polls were much higher than the 

Conservative popularity in the polls in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the definition of an undecided voter was a 

Tory without a contract. 

 

An. Hon. Member: — What's this got to do with the estimates? 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, the member for Kelvington-Wadena asks 

what it has to do with the  

estimates. I'm sure that he realizes that the minister got into the 

whole issue of muck-raking and slamming different people 

because of political partisanship. All we're asking for, Mr. 

Chairman, to the minister, is to show us the documents that were 

public documents, and I still want the answer from him as how 

those public documents all of a sudden become secret and 

confidential documents. Tell me, that process, how that happens. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It's very simple, Mr. Chairman. It's a time 

honoured process. They followed it. I have been advised to follow 

the same process. Now I don't mind taking almost anything I have 

and saying, here, read it. I really don't care because I've got 

nothing to hide. What I'm told is that would be precedent. That is 

something that has never been done before in the House, and I 

don't intend to be the first minister to break with precedent. There's 

nothing here to hide. There's absolutely nothing that is not above 

board. Everything was done fairly. 

 

The documents were opened in public. I don't even see those. 

Officials analyse them and they send it down, and they say, here's 

your recommendation, here's your best bid — fine. And as for 

being a Progressive Conservative member to do business with the 

government, we do all kinds of contracts for anything from 

sewage cleaning to beach cleaning. I couldn't tell you how these 

people vote. And frankly, Mr. Chairman, I don't care how they 

vote. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, you likely will soon care how they vote. 

I'd like to go on to a bit of a different topic, Mr. Chairman, but it 

has to do still with the whole issue of parks. 

 

Could the . . . I'm sure the minister is very familiar — at least 

some of his staff will be — of the employees of The Battlefords 

Provincial Park. And can you confirm to me, Mr. Minister, that 

one spouse of Regan Hamilton, who is a principal in Upshot 

Enterprises, his spouse has just currently become an employee of 

The Battlefords Provincial Park golf course, in particular working 

in the clubhouse at the park? Could you confirm that for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe this question relates to a Shelley 

Hamilton. The vacancy filled by Shelley Hamilton is a seasonal 

sales and service attendant 1 labour service position, which is not 

and never has been part of the summer student employment 

program. At present, the department employs 147 similar seasonal 

labour service positions in Parks and Recreation sites throughout 

the province. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, whether it has been a summer 

position or not, I think that people find it very strange. The 

employees who are working at the park all of a sudden see this 

individual drive up one day with a Porsche, a nice, new Porsche 

driving into the parking lot with "Mrs. H" on the licence plate. 

Well that's certainly out of character for most of the people that 

work there. And in times of very high unemployment, in times of 

very high unemployment in some areas of the province, when 

summer students are looking for seasonal jobs to go back to 

school, it certainly irks individuals seeing someone drive in, no 

one knows if they are coming to work there, wondering who has 

the new Porsche with "Mrs. H" on  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1918 

 

the licence plate, in the staff parking lot. And all of a sudden this 

individual is working in there. 

 

I maintain likely to keep an eye on the business so that Mr. 

Hamilton, who also has "Mr. H" on his licence plate and drives 

another almost equally elaborate vehicle around the golf course, so 

that they can look very closely at taking over the bid proposal, so 

that they could have closer information than other people have, 

and again, an unfair tendering practice in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't believe 

anybody checks out the type of car in which a potential employee 

drives up looking for a job. I could point out to the hon. member it 

certainly didn't irk the first three people who were offered the job, 

who turned it down, and subsequently it was offered to Shelley 

Hamilton. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Was the position advertised, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — These are posted internally. The people 

who turned it down, probationary employees who had first crack 

at the job, and they all said no. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Oh, so it was advertised internally. Well if it was 

advertised internally, how did Mrs. H find out about the job and 

then have it offered to her, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, posted within the park is 

what I meant — internally around the park. Anybody had the 

opportunity to apply. Some people have more initiative than others 

and they do go out and they hunt for jobs and they look around. 

You know, in this party we don't have that kind of jealousy at 

success that the people opposite have, and we don't think profit is 

a dirty word, and we don't mind if somebody drives a nice car. We 

like success. And work, hard work, are not dirty four-letter words 

in our vocabulary like they appear to be in yours. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — But cheating and manipulation is, and it should 

be in your vocabulary as well. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, please. I think we are 

degenerating this discussion into something that we could do 

without so I'm going to caution all members to please watch their 

language and let's try to keep it as parliamentary as possible. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — As difficult as it may be, I do not believe what I 

said is unparliamentary. And I will, in fact, not do that again, but 

the temptation is very great, Mr. Chairman. But I'll try and stay 

from the temptation that's there. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many people applied for the job that Mrs. 

Hamilton received in The Battlefords Provincial Park golf course? 

And were the three people it was offered to, did they apply, or 

were they asked because they were employees of the provincial 

park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, this was posted completely 

in accordance with SGEU rules and run accordingly. 

Mr. Anguish: — With SGEU rules means it's advertised, it's 

posted internally, not around the park. So I want to know, first, 

how many current government employees applied for the job? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — All I can tell the hon. member was the 

rules were all followed. The first three people who were offered 

the job said no. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — How many people then . . . you said it was 

posted outside, around the park. Now I would have to assume that 

if you did offer it to any one that was an SGEU member, they 

didn't want the job. So I would then have to assume that you 

advertised it by posting it around the park, which is what you said, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

What paper was it advertised in, if any paper? How many people 

applied for the job? And what was the interview process that these 

applicants went through, and who was the person who made the 

selection? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have a specific 

answer for the hon. member's last question on the numbers. I've 

asked officials to see what they can find out about that. In the 

meantime, they said they would send over to you the procedures, 

the hiring practice. We do it in accordance with SGEU rules. This 

particular instance, it seems to be of some importance to you, so 

we'll be pleased to check the details and send it to you. I don't have 

the specific answer for you right now. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — It's not necessarily of great specific importance 

to me, it's of specific importance to the people of Saskatchewan, is 

the way you hire people and the way you award contracts in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And it seems — it seems, Mr. 

Minister, to be very unfair. That's why we want you to provide us 

with information such as positions advertised, how many people 

applied, whether or not the bid documents were comparable so 

that we can look at bid documents. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that we haven't asked anything 

unreasonable of you. You have accused us of many, many 

allegations, and I think that that's unfortunate. You degrade the 

level of debate here in this legislature, and all we're asking from 

you is very simple, basic information. 

 

(1615) 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you offered that job to three individuals — 

I'm sure your employees told you that, that are here with you this 

afternoon — they would also know who those three individuals 

are. Please tell us who the three individuals were who were offered 

the job and in fact turned it down? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, one of my officials 

has left the Assembly to phone back to the office to see if we can 

find that information today. We'll get all the details we can. As 

soon as we have details, I'll be pleased to furnish them for the 

members. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to ask a 

couple of questions of the minister and his staff, if possible, 

concerning bait stations with regards to  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1919 

 

water-fowl on their migratory paths. I'd like to know how much 

was spent last year in the province of Saskatchewan on the bait 

station program, and whether or not a similar amount will be spent 

this year, or as required? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I can advise the hon. 

member we spent $300,000 on bait stations. We spend on an "as 

needed" basis. But we expect to probably spend about the same 

amount this year. We think it will be as big a program as it has 

been in the past. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Could the minister and his staff give me the 

procedure on how the grain for the bait station is purchased, and 

who it's purchased from, and who is in charge of the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we buy the barley from 

local farmers when they have it available; if they don't have any 

available, we buy it from local elevators. And the program is 

administered by the wildlife branch within the department. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — I'd like to ask one further question with regards 

to trapping areas and bear hunting and guiding. And a couple of 

people in my area have trapping areas, and they have been 

concerned that people who are arranging bear hunts supersede 

their trap line rights and can come in at any time and go into that 

area and arrange hunting trips for bear hunters. They, themselves, 

would like that opportunity. Could you explain to me the policy 

with regards to bear hunting and guiding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, bear are regarded both as 

game and a fur-bearing animal, so they can be hunted within an 

area that is trapped, but only by the trapper who has access or 

rights to that area. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Minister, I've had a couple of reports from 

people who are on trap lines that, indeed, their areas have been 

invaded, if you would, by a couple of people who are setting up 

guiding expeditions. And if that's the case, am I to understand it's 

against policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I'm advised no one can trap in that area, 

but an outfitter can organize a hunt in that area. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, just a couple of 

questions. Mr. Minister, I don't know how long you've been in this 

province but that's . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Twenty-one years. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you. It's irrelevant to my question that I 

want to ask. Mr. Minister, this is the first year out of, I think, the 

last 20 or so, that I have not gone camping in our provincial parks 

due to some unforeseen circumstances over which I had no 

control. 

 

Mr. Minister, in Saskatchewan over the last 20 years, I think 

people right across Canada, right across Canada and from the 

United States, have always been very proud about our provincial 

and some of our regional parks. And I say that, Mr. Minister, with 

no hesitation whatsoever. We have always been very proud over 

our provincial parks. And I think we can still be very proud over 

our provincial parks today. 

But I am somewhat concerned, Mr. Minister, what has happened 

over the last four years or five years. And I hope you don't take 

that as a criticism, but I'm a little concerned of what's happening to 

the fees that we are charging, and the effects that this is having on 

our ordinary families who have maybe just an ordinary income 

and can simply not afford an extended vacation or a very 

expensive vacation and have stayed within the province and used 

our provincial parks for their vacations. 

 

I know when I was first married and wasn't making very much 

money, we were tenting, and we always used the provincial parks 

and found them as a very enjoyable place in which to spend two or 

three weeks of our vacation. 

 

I was listening to the open-line show on CFQC a few weeks ago. 

And you probably are familiar with the individual who hosts the 

open-line show, a guy by the name of Roy Norris. And Roy Norris 

was on the open-line show, thanking you, Mr. Minister, for an 

average increase of $38 per week for his family for the use of Pike 

Lake Provincial Park. 

 

He listed a number of things that he found had increased from last 

year. One of them was what I think he termed as a dramatic 

increase for the camping fees. And I think you must admit they 

were rather dramatic, from $7 to $12. Also he indicated that the 

park entrance fees had increased. 

 

One point, Mr. Minister, I really do want you to look into, and that 

is: at Pike Lake, my understanding is that there is a closed-in 

swimming pool now. And some of the mothers were complaining 

that if they wanted to take their children into the swimming pool, 

inside the building, the mothers would have to pay, even though 

they didn't go swimming, but went in there to supervise their 

children. And if that is true, I would really ask you to look into that 

and see if maybe that is something that we should correct so that 

people will not receive undue hardship. 

 

Could the minister first of all tell me: is it true that families will be 

experiencing about a $38 increase per week because of park 

increases, camping increases and other inside park increases? Is 

that about correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, in response to the hon. member, Mr. 

Chairman, I didn't hear the Roy Norris show, but I heard he made 

a mistake and said $138 instead of 38. But if his family were to be 

in an electrified site, they would be paying, as you'd correctly 

identified, $12 a night instead of 7. So that's be $5 a night 

difference times, if it was 7 nights — $35. 

 

I'd point out to the hon. member, it was the first increase in a 

number of years. And four years ago when it was increased, it was 

only increased by $1. In that time, in the number of years that have 

gone by, we have increased the number of electrified sites around 

the province. We've made, I think, some significant improvements 

to the parks. And I certainly am not trying to stand here and take 

the credit for it, but we have done things like swimming pools in 

the parks, and we have generally, I think, done a  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1920 

 

fairly good job of improving the services within the parks to folks. 

 

So yes, they did go up. They're not out of line with what is 

happening in other provinces. We're within a dollar or two either 

way for camping in most of the provinces, I believe. There may be 

one or two in the Maritimes I don't have information on, but I can 

look it up. 

 

The second part of your question related to swimming at Pike 

Lake. And yes, that was brought to me by one of our MLAs — a 

mother going in with three or four children and wanted to be there 

and supervise. We do provide qualified life-guards to supervise 

children within the pools, but I understand the emotional issue that 

some of the mothers presented, saying they would prefer to 

physically be with their kids, and they were not swimming. 

 

What I've advised the officials — and this was within the last two 

weeks — was that if the mothers were going to accompany the 

kids, but were not actually going in for the purpose of swimming, 

I don't see why we should charge them to be there. If the mothers 

want to get into the water, splash around and go swimming, then I 

think it's incumbent upon them to pay the fee like every other user. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I thank you very much for the 

answer. Mr. Minister, I want to very quickly turn to golf courses. 

Can you tell me where is the golf course at in Pike Lake Provincial 

Park? My understanding was that it was some private people were 

interested in building it. They had some meetings in Saskatoon. Is 

that still on . . . is there a possibility that that golf course may go 

ahead, or where are we at as far as that golf course is concerned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there was a group 

who were interested in doing something with the Pike Lake golf 

course. They were unable to come up with adequate financing, so 

it just didn't go ahead. And to this point in time, as far as we are 

aware, there is no private interest in the golf course. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, very quickly, is the government 

interested in putting up a golf course at Pike Lake? My 

understanding is that Saskatoon is very short of golf courses. A lot 

of people visit Pike Lake, not only on the weekends but during the 

week. I think it would be something that maybe the government 

wants to look at and see if it would be financially feasible for the 

government to put up a professional golf course. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Minister, while I'm at it, I want to switch to 

Diefenbaker Lake and just ask you, while you're answering the 

other question, to also tell me what progress are you making on 

the golf course at Diefenbaker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, if I may, I'll deal with the 

second half of the hon. member's question first because it's the one 

I've got on the top of my head. Eleven holes will be ready this year 

and playable this year. The other seven holes will be completed 

next year. We are currently in the business of looking for a 

proponent who will operate the golf course for us. 

As regards Pike Lake, yes, there is a land mass there. I'm aware 

that there've been several proposals, certainly since I became 

minister of this department. There've been two proposals that I can 

remember, of people who were interested in building a golf course 

in and around Saskatoon, and inadequate financing — it just fell 

apart. 

 

I suppose in the long run perhaps a government could look at 

doing something with Pike Lake. My own preference, I'll be 

honest with the hon. member, is if we were to do some 

development there, that we would lease it on a basis whereby we 

could recoup some of the cost. But it could lend itself readily to be 

a successful golf course if the money were available because there 

is a shortage of golfing space around Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, thank you again. Mr. Minister, 

would you mind telling me: over the years one of the things that I 

have regretted that we did not have in our provincial parks is 

tennis courts. They're not that expensive to build, and the upkeep 

isn't that great. Aren't we thinking at all of putting some tennis 

courts into, let's say, The Battleford Provincial Park (because that's 

the one I frequent the most), and it has a lovely golf course. And is 

there any possibility that you can, for the foreseeable future, put 

some tennis courts in our provincial parks and maybe upgrade the 

one that have at Greenwater? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the last upgrading of tennis 

courts were done in Moose Mountain within the last year. We 

have tennis courts at Buffalo Pound, Cypress Hills, Duck 

Mountain, Good Spirit Lake, Greenwater, Meadow Lake, Moose 

Mountain, and Pike Lake. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, the point that I wanted to make was 

that really the one at Greenwater leaves a lot to be desired. The 

quality of it is not very good unless it's been upgraded in the last 

year. It leaves a lot to be desired. And I just want to make a pitch 

for tennis courts. I just don't think that they're that expensive. They 

add a lot to a family with kids to have a way to entertain 

themselves in the parks. I will leave that, Mr. Minister. 

 

I want to very quickly ask you a question. I think we discussed this 

the other day. Could you make available to me the attendance 

record of the parks over the number of years which you might 

have — it doesn't have to be done today, but if you can send them 

to me, that would be fine — and up to the last month that you have 

for this year. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell me: Fisherman's Cove, at Greenwater 

Provincial Park — it's just outside the park — has your 

department had any discussion with Fisherman's Cove — that's the 

restaurant there — and/or have you had any investment in that 

restaurant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we have no investment in 

Fisherman's Cove. 

 

And you asked me informally the other day if I could find these 

numbers. I've got them for you from 1977 through 1986, and what 

I'll give you is — somewhere we've got here, I'll get it over to you 

later — the numbers, and I think we've got them for July of this 

year, and we won't have  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1921 

 

compiled the whole statistics until the middle of October, 

particularly for camping, and I'll certainly be prepared to send 

them to you as soon as I have those. In the meantime, if I send you 

over this, this will give you the last ten years. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate that, and as soon as you 

have the figures for this year, I would very much appreciate if you 

could send those to me so that I can make some comparisons. 

Thank you very kindly. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have one further question. Recently, as you know, 

there have been discussions going on in Waskesiu for further 

development. I know that this is federal; I certainly know that. 

Have you had any discussions at all with the chamber of 

commerce in Waskesiu who are pressing the federal government 

and the federal officials to try and make Waskesiu more inviting to 

the people of Saskatchewan and the rest of the Canadians? 

 

Waskesiu used to be a place where you were lucky if you could 

get in by Thursday. Now I'm told that you can almost get in at any 

time of the week, and there's no difficulties because the attendance 

is way down. Have you made any representation? Have you had 

any requests from the chambers to give them some support for 

upgrading of facilities in Waskesiu, and in including other 

facilities for families? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we haven't had formal 

requests from federal officials from Parks Canada and 

Environment Canada to assist them with upgrading within the 

park. I recognize some of the things you're saying, and I agree 

with you. There probably is room for some work to be done there, 

and some development that could be done. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, you misunderstood my question a 

little bit. I didn't expect that you would get representation from the 

federal officials. My question was did you get representation from 

the chamber of commerce? Because the federal officials don't 

want any development — that's the problem. Did you get 

representation from the chamber of commerce for you on their 

behalf to try and convince federal officials that something should 

be done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the chamber of commerce 

hasn't corresponded with me or with department officials. I believe 

they've had some contact with the Department of Urban Affairs, 

and they were looking to get out of the federal system, as I recall. 

But I wasn't advised of it formally by the Minister of Urban 

Affairs. I just read of it in the media. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister 

. . . A number of cottage owners on Lac La Ronge — and there 

something in the neighbourhood of 210 cottage owners on Lac La 

Ronge — have expressed to me the concern of the beaver 

population which seems to be increasing at an alarming rate. And 

the beaver are chopping down all the spruce trees, and a lot of the 

spruce trees in front of the cottage area. And of course, they only 

take the leaves and they leave everything there, and as well as a lot 

of the poplar trees. 

And I understand, because it's in a provincial park, they are unable 

to trap these animals or, you know, even to move them to another 

area. Could you give me an answer to that and how the problems 

might be handled in the future if there is a problem? 

 

I meant birch trees rather than spruce. They don't eat spruce. They 

love birch. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that if 

there is a problem with nuisance beaver in that area, we can 

address it. We can, in fact, bring in licensed trappers to do the 

trapping. We do have a nuisance beaver trap program. And just as 

an aside, and I know my colleague from Athabasca's aware of this, 

there's more beaver now than there was at the height of the fur 

trade. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I'd like to ask some 

questions to the minister regarding the archives. And I'd like you 

first of all, please, to give me your understanding of what the 

archives is. Can you describe it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

hon. member, I was going to look for the specific mandate and just 

read it to her. Perhaps I can just give you a little bit of background 

here. 

 

Some years ago I was minister of advanced education and 

manpower, and at that point responsibility for the archives fell 

under that department. Subsequent to the last election, we're 

looking at reorganizing and realigning departments, and we 

thought that the Archives Board themselves actually would feel 

more comfortable falling under Parks, Recreation and Culture, 

because we do have responsibilities for heritage, and naturally the 

Archives Board has a responsibility for heritage, and history, and 

collection of documents and other archival material, that do form 

part of a very impressive collection in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well, I'm glad that you were aware of the fact that 

it collects historical documents, Mr. Minister. The archives was 

established in 1945 under The Archives Act. And from its very 

beginning, the Archives Board was a joint undertaking of the 

government and the University of Saskatchewan, reflecting the 

importance of maintaining political neutrality by being partly 

controlled by the university, and academic respectability of the 

archives, which is a place for historical research. And as an 

integral research component of the university, it's very important 

that it was under the Department of Education, Department of 

Advanced Education. 

 

It's now been moved, as you've mentioned, to the Department of 

Parks, Recreation and Culture, a move which is not comfortable 

for the people in the archives community and people interested in 

historical research. In fact, they're very upset about the move out 

from the Department of Education. 

 

I'd like to ask you questions about the Archives Board, per se. 

There are two positions vacant on the Archives Board and have 

been for some time. I would like to know how long those positions 

have been vacant, and when are they  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1922 

 

going to be filled, and by whom? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in the discussions I 

had with members of the Archives Board and people connected to 

that particular aspect of the cultural and heritage community, they 

told me they thought the realignment made more sense to be with 

this department than with the Department of Education or 

Advanced Education. 

 

The representation on the board still consists of an appointee of the 

University of Saskatchewan; an appointee of the University of 

Regina; University of Regina's, Dr. Bernie Zagorin, who is the 

chairman of the board, Dr. Courtney from the U. of S. The other 

one appointment, by legislation, is the legislative librarian, Marian 

Powell. That's three of the positions. The fourth position is 

occupied by Ron Hewitt, clerk of the Executive Council, which 

was a position occupied at one time under the NDP 

administration, and that leaves one vacancy on the Archives 

Board, not two, as the hon. member suggested. The fifth position, 

at one time, was filled by the minister responsible for the Archives 

Board. And at one point I, myself, served on the Archives Board. 

Since assuming responsibility for the board under this particular 

portfolio, I have decided I don't want to be a member of the 

Archives Board. 

 

The chairman of the board met with me two weeks ago, 

approximately, and he suggested that they would like to have an 

MLA appointed to the board, and I was in the process of doing 

that. In fact, the gentleman that I had asked to serve on the board 

happens to be yourself, Mr. Chairman, who has a background and 

a degree in history and a strong interest in archives. 

 

I thought he'd make a very good representative. I found out that 

legislation would preclude him from taking that position for 

several reasons, so we are currently attempting to fill the position 

with a suitable candidate. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well it'll be interesting to hear if the people on the 

board really are happy with the move into Parks and Recreation 

and Culture. 

 

Do you think they're also happy with the fact that for the last four 

years the budget for the archives has been frozen at $852,910, and 

this year reduced by $212,910, to a figure of $640,000 — over a 

$200,000 cut? Are they happy with that? Why have you done that 

to the archives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the funding to the 

Archives Board has been comparable with other provinces. This 

year they experienced the same type of cut-back in line with trying 

to tighten our belts and show some fiscal responsibility that other 

agencies and government departments experience. 

 

In my discussion with the chairman of the board, he indicated that 

they recognize the difficult fiscal situation facing all of us within 

the province. And he also indicated to me the board would be 

determined to do their part. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Chairperson, this government, this PC 

government, is continuing to drag us down to what other 

provinces have, instead of supporting the very creative  

and innovative programs that we've established in Saskatchewan 

that are different and better than other provinces have. 

 

Certainly the development of the archives since 1945 has been one 

of those programs. Let me quote the Dominion Archivist, Sir 

Arthur Doughty, from a long time ago, said: 

 

Of all national assets, archives are the most precious. They are 

the gift of one generation to another, and the extent of our care 

of them marks the extent of our civilization. 

 

It seems that we're going downhill. Mr. Minister, there are several 

positions vacant on the staff of the archives. There's been no 

Provincial Archivist appointed. There's an Acting Provincial 

Archivist. There's no associate Provincial Archivist. Those 

positions have been vacant for a full year and there's been no 

government action to fill these central leadership positions. 

Currently as I understand it, the staffing at the archives has 

dropped below the 1980 level. Can you tell me how many 

permanent positions you now have in the archives, and how many 

there were in 1980? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I would point out to the hon. member, 

that's a decision for the board. They are an autonomous board to 

determine staffing levels. I don't have the staffing level for 1980. I 

can probably find it for 1987, and as soon as I do, I can provide it 

to the hon. member. I don't think I'll be providing the information 

today, however, because we don't have the staffing levels for 1980 

here. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I would like to be provided with those staffing 

levels — the number of permanent positions that now exist in the 

archives and the number of temporary or special employment 

positions that now exist, and what they were in 1980. And I would 

look forward to getting that information. 

 

I don't know when you filled the vacancy on the Archives Board 

so that now there's just one position vacant. My understanding as 

of July 24. 1987 was that the Acting Provincial Archivist was on 

the board, the legislative librarian, the head of the history 

department at the University of Regina, and a member of the 

history department at the University of Saskatchewan, and that 

there were two vacant positions. 

 

It means that the board has been operating with less staff, less 

board complement, and probably decisions have been more 

difficult by a $200,000 cut in the budget. But definitely, they have 

to get the staffing of the archives up to a better level because 

they're very overworked right now and the archives are falling into 

great disrepair. 

 

I want to ask you some questions now about the space that the 

archives . . . that they fill. I would like to know under the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation how much 

money is available for the renting of a privately owned space now 

occupied by the archives? How much money of the $11 million in 

this  

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1923 

 

payment represents rent for the archives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, that would be a decision 

for the board to decide, how much money they want to spend on 

renting space. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Chairperson, when this budget is drawn up by 

the government, surely they know — when they estimate $11 

million-plus, under the payments to the property management 

corporation — how much of that approximately is rent for the 

archives. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe the hon. member is looking at a 

line in the blue book from property management Crown to our 

department to cover all of our space activities, and the rent that 

would accrue to us thereby. A decision by the Archives Board is 

theirs entirely — where they will rent and how much they will pay 

for it out of their grant. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Are you telling me that the total amount of money 

that the archives rents for space is coming out of that $640,000 

that you have given them for the money for the Archives Board? 

That includes the rent of space? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Then my question still remains. I would like to 

know the breakdown of this payment to the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. How much of that is given to 

the Archives Board to pay their rent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, it may show in our gross 

figures somewhere, but I believe the hon. member is going to have 

to address that question to the minister responsible for the property 

management corporation because they are paying rents, and they 

are assessing on buildings. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Do you mean to say then that when we vote on 

subvote 21 under your department, payments . . . subvote 57, 

excuse me — subvote 57, payments to the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation, that we have no right to question you 

when it's under your department, as to the amounts of money that 

are under that item? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, questions on rental 

charges to Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation by 

facility will come from them. It doesn't come from us. We've got a 

global figure for rent. I'd point out to the hon. member, if you take 

a look at that subvote, we have offices all over the province. We 

have conservation offices staged all across the North, across the 

South, we have regional offices, zone offices. We have a whole 

host of facilities. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I'm aware that you have a whole host of facilities. I 

would have thought you would know how much you were paying 

for rent for some of them so that you could give us that 

information now. But it's your understanding then, it's your 

commitment that we will get that information when the property 

management corporation is discussed. Does that come up in the 

House or is that in the Crown Corporations Committee that we  

discuss that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I do believe that's Crown corporations. 

 

Ms. Smart: — So it won't come up here for public discussion. 

Can you tell me who owns the building? This is not a decision of 

the Crown management corporation. It should be information that 

you would have. Who owns the building that the archives is in at 

the moment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that the rent 

would be paid by us. It's managed by property management 

Crown corporation, and questions relative to space should be 

addressed to them. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, are you aware that Coopers & 

Lybrand report on the archives recommended increased efficiency 

of government management of records? Are you aware of that 

report? Are you aware of their emphasis on long-term planning 

that was badly needed for the archives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I'm aware of a Coopers & 

Lybrand report relative to my department and organization of the 

department. I'm certainly not aware of that particular suggestion 

that was just made. 

 

Ms. Smart: — One of the suggestions they made was that there 

was great need for increased efficiency of government 

management of records. And there have been complaints from 

depositors, from people who've put their material into the archives, 

that the records they've given to the archives have not been 

processed properly. 

 

It's my understanding that the archives, because they're so 

short-staffed, and now they're being cut back more and more with 

the money that they have, are getting further and further behind in 

processing our records. And if this happens, and the records are 

not able to be conserved properly, we're going to lose about a 

decade of history in this province. And it's your responsibility to 

see that this does not happen. These records are very valuable. 

 

I would like to ask you if you're aware whether the PC cabinet 

ministers and other PC government people have been depositing 

their records in the archives. Have you been doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I personally haven't yet, 

and I'm not aware of what other ministers or people within 

government have been doing. I haven't been requested to submit 

anything to archives. I'm aware of the rules. I discussed them with 

the chairman some time ago about why ministers would want to 

put records in and for how long they are not available to the 

public. 

 

Having toured the archives a few times, I've seen boxes of 

documents from former premiers, some of which are not yet 

available to the public. There's a certain number of years where 

they lie in limbo before they're made accessible to the public. I 

don't know who has submitted anything so far. 

  



 

August 19, 1987 

 

1924 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, as part of The Archives Act, it's the 

responsibility of government departments to have the archivist 

come in and look at the documents so that they can be preserved. 

It's shocking for me to hear you say that you don't know what the 

government's been doing with their records since 1982. It's very 

important that the Provincial Archivist be involved in looking at 

those documents and making sure that they're preserved. That's in 

the Act, so that needs to be done. 

 

One other thing that I would like to just comment on briefly is that 

the publication of the Saskatchewan History magazine has been 

stopped as a result of these cut-backs. It's no longer being 

published. So we have a cut-back in staff; we have a cut-back in 

budget; we have a board that's not been appointed properly; we 

have the Archives Board taken away from the university so the 

archives are not a research component of the university any more. 

 

There's just a tremendous attack on these historical records by this 

government opposite, and it's a real shame. It's a loss of a decade 

of history. And I say the history of this province deserves a much 

higher priority from this government. You should fill those vacant 

staff positions as quickly as you can. The Archives Board should 

be receiving a budget of at least $900,000 at this point in time. 

Freezing the budget for four years and cutting it back by $200,000 

is not good enough — not good enough at all. And I'm sure that 

the Archives Board are not happy about that. 

 

And finally, the Archives Board should continue to be under the 

Department of Education, not put under Parks, Recreation and 

Culture. The archives are a resource for the university for 

academic research. They're very important for the future as well as 

the past. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member has 

been reading from a prepared text and rattling on with some tirade 

about making stuff available and accessible. I'm advised 

departments do regularly ship stuff over. I personally haven't been 

requested. I didn't know I was supposed to be shipping things on a 

daily or on a weekly basis, or the archivists were supposed to be 

tripping through my office looking at things. If the archivists are 

interested in coming and looking at documents of mine, they can 

come and look at them. 

 

The hon. member was going on about taking away the archives 

from the universities. I seem to remember the university thinking 

they could use the space themselves and saying they would like to 

see the archives moved out into another space. I don't know where 

you get your ideas from that this is somehow very unpopular with 

the universities, or that it is in fact some research arm for the 

University of Regina or the University of Saskatchewan. They do 

have representation on the board. 

 

The representatives they have seem to be quite happy with the 

board. They seem to be quite happy with the operations. Certainly 

they would like more money; everybody would like more money, 

Mr. Chairman. The fact of the matter, there isn't an awful lot of 

money to put into their operation. They have assured me that they 

can operate within the budget they have and they can  

continue to do a good job for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Chairman, and to the minister, it's almost 

the normal time of adjournment, and you gave me your 

undertaking a little earlier in this committee to gather some 

information concerning hiring procedures and individuals that 

were hired. And I'm wondering if you in fact have that information 

at this point in time, since you mentioned one of your officials 

was, I think, in your words, running to the telephone to determine 

whether or not you could get the information here today before 5. 

I'm wondering if you do have that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the official has returned. 

He called the department and he asked them to look up the 

information and put it together. We don't have it here yet. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


