


















































July 13, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 13, 1987 
 

 
1135 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wanted to direct your 
attention to the question of the Emergency Measures 
Organization. I’m wondering what is going on with this particular 
department with this particular branch. I refer, Mr. Minister, to 
the estimates for ‘86-87. In that year, which I gather was the year 
that the EMO was transferred from the Department of Labour, the 
spending tripled. You went from three employees to five 
employees and from $100,000 to an expenditure of $350,000. 
This year, Mr. Minister, in this year’s estimates, the toboggan is 
headed back down the hill, and you’re cutting your staff from five 
to three but not your expenditures, though. Your expenditures are 
actually going up. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d give me some indication of what 
you think you’re doing with this agency which, while admittedly 
not always high profile, is vital to the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There’s actually been no cut in the staff 
there, but it is a bit confusing the way it’s worded. There are two 
staff members who work under contract; they’re not directly 
salaried. They’re under contract, and the reason for that is 
because we can charge the cost back to the federal government 
through the JEPP (joint emergency planning program) program. 
It’s the joint emergency program. When they’re under contract, 
we charge their costs directly back to the federal program, and we 
really are covering it with exactly the same staff contingency that 
we were before. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Who are those individuals who are under 
contract, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The two who are under contract are 
MacMillan and Woltman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Can I have their full names, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’re having a bit of difficulty. The director 
of that division is away, so I haven’t got them here. I could bring 
a man in tomorrow, but I don’t have . . . or Wednesday, rather. I 
don’t have one here tonight. I think it’s John Woltman, and I’m 
not sure whether it’s John MacMillan or not. Could be. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How long have these individuals been 
employed by or associated with the EMO (Emergency Measures 
Organization)? Do you know that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe they were employed at the time that 
the JEPP program came into being, in about February of ‘85. 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, would you be prepared to give 
us a contract which they’ve signed? Contracts by this 
government, Mr. Minister, have been a subject of very 
considerable abuse. Contracts have been entered into for fixed 
terms, extending beyond the normal term that one would be 
employed. Some of the contracts have been entered into at 
excessive rates of pay. And I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, if you’d 
give us the contract. We wanted to delete a portion of it, I 
suppose, but I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d give us the actual 
contract. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Generally you don’t give personal service 
contracts out, so I’ll give you the amount of money involved in 
the two contracts. There are two people, and the total of the two 
contracts is $55,200. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That doesn’t tell me an enormous amount, 
Mr. Minister. Is that for an hour’s work, or two hours, one month, 
one year? What do they do for the $55,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There are two employees and they’re 
full-time employees. They work full time. They were on staff, 
and then they were put on contract in order to meet the 
requirements of the JEPP program so that we could charge it back 
to the federal government. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay, I would appreciate it if you would 
forward their names, then, and at least their job description if you 
won’t give me a copy of the contract. 
 
Mr. Minister, the item “other expenses” has gone up by some 21 
per cent, 22 per cent. Perhaps, Mr. Minister, you could indicate 
what that is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s strictly because of the contracts. 
There are 55,200 was transferred out of salaries into other 
expenses, and then that whole amount is recoverable from the 
JEPP program. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, moving on to subvote 6. I 
heard an exchange between yourself and the member from 
Regina North East with respect to the payments to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. Your 
response, I think, could be fairly characterized by saying you’ve 
no notion what the 970, $985,700 is for and you’re just taking it 
on good faith that you won’t be overcharged. Mr. Minister, you 
may have complete faith in the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation; I can tell you there’s a number of 
members of the public that have . . . stop a little short of that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it’s essential that ministers come to the 
legislature prepared to answer questions — legitimate questions 
— on each subvote. This, Mr. Minister, has been a ripe — I was 
going to say prime;; I think ripe is a better term — a ripe area of 
patronage in the past. If there’s one area, I think, where we would 
not be prepared to trust this government or any other, it’s with 
respect to leasing of property and the purchasing of property and 
the provision of supplies and personal property. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, it’s just simply not satisfactory to say, 
gosh, I don’t know, I know it’s a million bucks but I just haven’t 
any idea what it’s going for. Mr. Minister,  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1136 

 

that’s just not a satisfactory approach. And I think, Mr. Minister, 
you’re under an obligation to give this legislature and the people 
of Saskatchewan an accounting of a million dollars. You may 
believe with C.D. Howe, “What’s a million?” 
 
Some of the agencies who have had their funding cut with 30 or 
$40,000 cut out of their budget and thereby effectively been very 
impaired, I think, would look kindly on a million dollars. So I 
think, Mr. Minister, you’ve got to give us an accounting of what 
this is for. We have got to have, I think, some detail about the 
breakdown of that, the same detail that the members would get if 
the Saskatchewan property development corporation were before 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I’m not quite as rich as C.D. Howe, and 
I haven’t come to the point where a million dollars is nothing. It’s 
a lot of money in my business. 
 
So the figures that I gave to you before are the proper figures. I 
told you that the office space rental $860,800; mail and postage, 
$124,900 — that’s the two figures, and that comes to $985,700. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well that’s . . . I’m just smothered in detail. I 
want to tell you, I don’t know how anyone could handle such an 
enormous mass of detail. For a million bucks, I get about 30 
words. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d hoped for frankly something a bit more than 
that. I’d hoped you might give us an accounting of $985,700, and 
a comment that $124,000 is spent on postage and messenger, and 
$860,000 relates to the property — frankly, just is not 
satisfactory. Mr. Minister, I would ask you if you would give us 
an accounting of what services you’re being provided, what space 
you’re being provided for this sum of money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the member has his pen handy, we lease 
space in Estevan, in Derrick Plaza and Downtown Plaza; in 
Humboldt, in the graphic arts building on the first floor; in 
Kindersley, the Wellbelove Building on the first floor; in 
Melville, the provincial office building, first floor, Moose Jaw, 
the W.G. Davies building, second floor; North Battleford, Kramer 
Place, first floor and second floor; Prince Albert, the MacIntosh 
Mall, the lower one and on the 12th floor; in Regina, the Palliser 
Square on the second floor, Saskatchewan Place on the fifth floor, 
and the Walter Scott Building, the lower one, first floor and 
second floor; in Saskatoon, in Circle 8 Building on the second 
floor; the E.I. Wood Building in Swift Current, second floor and 
fifth floor; and in Tisdale, the Provincial Office Building, second 
floor; Watrous, the Water Supply Building, first floor, and in 
Yorkton, the Kuziak Building, second floor. So that would cover 
the space locations that we lease. The figure that I gave to you 
was the cost of leasing that space. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Does that not include the provision of 
supplies as well? Does that not include the provision of personal 
property, everything from pencils to typewriters, as well, that 
figure? Or does that come under the general heading of postage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It includes the operating and  

maintenance charges, the cost of telephones, the mail and the 
postage costs that I gave you the other day, and the purchase of 
furniture. I gave all those figures before. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, could you give me a written 
breakdown of this? You were reading it. Could you give me a 
written breakdown? Could you give me a copy of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I could give you a copy of the same listing. I 
can’t give you the paper I was reading from. I could give you a 
listing of those names, but they’ll be in Hansard tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What is it on the paper that you were reading 
that you don’t want to make public, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Now that would be really telling you 
something, and I’m afraid I’m not prepared to give you that 
information. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it would be a good deal better 
if there were a minister here able to answer for the governments 
expenditures, which are very considerable on personal and real 
property. You people made the decision that you wanted to at 
least to attempt to avoid that kind of scrutiny. You didn’t want to 
put a minister up who would have to answer for this governments 
expenditures on real and personal property. 
 
Mr. Minister, Therefore we have no option but to go through this 
individually with each of the ministers and get it from you. And I 
therefore ask you, Mr. Minister, for a breakdown of how the 
985,700 was made up — and I do not regard two figures as an 
adequate breakdown nor would, I think, any fair minded person. 
You owe us some detail, at least as much as it’s going to appear 
in the public accounts next year. You owe us at least that much 
detail on how this million dollars is being spent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I gave the information before that the former 
Supply and Services department looked at the amount of money 
that was being paid in rent for this space that we are now 
utilizing, and the figure that they gave us for the existing office 
space — and we’re not adding any — was exactly the figure I 
gave you, and that’s for rent on the space that I gave you, is 
$860,000. Now that’s the biggest part of that overall cost. The 
other one is mail and postage and the small amount of 
furnishings. And we don’t expect to buy that much furniture this 
year. Our department is some smaller. We don’t see the need of 
buying a lot of furniture. Everybody has the furniture they need. 
So that’s basically the figures that you will see. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if I was satisfied with two 
figures that go into making up a million dollars, it doesn’t add up 
to $985,700. The very least you owe us is a set of figures which 
add up to $985,700. And the two figures you get, which I copied 
down at $868,000 and $124,000, don’t add up. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d ask you to give us a breakdown of that. Give us 
the breakdown for leasing of real space, leasing of real property, 
expenditures on postage, if you like,  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1137 

 

telephone, and expenditures on supplies, and furniture, and 
personal property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The figures I gave you add up to exactly 
$985,700. That’s what’s in the blue book; that’s exactly what 
those two figures add up to. So I don’t know what your 
mathematics is doing to you, but try it again — $860,800 and 
$124,900, and if you add it up, it’s $985,700. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. In that case, Mr. Minister, I had not 
copied them down correctly. 
 
Mr. Minister, this could be avoided if you’d give us the figures in 
writing instead of playing cat and mouse, as you’re doing tonight. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have gone through a dozen estimates. You always 
get these figures in writing; we always have until this year. Now 
you don’t. Now you don’t have a minister, so now we’ve got to 
try and pull teeth, Mr. Minister. If you’d give us this breakdown 
in writing, which we have always gotten in the past with respect 
to Department of Supply and Services, we could bring this silly 
charade to an end. But if you insist, Mr. Minister, we’ll got 
through it and get it broken down however long it may take us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the figures that I gave you are in the 
blue book; the $985,700. I listed all the areas that we had space 
leased in. Mail and passages is very difficult to break down 
because it’s an estimate. The only way I could break that down 
would be to tell you how many letters I write, and that will come 
at the end of the year, not at the first of the year. This is strictly an 
estimate of the costs of those areas. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What, Mr. Minister, is the estimate of the 
amount that will be spent on furniture, then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That was not broken out by Supply and 
Services when the figure was given. It would be the amount that 
was spent last year, I would estimate, but I haven’t got a figure on 
it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I am frankly concerned about 
the lack of accountability and the lack of control over these 
expenditures. Given the track record of this government and the 
sloppy management which this government has honed to a fine 
art since its election, I think anyone would be concerned about 
the manner in which you people control expenses. 
 
Mr. Minister, how was the figure of 975,000 arrived at? Was that 
the figure you got on a memo from the corporation? Is it 
according to some sort of a formula, or how did you arrive at the 
figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to you earlier that the Department 
of Supply and Services added up the cost of all of the rent for the 
space that we now occupy. They added up the cost of the 
furnishings that we purchased last year, and the cost of our mail, 
postage, and telephone, and these are the figures they gave us 
from last year’s costs. 
 
As you realize, when Supply and Services looked after  

space, that figure was never provided to a department. So the 
figure I’m giving you is more information that has ever been 
given before by a department. You might have gotten it out of 
Supply and Services, but you certainly didn’t get it from a 
department’s blue book; it was never charged before. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, we certainly didn’t, but there was no 
need to. In any other year, Mr. Minister, the estimates of the 
Department of Supply and Services were before the legislature; 
now they’re not. What we have is 20 or 30 of these subvotes with 
the expenditures in it, and so we have to put it together. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is true that they haven’t given us the amount that 
they pay. In past years they have refrained from giving us the 
square footage rental on private leases. We have, however, Mr. 
Minister, got complete detail about the amount of space actually 
occupied and actually rented. Indeed, it has traditionally come in 
the form of a computer print-out which is fairly thick. That has 
given the opposition and the legislature complete detail with 
respect to the amount of space that you’re leasing. 
 
Now you won’t give me that. I’m not sure why you think that’s 
such a dark secret, but you won’t give it to me. It must have been 
on the document you were reading. I suspect that came out of 
your briefing book, and I suspect the square footage and the other 
detail with respect to the leased space is on the document you 
were reading. But for some reason which I cannot fathom, you’ve 
decided that that is not in the public interest that that should be 
known. 
 
If you wanted to maintain confidentiality with respect to space 
that’s leased, there’s some precedent for that, but the only thing 
that has not been disclosed in previous year is the amount of 
rental per square foot paid for private leased space. Everything 
else has been given to us in exhaustive detail, Mr. Minister, that’s 
what I’d like from you is the detail of what this is being spent on, 
the square footage, etc. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, what we’re getting for our million 
dollars. If you and the House Leader want to get together and 
devise a better way of doing this, that is right as rain with us, but 
at the moment all we can do is get this detail from each individual 
minister. So I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, to come clean. give us 
a reasonable accounting where the million dollars came from, or 
where the million dollars is going, rather. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well I think I gave you a pretty reasonable 
accounting when I gave you the locations of the office space, the 
amount of money being spent for office space, and the amount for 
other items like telephone and postage. I think that does cover it 
all. 
 
Now I’m not going to be able to break it down and tell you what 
every one of $985,000 are doing, but I think traditionally if you 
say rent, and it’s covering the rent of the office space, and I gave 
you the locations of that space. I don’t see where you can fault 
me on that kind of detail. And I’ve given you the exact figures of 
what we intend, in a budgetary way, to spend this year. If we can  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1138 

 

cut back somewhere in the amount of space we need, fine, then 
there would be less cost. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if you could have cut back in 
terms of your own personal staffs, that might have made some 
sense, but you didn’t do that. Let’s not get into where you could 
have cut back. There’s a number of places we would like to have 
seen you cut back other than the places you did. 
 
Mr. Minister, am I correct that this figure also includes supplies 
purchased by the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation and you were charged your share of the supplies 
purchased by . . . what I suppose would now be the purchasing 
agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ve advised that the only kind of supplies 
that would be in there would be maintenance, and that’s covered. 
Like the maintenance of the space is covered under the contract, 
so we wouldn’t have a break out of an individual cost for the 
cleaning supplies or something like that. But if you’re speaking of 
supplies like stationery and pencils and typewriters and things, 
no. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Where does paper, pencils, and typewrites 
come . . .Typewriters, I think, is in the furniture thing. Where do 
pencils and paper come from? Where does the department get 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That kind of supplies, I’m advised, would 
come out of the administration budget. And, yes, I went one too 
far when I said typewriters; they would be included in that figure 
if we had to buy a typewriter because all furnishings are covered. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s my understanding, Mr. Minister, that 
supplies were purchased formerly by Supply and Services and 
was then made available to the departments as they needed it. Are 
you telling me that you are now going out into the market and 
purchasing your own supplies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Supplies are purchased by the purchasing 
agency. We requisition from that agency, but they’re charged out 
to us, and it goes through the administration budget within the 
department. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is the purchasing agency not in the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, or is that 
somewhere else now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, it will be in the property management 
corporation, but it isn’t part of this kind of figure. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Good. How much under administration do 
you spend on supplies then? 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m frankly surprised to hear that answer. I would 
have thought that the $975,000 included everything that you 
owed to the property management corporation. I’m surprised to 
hear that you’re making payments to them under the 
administration, and you have a separate subvote wherein you 
charge yet two additional items — two such disparate items as 
telephones and leased space. 

I would have that the $975,000 would have included everything 
that you paid to Supply and Services for all the real and personal 
property which you got from them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me read to the hon. member two 
paragraphs from this document. 
 

The accommodation service provided include items such as the 
rent, operating and maintenance charges, office furniture 
rental, space improvements, program equipment in major 
facilities and any taxes associated with the properties. 
 
Departments can provide a complete list of facilities. 

 
And so on. And then it goes on in the bottom of there . . . No, 
that’s the only area. It says it includes the square footage for 
office space, warehouse, special purpose facilities, that sort of 
thing. That’s the only areas. 
 
You asked me about the total cost of supplies. Last year it was 
$18,000, and that’s the estimate for this year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And that’s a separate payment which you 
make to the property management corporation that’s not included 
in subvote 6. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that will go back to the property 
management corporation in one payment, or in a group of 
payments, I should say. But whenever we order supplies, we buy 
from there and they pay there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All right. How much do you estimate you’ll 
spend this year then? I heard how much you’d spent last year. 
How much do you estimate you’ll spend this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I told you our estimate was 18,000. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Are there any other items which you’ve got 
squirreled away somewhere, Mr. Minister, that you’re paying to 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, or is this 
the complete list now? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m afraid our department doesn’t have any 
squirrels, so we just have everything out in the open. And the 
subvote that I gave you of 985,700 is quite an open subvote. It 
shows what it’s for. 
 
And the 18,000 for supplies . . . I guess every department has 
always had supplies. I understand the process that’s used now is 
the same process that has been used over a long period of time. 
The difference is that now it’s called the property management 
corporation; before it was called Supply and Services. So there’s 
no major change, really. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m delighted to hear you’re 
running an open government. You’ll then be prepared to give me 
a copy of the document you just read  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1139 

 

from which set out your arrangements with the Saskatchewan 
property corporation. I assume you’ll make a photocopy of that 
available to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Members should never make assumptions. I 
gave you the information that I can give you from that document. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Why, Mr. Minister, can you not tell us what 
your arrangement with the Saskatchewan . . . Why can you not 
give us a copy of that document which clearly spells out your 
arrangement with the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation? I would think that would be clarified. I would also 
think it’s information that this Legislative Assembly’s entitled to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s an inside working document of the 
department, and no, it’s not the kind of information that you 
normally releases and that the legislature is entitled to. It’s a 
working document that my department has. It, in the past, would 
not have been tabled and tonight will not be tabled. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the past there was no 
such thing. This is a brand-new arrangement. You clearly have 
reduced your arrangement with the property management 
corporation to writing. You just finished reading from it. I’d ask 
you, Mr. Minister, to make a copy of it available to us. Surely 
that’s a minimum that we should be entitled to. We should know 
what your arrangements with the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation is. I ask you to make a copy available 
to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I answered the question. I advised the 
member that no, that was an inside working document of the 
department and will not be provided. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What is it about that document, Mr. 
Minister, you don’t want to make public? What is it that you’re 
ashamed of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not ashamed of anything. It’s one of the 
working documents, and there are many of them that we do no 
provide. It’s an ongoing working document, and we’ll keep it to 
work within the department. It’s always been done and it will 
continue to be done. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s not always been done. That is the first 
time this matter has arisen in Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, will 
you at least have the courtesy to tell us why we can’t see it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s very simply, because I won’t give it 
to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, your arrogance may amuse your 
back-benchers, Mr. Minister. I doubt that that’s going to amuse 
the public of Saskatchewan. It certainly doesn’t amuse me. 
 
Mr. Minister, if there’s a reason why the public shouldn’t be 
burdened with this document, then that’s fine. But if there isn’t 
any reason for it, then, Mr. Minister, we should have a copy of it. 
It is important information that goes to  

our ability to make this government accountable to the public for 
the very considerable amounts of money they spend. 
 
So if you’ve got a reason, Mr. Minister, give it to us. If you don’t 
have a reason why the document shouldn’t be disclosed, give us 
the document. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member is speculating on what’s in the 
document, and I’ve advised you that it’s an inside working 
document of the department. There are many of those inside 
working documents that are not meant for public consumption. 
And this one is not, and I’m not prepared to go further than to 
give you the information I gave you. I think I’ve given you the 
background information that’s pertinent to these estimates, and 
I’m going to leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this government has a history 
of going out of its way to avoid accountability. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll just . . . We won’t go beyond a year ago. Mr. 
Minister, the session was started in June in the hopes that no one 
would say attention to your misdeeds. I think the polls suggest 
that perhaps some have, notwithstanding the timing when the 
session started. 
 
Mr. Minister, the conversion of the Department of Supply and 
Services to a Crown corporation has a number of major 
ramifications, one of which is it’s much more difficult for the 
public to find out what’s going on when it’s a Crown corporation. 
There are simply not adequate mechanisms established to provide 
full accountability. 
 
This is not a Crown corporation, Mr. Minister, which competes 
with any other. It performs all of the functions of a line 
department, and everything it spends is collected in taxes. There’s 
nothing about this department which requires it to be a Crown 
corporation, and the benefits of it are not too obvious. One of the 
benefits to the government is obvious, and that is it’s very 
difficult to find out what you’re doing with an area in the past 
which has been a notorious source of patronage — the purchasing 
of supplies and the leasing of space. 
 
Mr. Minister, we didn’t ask you for a lot of detail; we simply 
asked you what your arrangements are with the Crown 
corporation. And that surely is not too much to ask you. You read 
it from a document — No, you didn’t. You didn’t give us any 
detail. You gave us a lot of silly blather about how you got a 
memo from them, and that’s what they thought it was, so that’s 
what you paid. Clearly that’s not the situation, Mr. Minister. 
Clearly you have reduced your relationship with the Crown 
corporation to fairly specific terms — you read from it. 
 
Now do you not have the courtesy, having read from a document, 
to table it? If there is a reason, Mr. Minister, why you can’t give it 
to us, tell us that Give us the reason. If there isn’t a reason, then 
carry out your responsibility to this legislature and give us the 
document. But you owe us either the document or a reason why 
you can’t give it to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, the member made quite a speech about 
Crown corporations, and I guess maybe I  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1140 

 

finally found the reason why, when you were government, you 
established so many Crown corporations. But unfortunately, since 
we’ve been government, Crown corporations are not a place to 
hide things. 
 
Our Crown corporation are available to you for review, and every 
item within the Crown corporations can be reviewed during the 
course of the Crown Corporations Committee review of this kind 
of an item. So the member hasn’t really much fact when he says 
that we’re hiding; we’re not. The whole thing will be open the 
same as it’s been open before. And when you were here the 
Crown Corporations Committee was called, and we all had a 
chance to question it. When we’re on this side of the House, the 
Crown Corporations Committee will be called, and you’ll have 
the opportunity to question it. 
 
So the member can’t stand behind that one and say that we’re 
hiding anything. It’s wide open. It’s operating the same now as it 
did when you were here, only it’s a different Crown corporation. 
 
I indicated to you that the document that I read from is an internal 
working document of the department. It’s not intended for public 
release. 
 
I gave you the information that covered the items that these dollar 
figures are covering, and for that reason you have the information 
that you need from that document. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I must say 
that I am sorely wounded. Because, Mr. Minister, five or six days 
ago you refused to provide any information when questioned 
about the relationship with the property management corporation, 
except what is in the blue book — a figure, one figure; refused to 
provide anything. 
 
Now you’ve told the hon. member from Regina Centre 
information about where the space is located which the 
Department of the Environment is using. Now that may be due to 
his superior ability to extract information from you because of his 
legal training. 
 
However, I do want to follow up on the matter, Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. Minister. And I gather that the figures that, or . . . or the 
locations that the minister provided were locations in public 
government buildings. 
 
And I would like to find out how much space is leased at the 
present time in each of those locations; and I would like a list of 
the private lease space that the Department of the Environment 
has. And I would want to know whether the minister can provide 
costs which are attached to this information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry the member feels slighted. But you 
know, it depends on what question you ask. You don’t expect an 
answer for something you didn’t ask. 
 
He asked where, and so I gave him where; and if had asked 
where, I guess you’d have got the same answer. 
 
I gave the hon. member the locations where those office spaces 
are rented. And I gave you all of the space that we rent across the 
province. And it’s all there in Hansard. 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, that you lease no space  
from  the private sector; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — All of our space is leased through the 
property management corporation, and I imagine some of the 
locations that I read out are privately owned, but I couldn’t even 
tell you which ones. Some may be and some may not be. But I 
read the names of the buildings and which city they were in. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I can 
recall in the early ‘70s when the department of government 
services was under enlightened minister direction, this kind of 
information was readily provided to the members that sat on this 
side of the House. 
 
And I want to know if the minister can provide to us a list of the 
locations where space is leased, the amount of space that’s leased, 
and whether it’s public or private space that’s leased. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that my staff could get the 
square meters or the square footage; I don’t know which way it’s 
listed. But as far as whether it’s privately owned buildings, we 
can give you the name of the building, but the property 
management corporation never indicates to us whether they own 
it or whether someone else owns it. So I don’t have that 
information in my department. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, will you promise me that 
you will give it a try? You may be able to convince the minister 
that’s in charge of the Crown corporation that he should tell you 
whether this is space that’s owned by the Government of 
Saskatchewan or space that’s owned by a private company. I 
think he might, because he’s a man that can be reasoned with; 
and I want you to give it a try. Because I don’t believe you’ve 
ever asked him that. From your comments it appears that you 
have never asked him that. And we’d like to know where this 
space is for the Department of Environment and whether it’s in 
private buildings or public buildings. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could provide us with the 
guide-lines or the policy of your department which governs every 
interface between your department and the property management 
corporation, whether it’s supplies, or whether it’s space, or 
whether it’s postage. Give us the policy or the guide-lines, 
whatever you call them, that governs that relationship. 
 
what we’re trying to do here, Mr. Chairman, is understand what 
the relationship is between the property management corporation 
and each department of government. Since this is the first 
department that is before us, it seems logical to me that we’re 
going to ask the questions on the first department, to find out 
what that relationship is. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now whether we should know that relationship or not is not a 
question that is before us at this time. It’s conceded that we 
should know that information, because that information was 
readily available when the space of this province was handed by 
the department of public works,  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1141 

 

the department of government services, the Department of Supply 
and Services. That information was readily available. And what I 
want the minister to do is to shed some light on the relationship 
between his department and the property management 
corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The property management corporation 
develops its own guide-lines in the way that it deals with the 
departments of government or the agencies of government. If the 
member wants that kind of information then he should properly 
get it from the minister responsible. I don’t believe it’s my 
document to give, it’s his; and if he wants to release it, that’s his 
business, but that is not for me. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I think that the . . . I believe 
that the question has been voiced to you by a member sitting in 
his seat. You are here asking us to approve your estimates, but 
you won’t tell us what guide-lines govern your relationship with 
the property management corporation as such; we’re asking what 
is the relationship between the Department of the Environment 
and the body that it rents its space from. And we have a right, as 
members of this Legislative Assembly, to know that information. 
And when you’re on your feet again, Mr. Minister, I want to get 
the answer that I posed the question for just a short few moments 
ago. And that is a listing of the leased space and the private space, 
and the amount that the Department of the Environment has in 
every location. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me take the last question first. And I 
indicated to you that we would provide the name of the building, 
the town that it’s in, and either the square footage or the square 
meters. I don’t know just how the buildings are measured. Some 
of them that we’ve had for a while may be in square footage. But 
we’ll indicate those things. 
 
Whether or not the building is privately owned, you’d likely 
know by the name of it or by talking to one of your members who 
happens to come from that area. But we don’t as a department go 
out and negotiate leases. That’s done by the property 
management corporation. So that type of information is within 
the corporation and should be sought from that corporation, not 
from us. 
 
You ask about our relationship. It’s a fairly simple relationship. 
We pay the property management corporation for the space that 
we lease. We pay the property management corporation for the 
use of the mail room for sending out our mail. We pay them for 
any furniture that we buy and we pay them for any supplies that 
we buy. So you know, it’s a fairly simple relationship. They 
provide and we pay. It’s not too complicated, really. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — It sounds, Mr. Minister, like the property 
management corporation has a stranglehold on you. And I 
wouldn’t, if I was you, allow myself to be in that position too 
long because this Crown corporation which you don’t believe in, 
which you philosophically don’t believe in . . .And we can tell 
you don’t believe in it because you’ve started about three or four 
new Crown corporations since you formed the government of this 
province. I wouldn’t get myself in that position if I was  

you. 
 
I would demand from the property management corporation a 
detailed explanation of what they’re putting you through when 
they’re renting you space. And it’s very easy because he sits very 
close to you. So you get over to him and you find out what the 
arrangement is. 
 
Now I’m not sure whether he’s going to make that arrangement 
available to us when we get, at some time in the future, in the 
distant future, get a chance to question that minister who’s in 
charge of that Crown corporation. It may be too late to prevent 
you from making some sorry mistakes on behalf of your 
department. We want you to know how you’re dealing with this 
Crown corporation which has been established, and we want to 
know what the relationship is. 
 
Mr. Minister, changing the subject only slightly, I would like to 
know in the closed fiscal year, the immediately closed fiscal year, 
how many consultants were retained by the Department of the 
Environment, and what was the purpose of the retention in each 
case, and the costs? Consultants retained by the Department of 
the Environment, the purpose of retaining the consultants, and the 
cost, and the name of the consultants, of course? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A few moments ago I addressed a question 
to the minister with respect to the relationship between the 
corporation and the department. The minister read several 
sentences from a document. When I then asked him for the 
document, he refused to give it to me. 
 
I would refer, Mr. Chairman, to Erskine May. page 433: 
 

A Minister of the Crown may not read or quote from a 
despatch or other state paper not before the House, unless he is 
prepared to lay it on the Table. 

 
A minister who reads from correspondence then ought to lay it on 
the Table. 
 
Similar authority, Mr. Chairman, is to be found in Beauchesne’s. 
I’d refer you to paragraph 327: 
 

A Minister of the Crown is not at liberty to read or quote from 
a despatch or other state paper not before the House, unless he 
be prepared to lay it upon the Table. 

 
And then section (2) of that: 
 

. . . a document which has been cited ought to be laid upon the 
Table of the House . . . 

 
I’d ask you, Mr. Chairman, to instruct the minister in his 
responsibility to this Legislative Assembly and ask him to lay that 
paper before the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That particular rule, Mr. Chairman, has 
always been if you are quoting from a particular  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1142 

 

document. The hon. member indicated that what he was doing 
was referring to various briefing notes, and briefing notes have 
been used in this Assembly on many occasions, and it’s . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. The chair has no way of 
knowing what kind of document it was, but: 
 

It has been admitted that a document which has been cited 
ought to be laid upon the Table of the House, if it can be done 
without injury to the public interest. The same rule, however, 
cannot be held to apply to private letters or memoranda. 

 
The point of order is not well taken. Debate continues. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I appeal that ruling. I 
challenge your ruling. I challenge the Chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Mr. Speaker, in Committee of Finance the 
member for Regina Centre raised a point of order stating that the 
minister was required to table the document from which he was 
reading. 
 
I referred to Beauchesne’s citation 327(2) and ruled the point not 
well taken. The member challenged my ruling. 
 
(2017) 
 
Ruling is sustained on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 

Muller Meiklejohn 
Duncan Martin 
McLeod Toth 
Andrew Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Lane McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Smith Swenson 
Swan Martens 
Muirhead Baker 
Maxwell Gleim 
Schmidt Gardner 
Hodgins Kopelchuk 
Hardy Britton 
Klein Goodale 
  
 

Nays — 18 
 

Brockelbank Kowalsky 
Shillington Atkinson 
Koskie Anguish 
Romanow Goulet 
Thompson Hagel 
Mitchell Calvert 
Upshall Lautermilch 
Simard Trew 
Solomon Van Mulligen 
  
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, let me remind you of what is at 
stake in this area. Last year the Department of Supply and 
Services spent $112 million. There is no clear opportunity to 
come and question anybody on that. We have to do it department 
by department. Mr. Minister, this has been a prime source of 
patronage in the past. This department’s been no end of trouble 
and embarrassment to this government, and we would be derelict 
in our duty if we didn’t ask you to account for this million 
dollars, if we didn’t ask you for a reasonable amount of detail. 
 
This issue arose because we asked you to give us a clear and 
specific statement of your relationship with the property 
management corporation. You read from a document which has 
it. Then, without giving us any shadow of a reason why you 
shouldn’t disclose it, you arrogantly stood there and refused to do 
so. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are . . . .Mr. Minister, we’re here to ensure that 
public money is spent wisely and efficiently and fairly. That’s 
what accountability is all about. Everything you’ve done since the 
election, Mr. Minister, has suggested you want to avoid that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you were late in bringing down a budget. You 
brought it . . . You opened this session in the summer when you 
hoped no one would be watching. You have time, and this 
government has time and time again made every conceivable 
effort to avoid accountability and to avoid telling people what 
you’re doing. 
 
This, Mr. Minister, involved $112 million of money that is 
expended in such a fashion that it lends itself readily to patronage. 
This is not $112 million paid out in salaries. The majority of this 
is paid out for goods and services, and it’s been a source of an 
endless number of embarrassments to you people in the way in 
which you’ve done it in the past. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have a right to this information. We have a right 
to know what you’re doing with the taxpayers’ money, and you,. 
Mr. Minister, have a responsibility to account to us for the way 
that money is spent. And that’s what this is all about, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you clearly have the detail of how this money is 
being spent. You read from a document which has it. I’d ask you, 
Mr. Minister, to carry out your responsibility and give us that 
information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There’s no item in my budget that says 112 
million. I kind of wish there were. It happens that in my budget 
there’s one item that says 985,700. I’ve given the hon. member an 
account of how that is accounted for, what it’s spent for, and I 
believe the information that I gave you is as factual as I can 
provide. I have no other information on the subject, and I’ve 
answered the question a number of times. 
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1143 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it may be as factual as you can 
make it. It’s certainly not as detailed as you can make it, Mr. 
Minister, you were reading from a document which has some 
information which is very germane. It sets out your relationship 
with the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation,. what 
they provide, and how it’s done. And that is obviously, that is 
obviously a document which the public ought to have. If, Mr. 
Minister, if you’ve got a reason why you won’t tell us, why you 
won’t give us this sort of detail? If you’ve got a reason why, for 
some reason or other, the public shouldn’t know how their money 
is being spent, then give it to us, or give us the information. But 
don’t stand up repeatedly and say, that’s an internal working 
document. That is not a reason not to disclose a document to us. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, give us an accounting of how the 
public’s money is being spent. It’s almost a million dollars. And I 
suggest to you, Mr. Minister, you’ve got a responsibility to tell 
the public how that million dollars is being spent and you 
haven’t. 
 
Mr. Minister, in past years . . . I invite you to have a look at any 
estimates previous to this one, and look at the sort of information 
which was given by Supply and Services with respect to the 
money that they spent. There is 19 subvotes; it’s broken down 
according to what was spent on operations, renovation, 
maintenance. 
 
Mr. Minister, I and, I think, members of the public who have 
watched this government sloppily waste money for five years, are 
interested in how you’re spending their money. They’re 
interested, Mr. Minister, in whether or not there are any 
renovations, in how the buildings are operated. And you have a 
responsibility to give us that. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, to 
come clean and give it to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to the member earlier that it was 
for rent and for postage and mailing and furnishings. I told you 
that we would provide a list of all of the locations of the buildings 
and the square footage or the square meters in each building. 
 
Now the postage side of it, it’s put in at basically the same figure 
that was used for postage last year. We don’t know. It’s an 
estimate, as you know. It’s an estimate of cost. So we don’t know 
what we’re going to mail in this particular year. So I can’t give 
you any great breakdown of mail, but I think when it says mail, 
that’s basically what happens in the mail room down downstairs 
here. 
 
So I have given you that break down, and I’ve promised to give 
you the listing of the office space that we rent. I can also tell you 
that the space that we rent now is the same space that we 
occupied a year ago with the exception of the portion that was 
transferred to us from Labour. All other space is the same that we 
had a year ago. If you received the information last year from 
Supply and Services, and you say you did, then you should very 
easily be able to look up again and see exactly what our costs 
were, and you’ll find that the figure I’m giving is right. 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what we are 
faced with here is a government who intends to cloak part of its 
operation in secrecy, a part of its operations which have been 
plainly visible to the public prior to this time. And this in keeping, 
Mr. Chairman, with other actions of the government with regard 
to how they’re running the government. And this is obvious. 
People are starting to ask questions out there, Mr. Minister. And 
when you see the auditor’s report, you understand why the people 
of Saskatchewan are starting to ask questions about this 
government and its secrecy and its not providing information to 
the representatives of the people in this Chamber. 
 
And what does the . . . And what are the public reading out there? 
Well, they’re reading this: The Regina Leader-Post, June 18. This 
is on the very subject I’m talking about here, and I’ll quote you: 
 

Concerns over a lack of government spending accountability 
and possible interference in his own independence have been 
raised by the provincial auditor, Williard Lutz. 
 
Specifically, Lutz said he was concerned about the time lag in 
the tabling of the government’s audited financial information 
in the form of public accounts. 

 
Right on. We’re concerned about that; the public’s concerned 
about it. And if the Deputy Premier wants some more, I’ll give it 
to him. “Lutz is . . . concerned about the lack of . . . “ Perhaps the 
minister should get his mouth out of gear and listen to what I 
have to say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — 
 

Lutz is also concerned about the lack of accountability 
resulting from the creation of the Property Management 
Corporation out of the old Supply and Services Department. 
 
If this information is not disclosed by the Property 
Management Corporation, Lutz said, MLAs will be denied 
“essential information.” 

 
I could go on reading more about what the Provincial Auditor 
says about this government here. Now the minister says, well, I 
wish, I wish I had a lot more in the budget, when accosted with a 
figure by the member from Regina Centre. But let’s go over to 
another department, the Department of Education. The figure is 
not $1 million. I believe it’s $23 million, payment to the property 
management corporation. 
 
(2030) 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, this minister refuses to tell this Assembly 
what are the conditions that control the interface between his 
department and the property management corporation. Now if 
we’re up against the same kind of reticence to provide 
information to this Chamber in every department of this 
government, we’ll come out at the end of the day with zip about 
government  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1144 

 

space, relative to previous times when that information was 
available. Not only was it available about public buildings, it was 
available as to whether the buildings were private or public. We 
need — the people of Saskatchewan need — that information in 
order to make an analysis of what the Minister of the 
Environment, and every other minister of this government, is 
doing in relation to the property, the space that they rent for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have not provided that. Through a technicality 
you’re denying that and I want the minister on record, in response 
to my comments, as to why he is denying this information. 
Because if he is denying it, that means every other minister over 
there will be denying it as well. And we’re not going to get at that 
information because the minister in charge of the property 
management corporation will not be putting evidence or 
information before a committee of this House for at least a year, 
for at least a year. So there is an interval in there where there is no 
information provided to us. 
 
The minister in charge of the property management corporation 
says that this is going to be an efficient and effective Crown 
corporation which will provide benefits to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We want to know, Mr. Minister, what are the 
benefits? Have you determined what the benefits are to the 
Department of the Environment? I want to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the member again says that we’re 
hiding information, and that’s not true. You can go through the 
auditor’s report, and you won’t even find that he’s had any 
problem with the department of the Environment. We aren’t even 
mentioned in the auditor’s report because our staff have done a 
good job. Everything has been up front, everything is recorded, 
so there is no problem. 
 
When you talk about the amount of money that’s paid to the 
property management corporation or estimated to be paid to the 
property management corporation in the next year, it’s my 
estimates. The figure is there; I gave you a basic breakdown of 
what that figure would cover. You asked for the space; I’ve told 
you that I will provide a written document to you that will list the 
buildings that we are situated in, which cities that we are situated 
in, and the square footage or the square meters. 
 
Now I believe the hon. member has all the information he needs. 
And for him to stand there and cry the blues about us not giving 
him information is a bit foolish. the information is here. All you 
have to do is listen. I gave it to you before; you wouldn’t accept 
in that form. I give it to you again. 
 
Could I have the page, please? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was wondering if 
the minister could tell us as of February 28, 1987, how much 
physical space there was rented for office space storage in regard 
to the operations of the Department of Environment and Public 
Safety, what the total square footage is that was rented by the 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would have to get that information  

for you, and I have agreed to provide it to you, and I will provide 
it. I’ll bring it tomorrow . . . or bring it on Wednesday; we won’t 
be in the estimates tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could the . . . I find it amazing that all the 
people you have — you have one, two, three, four, five, six, 
seven people from the department — and there would be no one 
there that would know that as of December 28, 1987, as to how 
much space you rented in the Department of the Environment. No 
wonder the auditor is concerned about the controls that’s being 
kept by this government if out of all the people you have here this 
evening you don’t know how much space you rent to house your 
operations. Have you asked any of the people here tonight? Do 
any of those people sitting along the back row over there know 
how much space you rented in the Department of Environment 
and Public Safety as of December 28, 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well I told the member the different 
communities that we’re located in, and there are a number. And 
to just pick that figure out of the air would be wrong. I’m going to 
give you exact figures for every office that we’re in and when it 
comes you’ll be satisfied that it the actual space located in your 
town and in other towns. And we’ll break it out either in square 
footage or square meters, depending on how it has been provided 
to us. We’ll give it to you; we’ll give you every space that we’re 
in. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well that would be very . . . That would be 
very kind of you to do that, Mr. Minister. We look forward to that 
information forthcoming. 
 
Maybe you could tell us just a small example — how much 
square footage is rented currently from the property management 
corporation for executive administration, for example. Can you 
tell us that this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not just quite sure what you mean by 
executive administration. Do you mean my personal office here 
in the Legislative Building? Is that what you’re talking about, or 
are you talking about, or are you talking about the deputy’s 
office, or which offices are you talking about? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Okay. The permanent head of the department 
— how much space is rented for the permanent head of the 
department and the operations that are immediately under the 
authority of the deputy minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well that would end up being all of the 
office space that we have with the exception of my office here in 
the Legislative Building, and that’s that information that I’ll 
provide you. I couldn’t even tell you how many square feet in the 
office that I occupy here in this building, and I doubt if most 
ministers consider that as a real concern. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The member from Meadow Lake, Mr. Minister, 
asked me how many square feet there are in my wife’s kitchen. 
There are 240 square feet in my wife’s kitchen. 
 
Could you tell us then just the deputy minister’s office, not 
including the secretary’s space? How much space does  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1145 

 

the deputy minister have in his office? What kind of controls 
have you got on? You don’t know how much there is one office; 
you don’t know how much there is in total offices; you don’t 
know how much there is in your own office. You’re supposed to 
be publicly accountable to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan — you certainly aren’t. How much space is there 
in the deputy minister’s office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t have that figure; we could make a 
wild guess and I don’t think that’s the way to deal in estimates. 
We’ll give you the figures of how much space we occupy. He’s 
in the Walter Scott Building, and it’s not a large office but the 
exact square footage I really don’t know. it might be 300; it might 
be 350; but it’s not large. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Would you break that information down for us 
as to the various branches, how much is office space, how much 
is storage space? Would there be a detailed breakdown as to the 
square footage that you rent for the total Department of 
Environment and Public Safety, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The amount that we’ll give you is the 
amount of space in each building. That’s all that we’ll give you. 
We’re not going to break it down into how much is in bathrooms, 
and how much is in office, and how much in storage space. I 
don’t think it’s significant. We pay rent on whatever we’re 
leasing, and we’ll give you the overall figures for each building. 
But beyond that, no, we won’t break it down. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I agree that the bathroom sizes aren’t 
significant, unless there was an overly large amount of time spent 
in the washrooms. We’d want to know what people were doing in 
such a large space. But we would appreciate it just by building, I 
think would be adequate for our needs. And we don’t need to 
know the fine details of washroom facilities. But if you’d break it 
down by building, we’d appreciate that. 
 
Would you also, for the next time we sit in this committee, along 
with the total square footage that you rent, would you also have a 
breakdown as to providing us with what percentage is rented 
from the Crown, or is owned by the Crown; and also what 
percentage is rented from private interests that would in fact rent 
that through the property management corporation to the 
department of Environment and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ve answered the identical question several 
times this evening, and I’ve told you that I will give you the name 
of the building, the city or town that it’s in, and the amount of 
square meters or square feet that we lease. I don’t even know 
which ones are owned by the Crown and which ones are owned 
by private individuals. If I tell you the name of a building in 
North Battleford, it’s quite likely that you know whether or not 
it’s owned privately or publicly. 
 
So the property management corporation may know and should 
know, but I don’t know. We lease only from the property 
management corporation, as you know. That’s the information 
that I can provide you, and that I will provide. 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, when you go and ask for 
increased space because you’ve had a change in priorities on a 
program, or a change on priorities for some specific area of the 
province, and you require more office space, how does that 
process work? Do you say to the Premier, or to cabinet, to the 
Executive Council, that well, we’re going to require so much 
space? Or does the property management corporation have some 
magic formula whereby they know exactly how much space 
you’re going to need over the course of the year? Or does your 
department go and negotiate with property management 
corporation? 
 
Tell us a little bit about how that process occurs because you’re; 
indicating to us that you have no input whatsoever, the property 
that you rent and lease is laid upon you. And so I’d like you to 
enlighten us as to how the process occurs, that you gain the rental 
property that you require for the operations of your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well since I’ve been with the department, 
we haven’t had to go through that process because the space that 
was in existence last year is the space that we still use. 
 
I’m advised that when we need new space, the process is for us to 
list the people that we need the space for, the classification on the 
government scale that those people would be at, and people on 
different classifications are allotted a certain number of square 
feet. 
 
So the property management corporation then would review the 
amount of space required for the people that we’re proposing we 
need more space for, and then they in turn will shop for that space 
on the market and provide the space to us. Prior to this year we 
would have never had a figure, basically, of what our individual 
space would have been. This time we do get a figure, and I give 
you that figure. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, if you make this request from the 
property management corporation, they come back to you, do you 
accept absolutely the property that they’re providing for you? Or 
does the deputy minister or someone in your department go and 
look at the property and say, well, this property’s acceptable, this 
property isn’t acceptable? Or do you have to take what the 
property management corporation gives to you? Or do you have 
some input into the property that you actually get? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that in the past when a 
circumstance arose that we needed space, that usually there were 
one or two operations provided, and the deputy or someone 
would go and look at the space and then make the selection of 
which ever one he wanted. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — With due regard for economy, efficiency, and 
effectiveness, I suppose you would also want to know what the 
cost per square foot is of that property because it comes out of 
your budget. And if you are showing due regard for the public’s 
money, then you should have some consideration for the cost of 
property that you’re renting. Is it a consideration of your 
department to question or to accept the property  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1146 

 

management corporation’s allocation dollar amount on the 
property that they assign to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The property management corporation, as 
you know, is just newly formed. The space allocation at this point 
is strictly the space that we had before, and the costs that were in 
place last year are the costs that are still in place. There haven’t 
been changes really for any department that remained the same. 
 
(2045) 
 
One of the advantages that will be there for our department in the 
future is that, yes, you can take a look at what the space is going 
to cost, and you can make your choices because that will reflect 
in your budget. Prior to this year, that was not the case. The more 
space and the better space I could get for the department, the 
better we liked it because there was no direct charge to the 
department. That will not be the case under this because the 
charge will be made to each department of government. And I 
think it is a good move. It will make all of us really be a little 
more responsible and be better manages. I think it’s a good idea. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — If it operates like that, that aspect of it, I think, 
in fact would be a good idea. It makes the department responsible 
for what they’re spending. 
 
Now what I’m asking you is that when you go for more space, or 
a change in space, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Minister, when you go 
for more space or a change in space, do you have some leeway 
with the property management corporation? Do you advise them 
ahead of time that we have $13 a square foot to spend, or we have 
$28 a square foot to spend on property? Do you do that ahead of 
time? Or do you wait until the property management corporation 
comes back to you, then say to them, well this is a little bit too 
expensive, we’d like property for $20 a square foot, we can’t 
afford the $25 a square foot property that you’ve secured or are 
offering to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the future we may be able to do some 
negotiation with regards to rents and the types of space. At this 
point the space is there; we occupy it; there’s very little 
opportunity for that kind of negotiation to take place. All of the 
rental agreements are in place. But down the road when there is 
need for change either up or down, I hope that that opportunity 
for negotiation will be there. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’m glad that you’re looking at that for future 
negotiations with the property management corporation because 
I’m sure that’s what you’ll do to be diligent in saving your 
department dollars and cents. I would also assume that you know 
what the department is willing to pay for property at certain 
locations. And I’d like you to tell us, Mr. Minister, what you’re 
willing to pay for office accommodation in the city of Regina 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t have a figure that I could give the 
hon. member. We haven’t really discussed it. We aren’t in the 
process of leasing more space; so no, I don’t have a figure that I 
could provide under that. 

Mr. Anguish: — Did you tell us earlier, Mr. Minister, that when 
you provide us with some of the questions we’ve asked about the 
total square footage requirements by the department and the 
breakdown, that you would tell us the dollar amount that’s paid 
for each of those locations per square foot? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. I didn’t say that. I told you I’d give you 
the building and the amount of square footage or square meters in 
each building and in which town they’re located. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, will you also provide us 
with the dollar per square foot on each of those facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I don’t have those figures, and I won’t 
be providing them. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Are you telling us you don’t know how much 
you’re paying for rent? You just advocate this great new system 
in the property management corporation where you’re going to be 
saving all kinds of dollars and making you more responsible. 
Well, you’re going back, again, and your irresponsible. You’re 
absolutely irresponsible. You don’t know how much you’re going 
to pay for rent or how much you have been paying for rent. Is that 
what you’re telling us? You don’t know how much you’re going 
to pay over the coming year for rent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I gave you the figures, how much we’re 
going to pay in the coming year for rent. 
 
Since 1976 the dollar figure that is charged per square foot or 
square meter has never been given in this legislature for a 
building that the government leases. And the main reason that it 
hasn’t been given is because to give those figures out will have an 
impact on the lease rates of buildings in Regina or Saskatoon or 
any city. 
 
It’s not good business when you’re in a negotiating process to 
give the figure out, and it has never been given since 1976 when 
you were in government. I don’t know what happened prior to 
that, but I know it hasn’t been given since that time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I think maybe it’s time to change the past 
practice, Mr. Minister. I think you should provide us with what 
you’re paying per square foot. There’s all kinds of patronage your 
government’s given out all over the place in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and we suspect that there’s likely more patronage 
here. I don’t know specifically about your department, but I know 
in the Department of Highways there’s certainly cases that will be 
coming up during estimates. 
 
I think people have a right to know if there’s property that you 
rent that’s actually owned by the Crown, but you rent it through 
the property management corporation. If that’s at, say, $18 a 
square foot, and you have comparable property in terms of 
quality and quantity of space and desirability of department in the 
private sector that the property management corporation leases or 
rents for you at 28 or $30 a square foot, I don’t think that’s 
having due regard for efficiency and economy and effectiveness 
within the department. 
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1147 

 

And I think that the minister should place before his House, when 
he gives us the information he already has promised, what the 
dollar cost per square foot on each of the rental properties that the 
department get through the property management corporation. 
And are you telling us tonight that you will not, that you refuse to 
give us the information, detailed as to what you pay for rental 
property across the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ve already given you the figure on what 
we’re paying for office rent, total. But I’m not prepared to give 
you, on a square footage basis, the amount of money that we’re 
paying for office space in any given city or town, because that, I 
believe, will impact on the market, the rental market, in 
whichever city or town you would be giving those figures out for. 
 
You designed the process when you were government. That was 
the process that was followed then, and it’s been followed from 
that time to this, and it’s going to continue. I believe it was a good 
policy. You never gave the figure when you were in government, 
and I’m not intending to give the figure now. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You didn’t give it because you already 
admitted you didn’t know it. You said you didn’t know what the 
rental was per square foot. You told us that in this House this 
evening, Mr. Minister. So don’t go back on what you’ve told us 
earlier. You very clearly told us this evening that you didn’t know 
what the square footage costs were. Are you saying also that no 
one in your department knows what you pay per square foot for 
office space? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s a figure that has never been given out 
to departments over the many, many years that Supply and 
Services has been in place to lease space for government. That 
was held by Supply and Services and it hasn’t been given out; it’s 
kept confidential. The space that we need has been provided for 
us on an allocation basis — certain types of positions get a certain 
size of office. That’s the way it’s always been done since I’ve 
been around government and for some time prior to that. I think 
the hon. member realizes that the method has been in place, and it 
has been a good method and will continue to work that way. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, how do you expect to get good 
bang for your bucks if, so to speak, if nobody in your department 
knows what you’re paying for rent? Does property management 
corporation just come along at the end of the year and give you a 
bill and say, here, were charging you — I don’t know what it is in 
the Department of Environment; I don’t have the figure before 
me — that you’ve got to pay a million dollars for rent this year, 
and you just pay the bill? Is that this better system that you’ve got 
developed within your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to the hon. member that what 
we’re doing is being charged for the same cost that was in place 
last year. If there’s an opportunity come up for us to take new 
space, then we will indeed negotiate for that space and for the 
rates that we would pay. But that is not the question before my 
department at this time at least. We aren’t seeking any new space. 
We have  

sufficient space at this time, and as time goes along and we 
transfer some people from the gas inspection and the electrical 
inspection to Sask Power, we’ll likely have surplus space. So 
we’re not looking for more space, there will be no negotiations 
for space this year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well you haven’t known in the past what you 
pay per square foot for your facilities that you require. Are you 
saying that in the future you will know what you pay for your 
facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s a good possibility, as we negotiate for 
new space, that we will know what the cost per square foot is. 
And I think it’s good for a department to become accountable so 
that they are not using more space or better space than is required, 
but rather that they are operating on an economic base, and that’s 
what we’re looking forward to doing in the future. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’d like to see you 
become more accountable because I certainly think it’s a very 
accountable system, where you just pay the bill for rent and don’t 
know whether you’re getting good value for your money or not. 
There’s certainly no negotiation process right now. Property 
management corporation don’t tell you who you’re renting from, 
which I find very, very hard to believe, Mr. Minister. 
 
I also find it very, very hard to believe that in the interest of the 
taxpayers’ dollars that you wouldn’t try and get the best value for 
your rental dollar that’s available to you, regardless of whether 
it’s in Regina, or the Battlefords, or Moose Jaw, or Saskatoon. I 
think it’s very irresponsible for you not to know what you’re 
paying for rent. 
 
No business . . . And this is the government that always says 
they’re the big government — that’s right — big government in 
favour of big business. They run things so efficiently. I don’t 
know of any business that could ever succeed if they don’t know 
what they’re paying for rent. You try and get the best value for 
your dollar you can. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I hope you’re right about what the property 
management corporation is going to do. But I suspect that it just 
increases the hidden accounts of the departments within this 
current government that we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That you can’t get it through the departments, 
they don’t know what they’re paying. They don’t actually even 
know the process. They’re uncertain. They don’t know what the 
future holds. It portrays a lack of planning that this government 
has had since 1982 when you first came into office, and it seems 
to be getting worse. 
 
Property management corporation could mortgage and sell 
facilities out from under you. You seem to have no concern about 
that. You seem to have no input or influence over into it. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I suppose we look forward to getting the 
information. And you can expect that we’ll be coming back to 
you wanting to know what you’re paying for rent, and the split 
between what the Crown owns and what you’re paying the 
private sector, because we would think that there is likely a very 
big differential between the  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1148 

 

property that the people of Saskatchewan own and the property 
that your friends own that are high profile Conservatives in the 
province. They get bigger values out of the property they own 
because of the patronage this government offers to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member is making some pretty wild 
claims about patronage. Maybe that was the case when your 
government was in office, but it’s not the case in my department. 
 
We’re not providing any patronage for space that we’re leasing. 
So you seem to have a lot of information about patronage, and I 
guess maybe some of the former ministers over there were 
involved in some of that. But that’s not the case for us. 
 
When you talk about the space that we rent from private and the 
space that we rent from public, if you take a look at some of the 
fancy gold buildings that you built in this city of Regina, that’s 
likely the high-priced space. When you get out into rural 
Saskatchewan and into the small towns, the space isn’t quite so 
elaborate. 
 
And I believe that our department is not located in elaborate 
space, but rather in economic space. It always has been, and I 
make no apologies for the quality of space that we’re in. It’s not 
elaborate, but it serves the purpose. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. I wonder, 
Mr. Minister, if you can indicate to us whether in your 
discussions, and I assume you’ve had some negotiations with the 
property management corporation, whether the space that you 
rent from the government internally, within government, as 
compared to private contracts and leases, whether the rate that is 
established for government is an economic market rent, market 
influenced rent, or whether it is an artificial rate that’s established 
by the property management corporation. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That kind of information is not available to 
me. All of the space has been leased through Supply and Service 
prior to this year and will now be leased through the property 
management corporation. Most of it is the same space, so there 
won’t be any change basically there. But I can’t give you that 
figure, whether it’s the same kind of rent paid for government 
buildings as private. I just don’t have the information. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, would you acquaint 
yourself with the facts as to whether the government space is an 
artificial rate, or whether it’s an economic market rent that you’re 
paying for your space? 
 
And I assume you have some space with the private sector, and 
some within the government sector. In any event, whether you 
have any private space or not, you should acquaint yourself with 
the facts about whether the space is an artificial rate or whether it 
is a market driven rate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well as I indicated to the member, we have 
the same space that we had last year. The rent that we’re 
budgeting for this year is the same amount of  

rent that we paid last year. 
 
So for the hon. member to ask me the question, it’s very difficult 
for me to give you a figure because it’s a figure I don’t have. 
We’ve never had the figure for what rents were in government; 
they were kept within Supply and Services. The situation is still 
the same; we haven’t been given the figures on square footage 
rental at this time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, I was attempting to get 
away from the questions that the member from Regina Centre 
was asking you. I’m not asking for a rate. I’m just asking you to 
determine and supply to this House whether the rate that is 
charged for the public leasing of space is an artificial rate or is it 
derived from the market place. That’s what I’m asking you to 
determine and to provide the information to the House, and I 
wonder if you could do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, that information is not available to me, 
and I don’t think that it’s the kind of information that I will 
supply to the House. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I think 
sometimes with the deluge of detail that comes with the 
estimates, we can lose sight, momentarily at least, of the forest for 
the trees. And I’d like to focus just on the forest for a moment, if I 
may. 
 
It seems to me that as we’re standing here in this evening and 
having this debate that we’re involved in right now, that it is part 
of a much larger issue. And the issue is this, Mr. Minister. There 
are two things. The issue of your credibility, and the credibility of 
the government of which you are a part. And the issue is also 
your accountability and the accountability of this government of 
which you are a part. 
 
Let me just for a moment, Mr. Minister, focus on what would 
have been provided in the detail for the dealings with what is now 
called the property management corporation a year ago when the 
Department of Supply and Services existed. At that time, 
information not only about leasing and purchase details would 
have been provided, but also information about maintenance of 
buildings, operations of buildings, renovation of 
accommodations, printing, mail and telecommunications, 
photographic services, and materials management. Clearly, Mr. 
Minister, the list is much longer than that which you’ve been 
prepared to provide tonight. 
 
And as we in the opposition stand here in these estimates, it is our 
responsibility to try to force — I’m sad to say — to force the 
government to be accountable and to be credible with the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And we have to do that in a context because that 
is important to the people of Saskatchewan because of the track 
record of this government, Mr. Minister. We all recall standing in 
this room at 1 o’clock in the morning on Christmas Eve, passing 
Bill 5 — Bill 5 which gave government permission to create 
government departments, wipe out government  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1149 

 

departments, mix and match them and change their budgets 
around — and you’ve done that — and to do all of that behind 
closed cabinet doors. That was what Bill 5 was all about. The 
public was not terribly pleased; they wondered why the session 
was called before Christmas and why we were taking the motion 
at 1 o’clock in the morning on Christmas Eve. 
 
Then we came to June 17. And June 17, Mr. Minister, being if I 
may suggest to be exact, ten weeks and one day — ten weeks and 
one day — the latest budget in the history of Saskatchewan, and 
many people suggesting a budget that was presented so that we 
could come and do these deliberations while the people of 
Saskatchewan are involved in their summer holidays; and so that 
in essence, again, the operation of government would be carried 
out behind closed cabinet doors as much as it is possible for you 
to manipulate. 
 
And I suggest again, Mr. Minister, when the property 
management corporation was created, many people again said: 
here is another symptom of a government that doesn’t want to 
operate in the public eye, with the public accountability and 
public credibility. It’s creating the property management 
corporation; a corporation that will make it just opportune to 
engage in the practice of patronage while arranging for the 
facilities for government to do it’s business. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that as we sit here this 
evening debating the estimates, and as we discuss your 
department’s relationship with the property management 
corporation, the issue is very clearly your credibility — and the 
credibility of your government — and your willingness to be 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the member makes an interesting 
speech, but one that has very little substance. 
 
When it comes to accountability, we have given you the figure 
for this department, and as you go through your estimates books, 
you’ll find that every department is giving you the same kind of 
figure that shows you how much our rent is costing by 
department. That’s something that wasn’t available to you before; 
you got a bulk rent for the government. 
 
So we are providing you with information, and we’re not sitting 
behind closed doors as the hon. member indicates. We’re 
standing here in this legislature of Saskatchewan; the television 
cameras are running; the public are watching; there’s no big 
secret. 
 
And I have given information day after day. The information that 
is available for me to give, I have given, and I have given a lot of 
information. And some of the members have even got up and 
thanked me for the forthright way in which the information has 
been provided. So don’t tell me that I haven’t been giving you 
information. I have been giving you much information. I have 
given you information on the subject that you’re talking about 
tonight, and I’ve given it many times. So the member can make 
his speeches, but they’re not factual. 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it has been the record of the 
presentation of this budget to include in every government 
department the property management corporation expenditures, 
and that way to artificially enhance the budget that is being 
accredited to each department. You and I both know that. 
 
And when I stand in this House, Mr. Minister, and express my 
concerns about this government operating behind closed cabinet 
doors, that is not merely my personal opinion. That is an opinion 
that is shared by people around Saskatchewan; and if you cared to 
pay any attention to the poll that was published last week, you 
would know that just as well as we do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — You know, Mr. Minister, you know as well as I 
know, as well as all the members of this House know, that Bill 5 
was clearly intended to move government behind closed cabinet 
doors. I don’t know how many government departments were 
wiped out, how many were created, and how many were mixed 
and matched. You may be able to answer that better than I. We’re 
through finding out new things everyday as we go through the 
estimates. 
 
But clearly, it has been the agenda since the time that the Premier 
allegedly said that he understood, to the best of his information, 
that we had a $500 million deficit when he told the people of 
Saskatchewan in October that that was the financial 
circumstances that we had in this province. We have seen since 
October, Mr. Minister, this government moving behind closed 
cabinet doors and refusing to be publicly accountable and, I say 
also, increasingly becoming less credible with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — You know, as well as I, Mr. Minister, that when 
the Crown created the property management corporation, that it 
had all the characteristics of making it possible to carry out 
patronage in a way that it had never done before. And your 
government, Mr. Minister, has managed to carry out patronage in 
this province in ways that it has never been done as well. 
 
We are simply asking, as we stand here tonight, for the 
information that we expect from every department, from every 
minister, as we come before the estimates of this House. We are 
expecting some specificity with the details in your relationship 
with the property management corporation. And I say to you, Mr. 
Minister, that if you don’t come clean, and if the other ministers 
do not come clean, your credibility is going to sink to an all time 
low, and you can count on that from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — When we get into estimates, sometimes we 
actually touch on subjects that are within the estimates of the 
department. It seems like the member is covering a lot of other 
ground that isn’t within the Department of Environment. 
  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1150 

 

When you talk about doing things behind closed doors in cabinet, 
to the best of my knowledge, as long as I’ve been in government, 
and for many, many years before, cabinets have always sat 
behind closed doors. And they make many decisions, but the 
decisions become public after the decision is made, and that’s 
continuing to happen within our government. 
 
We have set up the property management corporation. The figure 
that I give you is the figure that is going to be charged by that 
corporation for the services that this department needs. The 
property management corporation, in its turn, will appear before 
you in Crown corporations, and you will have the opportunity to 
question, in detail, the minister responsible for that corporation. 
There are no closed doors; they’re all open doors. And if you 
have questions on the Department of Environment, I’d be pleased 
to answer those questions. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I find it unbelievable the statement 
that you’re making. I do not remember in this province of 
Saskatchewan there having been a Department of Labour wiped 
out at any time in the past without coming before this legislature. 
I do not at any time in the past remember a Department of Human 
Resources, Labour and Employment being created without 
coming before this legislature. Clearly, your government has 
chosen to operate behind closed cabinet doors. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of topics. I outlined those at the 
beginning of my comments, and let me to through those again 
that have to do with the expenditures relating to the property 
management corporation and your department. 
 
And I ask you simply this: to provide to this House the same 
information related to your dealings with the property 
management corporation as would be provided by the 
Department of Supply and Services in last year’s estimates, and 
let me refer to those again, those being: the lease and purchase 
details related to facilities that you use; the maintenance of 
buildings; the operation of buildings; renovation of 
accommodations; printing; mail and telecommunications; 
photographic services; and materials. 
 
And I ask you simply this, Mr. Minister: related to the 
Department of Environment, will you provide all of the details on 
those topics, on those categories, in the same way that they would 
have been provided by the Department of Supply and Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The detailed information that I gave earlier 
that broke down the $985,700 is the only break down that I can 
give the hon. member. I gave you that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Slight correction. It’s the only one you will 
give us. You could give us a good deal more if you weren’t, for 
some reason or other, ashamed of the information. 
 
Mr. Minister, we had the spectacle of you reading from a 
document which gave us a good deal of information that we 
would like, and you won’t give it to us, and you ought to. 

Mr. Minister, as the member from Moose Jaw North stated, your 
term of office since the election has been a litany of cover-ups, a 
litany of avoiding accountability. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Minister, the information we have asked concerns the 
expenditure of a good deal of taxpayers’ money at a time when 
you’ve been taking money away from people who very badly 
need it. If you insist that $1 million ought to go to the property 
management corporation, you have a responsibility to tell us why 
and how. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

That this committee direct the Minister of the Environment to 
provide to the committee the following information with 
respect to the relationship between the department and the 
property management corporation, for each of (the) 1986-87 
and 87-88 (fiscal years): 
 
(a) The purposes for which the department has made or 
proposes to make payments to the Corporation, citing the cost 
in each case; 
 
(b) The list of space occupied by the department, including the 
location, the number of square feet, annual cost and lease 
arrangements; 
 
(c) The number of vehicles assigned to the department and the 
cost of each; 
 
(d) Other services performed by the corporation for the 
department, including the cost of each. 

 
I move seconded by the member from Quill Lakes. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 

That the practice of permitting substantive motions in the 
Committee of the Whole and Committee of Finance be 
discontinued. 

 
That’s page 64, Committee of the Whole House. And on page 
170, procedures in committee. 
 

Each resolution for a Vote forms a distinct motion which can 
only be dealt with by being agreed to, reduced, negatived, 
superseded or withdrawn. The committee may reduce the 
amount of a Vote by the omission or reduction of the items of 
expenditure of which the Vote is composed. Here the power of 
the committee ceases. 

 
Mr. Shillington: — I thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me see if I 
may meet your exacting standards for these motions. I move: 
 

That this committee delete the sum of $985,700, the sums to be 
supplied to the Department of Environment, until the Minister 
of the Environment provide to the committee the following 
information with respect to the relationship between the 
department and the  

  



 
July 13, 1987 

 
1151 

 

property management corporation, for each of the ‘86-87 and 
‘87-88 years: 
 
(a) for purposes of which the department has made or proposes  
 
to make payments to the corporation, citing the cost in each 
case; 
 
(b) the list of the space occupied by the department, including 
the location, number of square feet, annual cost, and lease 
arrangements; 
 
(c) the number of vehicles assigned to the department and the 
cost of each; 
 
(d) services performed by the corporation for the department, 
including the cost of each. 

 
Mr. Chairman, I so move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The motion . . . I find the motion out 
of order because it doesn’t specify the amount to be reduced and 
in item . . .Order. In item 6, it can be voted against when that item 
comes before the committee. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder if the Clerk could . . . I’ll try this 
one more time. I was going to ask for a copy of it back. I will 
move: 
 

That subvote 1 be reduced by $985,700 till the minister 
provides the information requested with respect to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. As the motion stands, it’s not in order. 
But if the member was to put a period after $985,700, and delete 
everything after that, the motion would be in order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I make those changes, Mr. Chairman, so that 
we can . . . if you want to return it and have me initial it, I’ll do 
that. Make those technical changes so that the matter may 
proceed. 
 
(2150) 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 19 
 
Brocklebank Goulet 
Shillington Hagel 
Koskie Lyons 
Romanow Calvert 
Mitchell Lautermilch 
Simard Trew 
Solomon Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky Koenker 
Atkinson Goodale 
Anguish  
  

 
Nays — 27 

 
Duncan Martin 
 

McLeod Toth 
Andrew Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Lane McLaren 
Smith Hopfner 
Swan Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Gleim 
Hodgins Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Britton 
Meiklejohn  
  
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I just have one question. 
I’m sure the information is forthcoming, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
Mr. Chairman, before we had the first vote this evening, I had 
requested certain information from the minister with regard to 
consultants: the name of each consultant employed by the 
department in the year that’s closed; the purpose of the retention 
of each consultant, namely the study and the cost of the studies 
that were . . . or the money that was paid to each consultant. And 
I wonder if the minister can provide us with that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, if the vote had carried I’d have had a 
lot of difficulty providing you any information because that 
would’ve destroyed to staff of the Department of Environment. I 
thought you fellows were interested in environment and were 
kind of supportive of having a department. But anyway, the 
question that you’ve asked. Yes, we’ll provide the list of 
consultants that we’ve retained over the past year and the job that 
they were retained to do. I don’t . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And the amounts paid to . . . inaudible . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, and the amounts of the contract that 
they held. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll be looking forward 
eagerly to that. I will excuse you, Mr. Minister, for reflecting on a 
vote which has just been taken. And I will await the answer to the 
question which I posed to you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 
 
 
 


