













































August 13, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 13, 1987 

  

 

 

1773 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, before we adjourned at 5, I 

was relaying the message from the opposition and from the 

people of Saskatchewan about the choices that the government 

had made with respect to the Education budget and, indeed, to 

the budget on the whole. And the message was, Mr. Chairman, 

that the people of Saskatchewan felt that the government was 

betraying their youth by de-emphasizing the budget items 

related to education. Education was being cut. And I was asking 

the questions why. 

 

I was asking why, for example, the government chose to go that 

way. And the answer seemed to be that because of the first 

choice that they had made — the government had decided to go 

on a spending spree last year — they had another choice to 

make this year. They had to change their direction. They could 

change their direction either by collecting taxes from places 

they had been collected in the past or by down-sizing some of 

the budget items. 

 

Let me detail where the money could have come from, Mr. 

Chairman. From oil revenue the government could have 

received an extra $1.5 billion. From the PAPCO (Prince Albert 

Pulp Company) sale, the government could have received 148 

million. Savings from not going ahead with patronage 

appointments could have come up with another 20 million — 

1.7 billion in total when you total that, Mr. Chairman. That 

would have been half the deficit. 

 

And I mention that again. I mention that, Mr. Chairman, 

because it clearly was a choice. Clearly, it was a choice that the 

government had, but under your leadership you chose to do the 

opposite, and you chose to underfund education. 

 

What are the effects that we are feeling of the cut-backs to the 

funding? What are the effects of the 1 per cent cut-backs in the 

EDF (educational development fund) . . . the EDF cut-backs? 

They will result in two things, and to be brief I will just put 

them down into two points, Mr. Chairman. They will result in a 

higher pupil/teacher ratio which will lower the quality of 

education. They will result in that or they will result in higher 

local taxation. And we know that property taxes are already at a 

maximum toleration level. 

 

What will the university class cuts or limits and the technical 

school class cuts result in? They will result in fewer 

opportunities for adults, for young adults, to get post-secondary 

training in education. What will the community college cuts 

result in? They will result in no personal development classes 

taken by many adults in rural and in urban Saskatchewan. 

These cuts will have a long effect on our own youth. Why? 

Because the leadership of this government made the wrong 

choice. Instead of choosing to manage the economy so that it 

can be used to pay for education, our children’s education, we 

find that the money has been used to feed big oil, to feed big 

Weyerhaeuser, to feed bit Shand in the Estevan riding of the 

Premier, also providing rich desserts for the like of Peter 

Pocklington, George Hill, Tim Embury, Paul Schoenhals, Sid 

Dutchak, to name a few. 

 

Your government, your government called on Coopers & 

Lybrand for advice on how to get your finances in order, and 

these estimates show that you chose to accept the advice. If you 

want to continue to feed your same friends, you will have to 

reduce the amount needed for Health, Social Services, and 

you’ll have to reduce the amount for Education. That’s the 

course that you chose. Some choice. A poor choice and I say 

the wrong choice. 

 

Your leadership — and you were among them, Mr. Minister, 

and the Premier is among them — you were saying that you had 

to make a tough choice and you decided to reduce a deficit by 

cutting programs and increasing taxes to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We have shown in these estimates that there was another 

choice. The people of Saskatchewan know you had another 

choice. You chose to make cuts in Education and Health and 

Social Services; you chose to target the youth of Saskatchewan 

to bear the burden of this government’s mismanagement, when 

you could have chosen to go the steady course where 

Saskatchewan resources were used to pay for our programs. 

And it’s because of your choice that Saskatchewan people feel 

betrayed. They loathe your mismanagement. They feel 

powerless because you have not responded to their protests. 

They are left worried about the effects of the cuts. They are left 

wringing their hands because of your mismanagement priorities 

— and many of them feel like wringing your necks. 

 

When we listen to the Minister of Education throughout the 

estimates, he drove the road to distraction, using phrases like: 

— we must position ourselves for the 21st century; we must 

look to the future. He even raised repeatedly a motion that was 

put forward by the New Democratic youth. When we objected 

to the radical surgery he was performing, he accused the 

members on this side of living in the past. And he said that the 

New Democratic youths were at variance with the members on 

this side. He said that we wanted local autonomous governance 

for technical institutes, and the New Democratic youth wanted 

one set of governance for the institutes, and that we were out of 

date. 

 

But what is the resolution that he talked about? The resolution 

reads like this. It says, and I quote: 

 

That we endorse and actively support the reorganization of 

technical institutes under an independent board similar in 

structure to the university board of governors. 

 

Clearly, amalgamation was not mentioned. Clearly, our 

universities have two independent boards of governors.  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1774 

 

 

Clearly. 

 

And then he says we were out of date. And do you know when 

that resolution was passed, Mr. Chairman? Do you know when 

that resolution was passed? It was passed in 1976. 

 

So what did we get? What are we getting from the minister? We 

are getting camouflage and distraction from the cuts . . . to 

distract from the cuts. We are getting rhetoric and we are 

getting beautiful glossy pamphlets. 

 

Now I tell the minister that until he changes and his government 

changes their relationship with those who are sucking money 

from the province that should be put into the educational fund, 

until that changes, then the work that’s done in here will end up 

to be nothing but bunk — unless he changes. And that would be 

too bad. And that would be too bad, because as you read these 

documents . . . There is a lot of good stuff in there. There is a 

lot that’s debatable. But there is some good material, as there 

was in the Directions. This document is threatened. 

 

I guess an analogy, Mr. Chairman, an analogy would be that the 

crowing of a rooster does not put eggs in the frying pan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — You put out attractive booklets, well-written 

booklets, and then you pronounce rhetorical statements about 

amalgamation, about positioning for the 21st century, about 

how awesome the year 2000 will be. And I tell you, that will 

not result . . . These statements will not result in improved 

education unless the resources are put there to implement it. 

And these estimates clearly show, Mr. Minister, that the 

resources are being sucked into the black hole of the deficit, 

resulting from the mismanagement of your government. 

 

We are faced not only with mismanagement; we are faced with 

deception. Let’s take a look at what we found out about the 

teachers’ pension fund. That pension fund has a $1 billion 

unfunded liability. There was an agreement between the 

teachers and the government of the time, that the fund be . . . 

that that particular pension be funded and become funded, and 

since 1980 there were attempts, consistent attempts, to keep it 

. . . to fund it fully. And according to section 14 of The 

Teachers’ Superannuation Act, all contributions on behalf of 

teachers and by teachers, and the interest, together with the 

interest thereon, was by law to be deposited annually into this 

fund. 

 

I am advised that for the years 1980, 1981, 1982, 1983, and 

1984 this was done. Then suddenly, under this government, in 

1985 and 1986 things changed — then things changed. Thirty 

million dollars was siphoned off in 1985, and this last year 40 

million. Your government siphoned $70 million. The rationale 

was what? The rationale was because you needed the money 

and because the treasury was broke. Well that part was true — 

true if not an understatement. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, if your government was straight and it had 

gone to the teachers and had bargained or perhaps  

signed a contract, maybe the teachers would have agreed. 

Maybe they would have agreed to loan the money or to shift it. 

But what did your government do? It left the impression that the 

7 per cent of interest from that fund, to be contributed back into 

the pension fund, was the only legal obligation — that you only 

had to contribute 7 per cent of the investment income from the 

teachers’ fund back into the teachers’ fund. 

 

I asked for an authority or a statute or an agreement, and first I 

was given a reference to section 55 of The Teachers’ 

Superannuation Act. And when you look at that, it deals solely 

with the refund of contributions and the rate of the teacher that 

gets a refund. A teacher who ceases teaching gets a refund; it 

says nothing on that in there about how that fund should be 

built up. 

 

So when that was pointed out, then we were told, well it’s by 

mutual agreement between the teacher body and the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And what was the authority? I 

believe that what I was handed was a collective agreement from 

past, and in it, once again, it referred to the 7 per cent but only 

as to how much a teacher who ceases teaching should get from 

his pension fund, or her pension fund. 

 

So what has happened is the teachers have been fooled for two 

years. Now I don’t like being misled by a government, and I 

know teachers don’t like being misled by a government, 

particularly if it means $70 million of their pension fund. It’s 

bad enough you mismanage the economy; it’s bad enough you 

should underfund Education; but it’s terrible that you should 

need $70 million from the teachers’ pension fund to help run 

the government — and worse yet, to create a deception that you 

have a mutual agreement. To do so in the absence of an 

agreement is just an outright outrage. 

 

The estimates reveal, Mr. Chairman, a betrayal, underfunding, 

deception, and mismanagement by your government. You have 

been entrusted, Mr. Minister, you have been entrusted with the 

education of our children. I don’t believe that you or your 

colleagues understand the gravity of the feelings of the people 

of Saskatchewan who have children and relatives in our 

schools. I don’t believe that you really feel or believe how they 

want leadership, and the lack of leadership that they see in this 

government and in this department. I don’t believe that you 

even begin to understand that they feel that you have . . . how 

strongly they feel that you have abandoned, abandoned the 

steady course set by the previous governments and ministers. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Minister, we have lost confidence in your leadership. And 

accordingly, Mr. Chairman, I move, seconded by the member 

from Saskatoon University: 

 

That the amount for item 1 be reduced by an amount equal to 

the salary of the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr.  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1775 

 

 

Chairman, I want to make some brief comments on what these 

estimates have demonstrated in terms of educational policy by 

this government. 

 

First, Mr. Chairman, they’ve demonstrated how accessibility to 

post-secondary education in this province is now being denied 

to hundreds of young Saskatchewan people as a result of this 

budget. Eleven hundred student spaces eliminated at our 

technical institutes. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I believe there is a motion on the floor and 

the hon. member should be speaking to the motion. He is not. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I find that the member’s point of order is 

well taken. I would ask the member from Saskatoon University 

to keep his remarks to the motion before the committee. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the motion is that the 

minister’s salary . . . The motion is that the estimates under . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, if you could . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. It’s very difficult to 

hear with the chattering that’s going on in the back benches. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — My remarks are in order because I’m speaking 

to the . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Are you challenging the ruling of the 

Chair? 

 

Mr. Prebble: — No, I’m not. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I would ask the member top keep his 

comments on the motion before the committee and the motion 

reads: 

 

That the amount for item no. 1 be reduced by amount equal to 

the salary of the Minister of Education. 

 

I would ask the member to keep his remarks pertaining to the 

motion. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the intent of this motion is to 

demonstrate to the legislature that we on this side of the House 

have lost confidence in the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And my remarks, my remarks this evening are 

to that point, Mr. Chairman. And as I was about to say, the first 

reason why we have lost confidence in this minister is because 

this government and this minister have demonstrated that they 

are not prepared any longer to assure accessibility to 

post-secondary education in this province. They have cut 1,100 

spaces at Saskatchewan’s technical institutes. 

We have enrolment quotas, Mr. Chairman, for the first time in 

the history of the University of Saskatchewan, denying access 

to at least 500 qualified students. We have denial to 

accessibility for post-secondary education as a result of this 

government’s decision to increase tuition fees at technical 

institutes by 15 per cent, and in many courses even higher than 

that. 

 

We have a record, Mr. Chairman, over the last five years in 

which tuition rates at our universities have risen 43 per cent — 

double the rate of inflation — denying access to the universities 

of this province to many young Saskatchewan people. 

 

We have, Mr. Chairman, in this budget, as a result of the 

incompetence of this minister, we have a situation, in which, 

because of the underfunding of programs at our technical 

institutes and our universities, we see severe cuts in programs, 

particularly in programs that were primarily enrolled by female 

students. 

 

This budget, Mr. Chairman, attacks women. In the case of the 

university, forcing the closure of the home economics 

department at the University of Saskatchewan. In the case of the 

technical institutes, forcing the closure of programs like office 

education, dental assistants, cosmetology, certified nursing 

assistants, and a host of other programs primarily held by 

women. 

 

This budget, Mr. Chairman, brought forward today by this 

Minister of Education, which we’ve been debating over the past 

two weeks, has brought forward the most savage cuts to the 

student bursary program that we’ve ever seen in the history of 

the province of Saskatchewan, moving it, Mr. Chairman, to a 

situation where, for the first time since the bursary program was 

brought down, students are going to have to borrow almost 

$6,000 before they become eligible for any bursary assistance 

from this government, Mr. Chairman. 

 

These estimates that have been brought before us in the last two 

weeks also result in a very substantial cut in apprenticeship 

training spaces. The minister acknowledged in these estimates 

yesterday that the number of students enrolled in apprenticeship 

training had dropped dramatically from over 5,000, five years 

ago, to only just over 3,000 today. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, essentially what we have seen in these 

estimates is an attempt by this government to restrict 

accessibility and to force students in this province, at great 

expense to themselves, to relocate from one centre and another 

to either continue taking a course that they were taking before at 

another institute, but that is now being cut by this government, 

or in many cases, if they were enrolling in a course for the first 

time that was originally available in Saskatoon — shall we say 

office education or dental assistant technology — now being 

forced to move to Regina or Moose Jaw to take that same 

course. 

 

Mr. Chairman, therefore it’s this government’s decision to deny 

accessibility to post-secondary education to hundreds of 

Saskatchewan young people. That is the first reason why 

members on this side of the House have lost  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1776 

 

 

confidence in the Minister of Education. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there’s a second reason why we’ve lost 

confidence in the Minister of Education, and that is that this 

budget has also unfairly treated faculty and staff at 

Saskatchewan’s universities, community colleges, and technical 

institutes in this province. 

 

Virtually no consultation with the staff and faculty effected 

before cuts were made by this government. Lay-offs, Mr. 

Chairman, that in many cases cannot be justified at all given the 

record of employment for graduates in the programs that were 

cut. Decisions by this government to lay off people with many 

years of service to this province in a random manner 

demonstrating that this government did not appreciate their 

service, and firings and bumpings, Mr. Chairman, that have 

destroyed the morale of those still left working in our technical 

institutes and our community college system in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Chairman, where did the minister 

get his advice from? It’s obvious that he got it from one of two 

sources. Either he got it from the Coopers & Lybrand studies 

that were being done by this government . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or the Fraser Institute. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And the minister says, or the Fraser Institute. 

That’s right. You had two sources, Mr. Minister, of advice that I 

suggest you primarily have drawn. 

 

First of all, Mr. Minister, the reports that were done by Coopers 

& Lybrand, which you’ve yet to table in this Assembly but 

which you acknowledge were done for the kindergarten to 

grade 12 system and for the advanced education system, and I 

suggest to you, sir, that when you table those reports, those 

reports will focus primarily on where the government could 

save money and not on where the government could improve its 

quality of education in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I suggest to you that the second source that 

this government and this minister drew on for his advice was 

from the advice of people like Michael Walker and others who 

work at the Fraser Institute. Mr. Walker has acknowledged that 

he has come to this province to give advice to this government 

on many occasions in the last months. And I suggest to you that 

one of the areas in which he was giving advice was how to 

follow the example of British Columbia in cutting educational 

services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, there’s a third reason why we have lost 

confidence in this minister and therefore are calling for the 

removal of his salary from these estimates, and that is: — that 

the result of his cuts and his denial of accessibility has been a 

very significant decline in the quality of education and 

particularly the quality of post-secondary education that’s 

offered in this province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the firings, the early retirements, the bumpings 

at Saskatchewan’s technical institutes — the  

net result of those, Mr. Chairman is going to be a marked 

decline in the quality of education that’s available in 

Saskatchewan’s technical institutes when students return to 

them next month. You can’t . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Rubbish. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — One of the members opposite says rubbish. 

And I say to him that as a result of bumpings and firings, you 

can’t eliminate four or five of the people who working in a 

program out of the six or seven that were there originally and 

hope to have the same quality of education when students return 

in the fall. And that’s been the case again and again at places 

like Kelsey Institute and STI (Saskatchewan Technical 

Institute). 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, we on this side of the House say that the 

two-year freeze that this Minister of Education is imposing on 

university funding means no additional faculty . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I believe that the ministers’ salaries are 

under Executive Council estimates and not under Education 

estimates, and I wonder if the hon. member’s motion is in order. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member’s point of order is not 

well taken because the motion reads, an amount equal to the 

minister’s salary, and it isn’t specifically the minister’s salary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The opposition is in fact a motion to reduce 

the expenditures on education by an amount equal to the 

minister’s salary, with the minister’s salary being paid out of 

another vote, Executive Council. In effect the member’s motion 

is to effect reduce the expenditures on education. Is that 

correct? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. The minister’s salary is in 

item number 43 and the debate continues. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I was saying 

before I was interrupted by the member for Qu’Appelle, the 

two-year budget freeze that these estimates and that this 

minister has imposed on the university of this province, means 

no additional hiring of faculty. In fact it means cuts to faculty 

positions at the University of Saskatchewan and the University 

of Regina. It means a continuation and a worsening of 

overcrowded class-rooms at our universities. It means a further 

deterioration of library services on our university campus. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, perhaps most serious of all, the minister’s 

push to privatize education, to encourage education for profit in 

this province, with students graduating and getting diplomas 

that have no national recognition in the long term, may prove to 

be the most serious blow of all to educational quality in 

Saskatchewan. We reject, sir, your attempt to privatize adult 

education in the people of Saskatchewan, and we will reverse 

that attempt when we are next elected to government. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we reject this budget and support this motion 

because this minister is jeopardizing the quality of education in 

Saskatchewan. We reject these estimates  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1777 

 

 

because these estimates break the government’s commitment to 

make education one of its top priorities. And we reject these 

estimates because they fail to prepare us for the year 2000. 

 

In the year 2000, Mr. Minister, we will need fully trained health 

care professionals in our dental programs, in our hospitals, in 

our rehabilitation services. And your cuts to health care training 

in this province assure us that we will be short of nursing 

spaces, and short of rehabilitation care workers, and short of 

home care workers in the year 2000 unless your policies are 

reversed. 

 

(1930) 

 

You say, Mr. Chairman, this minister has claimed that he wants 

to build a future for high tech, for science and technology in this 

province, and we say to him that he cannot do that if he erodes 

university funding in this province. The universities are the base 

for a future high-tech economy in Saskatchewan, and he is 

undermining that economy by underfunding the University of 

Saskatchewan and the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister has claimed throughout these 

estimates that his government is working towards planning for 

the year 2000, and we on this side of the House say that one of 

the very reasons why we reject his estimates is because they do 

not lead us towards the year 2000; they lead us back towards 

the 1930’s when we had the last Progressive Conservative 

government in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chairman. I just 

wanted to reiterate and put the motion in the context of the 

educational estimates. We have heard now over the last six 

weeks that the NDP say they want more money spent on 

education, and yet tonight they bring a motion to this Assembly 

to reduce the moneys being spent on education by, I believe, 

some $60,000. And that is specifically what that motion does. 

 

Now I don’t know whether that puts the lie to all the arguments 

having been made over the last several months, or, Mr. Speaker, 

is the true story of what the NDP really want coming forward 

tonight when their educational critic comes before this 

Assembly and says to this government, cut more money from 

education. And I find that a shocking statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was strange . . . Now maybe it’s the absence of 

the opposition leader that’s caused the several mix-ups and lack 

of understanding and poor question period performance, which 

leads to this motion tonight. But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 

I’m going to urge members opposite to reconsider what that 

motion means and to begin to look when you stand up in this 

House and ask that the Education budget be cut another 60 

some thousand dollars, because that’s precisely what you’ve 

done tonight. And I find that appalling, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I’m going to urge all members, including some who didn’t  

get carried away with the foolishness and the procedural 

stupidity of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, to urge that 

this motion be defeated and that that 60 some thousand dollars 

be restored to the educational budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t let the kind of deception, 

which the Minister of Finance is trying to practise before this 

House in this debate, pass without some kind of response. 

 

Once again we have seen the Minister of Finance, a member of 

Executive Council and the cabinet, deliberately trying to 

deceive people, to mix facts with fiction — the same kind of 

fiction that he used in drawing up his budget these last several 

years. 

 

The Minister of Finance knows very well that the motion to 

reduce the Minister of Education’s salary to $1 is a sign . . . 

Pardon me, to reduce the minister’s salary is a sign . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — To zero. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — To zero, is a sign of non-confidence in the 

government and non-confidence in the activities of the minister. 

To suggest that this opposition, which day after day has stood 

here and have demanded more money, demanded more money 

for Education, to say that we’re trying to say the opposite is 

nothing but plain deception, and the Minister of Finance, who is 

well known in this province for practising that type of 

deception, should be ashamed. 

 

I’m going to support the amendment, I can tell you that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am not going to 

make any suggestions here or any assumptions or ask anyone to 

decide what people are thinking, but we should really consider 

the reality of this motion, and how clearly it was laid out by the 

Minister of Finance that his motion to reduce the salary does 

not reduce the salary of the minister, because it cannot be done 

by this motion. And therefore, there’s no alternative to defeat 

this motion because if we pass it, the Education budget is going 

to be reduced by whatever the salary of the minister is. And I 

encourage the members opposite to reconsider the reduction of 

the Education budget. And I know that our colleague and the 

member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg understands this and will 

vote with the government on this matter because he does not 

wish to reduce the Education budget. And I’m certain that there 

will be some sanity at least among the people of the right and 

the people of the near right in the Liberal Party. 

 

(1942) 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 10 

 

Prebble Shillington 

Tchorzewski Rolfes 

Kowalsky Atkinson 

Lyons Calvert 

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1778 

 

 

Simard Smart 

 

Nays — 26 

 

Duncan McLeod 

Andrew Berntson 

Lane Smith 

Swan Muirhead 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, order. I would ask the 

member from Regina Lakeview to be quiet while the vote is 

being taken. Order. Vote continue. 

 

Schmidt Hodgins 

Gerich Hepworth 

Klein Meiklejohn 

Martin Toth 

Sauder McLaren 

Hopfner Petersen 

Martens Gleim 

Neudorf Kopelchuk 

Saxinger Britton 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have 

a number of questions that I would like to address to the 

minister this evening and I understand that his officials are 

making their way back into the Chamber for advice to him. 

 

While they’re doing that, I would like to begin by making the 

point to the minister that I have followed the questions and 

answers in these estimates rather carefully and it seems to me 

that the minister has on a number of occasions . . . The minister 

has tried to make the point on a number of occasions that at 

least some members in the opposition are somehow frozen in 

the past and afraid of change. I want to assure him that I’m not 

one of those that fears change. I am anxious to pursue reform in 

anticipation of the future. And my only caveat attached to that, 

Mr. Minister, is that I would want to be sure that whatever 

changes are undertaken are thoughtful and timely and prudent, 

and not done in some kind of a deficit-driven panic, but in a 

thoughtful and well thought out way. 

 

(1945) 

 

And I am concerned, Mr. Minister, when I hear the outcry of 

distress that I have heard on a number of occasions in the last 

six months from teachers and from students and from parents 

and from school boards and from post-secondary education 

students and from professors and post-secondary education 

administrators and others. 

 

The minister indicates that he has, in the process of undertaking 

the changes that he has made, consulted broadly with almost 

everyone in Saskatchewan. But I must say, Mr. Minister, that 

there are a large number of people in the province who are still 

in a state of considerable apprehension about what has 

happened, and what continues to happen, and the uncertainty 

into which the changes seem to be directing education in this 

province. And I think it is important in this legislature for  

us to explore those issues. And I have a long list that I would 

like to raise with you and receive your reassurance about. I’ll 

try to restrict myself this evening to just three or four of the 

more important. 

 

First of all, in respect of the changes that you have made in the 

community college system in Saskatchewan, one of the changes 

in the regions and in the structures which you have undertaken 

directly affects my constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and 

that general district surrounding Assiniboia and many towns in 

south-central and south-western Saskatchewan. 

 

I gather from looking at the new map that we are not longer 

connected to the Coteau Range structure as it used to exist out 

of Moose Jaw, but are shifted into a much larger region 

generally known as the south-east region for community college 

purposes. And in order to answer a number of questions which 

my constituents have raised, I would ask you this evening, Mr. 

Minister, to clarify if you can the status of the Assiniboia 

district in relation to the community college structure. 

 

On behalf of my constituents, I would want to know where they 

stand and what will be available to them in future, compared to 

what existed in the past. And perhaps you could begin, Mr. 

Minister, by indicating specifically where that Assiniboia 

district now fits geographically in the structure, and will there in 

future be an ongoing community college office located in 

Assiniboia or in the Assiniboia district. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I thank the independent member for 

his questions. 

 

A couple of points I would make, first relative to your opening 

statement about consultation. I wouldn’t want to leave the 

impression, as I haven’t attempted to do here in these many 

days of the estimates, that the consultative process is somehow 

one that you turn on and turn off, and you do it for three months 

and then stop somehow. That process will continue on for some 

good long time. 

 

As relates specifically to the K to 12 side, and the teachers and 

school boards, and all who might have been interested in the 

establishment of Directions, there were several thousands of 

people that provided feedback including, I think, 6,000-odd 

teachers — written feedback on that consultative process. When 

the hon. member from Swift Current was the minister, I think 

there was something like 800 public meetings held, although 

my memory may serve to be corrected on that. So there was an 

extensive consultative process leading up to the publication of 

Directions, which will serve as the blueprint for the future. 

 

Similarly in the post-secondary education, certainly with 20 

meetings you’re not going to touch, you know, 500,000 people, 

nor was that the intention. Nor was it the intention that it should 

stop there. I’ve engaged in discussion with the universities’ 

boards of governors, the students, the student associations, so I 

will be engaging in further discussions as we go forward with 

that blueprint that I tabled in this House, and develop and frame 

the distance education initiatives and the literacy initiatives. 

And that will be ongoing over the next weeks and months  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1779 

 

 

and over the next year or two, I’m sure. 

 

As it relates specifically to the area in your constituency and the 

community college that was part of Coteau Range, for the most 

part nothing changes until the legislation in this House passes, 

because that will officially mandate the changes, if you like. 

The indication has been given, of course, based on the wishes 

and the desires of the people that wrote me, and there were a 

number . . . From a geographic standpoint, that part that was in 

Coteau Range will now be going to Weyburn in the south-east, 

and that was as they wished it. And I think there was some 

discussion between that and Swift Current, but I . . . My sense 

was, based on the correspondence I had, that this was their 

wish. 

 

Assiniboia, the office will continue in so far as changes and 

what’s available and courses, etc., etc. The only thing that will 

change there is as what will change across the province, and 

that is what’s commonly known as the hobby courses will no 

longer be delivered by the regional college. We would expect 

that local interest groups may well deliver them if there’s 

sufficient interest in any given community. 

 

And I don’t know whether you have the most recent boundary 

map that lays out the regional college districts. And the final 

one — at least I’m advised it’s our most final — but I’ll have a 

copy sent over to you to make sure that you see how it’s laid 

out and have that understanding. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I thank the minister for that. Do I take it, Mr. 

Minister, from what you’ve said, that essentially in Assiniboia 

the office will remain where it is, doing essentially the same 

function? Can you indicate as yet what, if any, staffing changes 

will be occurring in that office. And can you give me some idea 

what process you are going through within the department in 

developing the curriculum to be offered through this office or 

through you and your officials engaged in to develop the new 

curriculum that you have spoken about in general terms in the 

House, but haven’t yet provided us too much detail about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — A couple of points here for the hon. 

member. First, as a point of clarification, just so you 

understand, these employees aren’t employees of the 

Department of Education, and have never been. It’s not unlike a 

school board relationship, that kind of thing. So in terms of 

what ultimately will be the staff and/or their job descriptions 

specifically in Assiniboia, I can’t speak at this point in time for 

the regional board. They are also involved in this transition 

period which really doesn’t become . . . They can’t work in a 

solid sort of fashion, in terms of making some decisions, until 

the legislation passes. Which takes me back to my first 

comment about how Coteau Range . . . At this point in time 

we’ll probably still fund it because that’s, in a technical sense, 

how that has to work until the legislation is passed. 

 

I guess what I’m trying to show you is that we have some 

complications here while the legislation . . . until the legislation 

is passes. It’s not going to handcuff us in terms of delivering 

programs, or in terms of having an Assiniboia office staffed. 

The pay cheque may come from  

one place for a while until we get things sorted out, that kind of 

thing. 

 

The point I want to leave with you though on this, is that . . . 

And if I’m sounding vague on who and what, and what they’ll 

be specifically doing in the Assiniboia office, I can’t because 

that will be a decision of the regional board. But I can say that 

our expectation and our view probably would be that it 

wouldn’t be staffed a terrible amount different than what we 

might expect across the rest of the province, in terms of . . . for 

a community that size. 

 

Your other question is relative to curriculum. I’m not sure I 

totally understand it because they’re not into curriculum 

development particularly, so I’m not really clear as to what you 

were getting at there. The local contact committees will still do 

their job in so far as if there is some view that a institute course 

or adult basic education or university extension course, there’s 

substantial interest — the process that’s always been in place, 

there’ll virtually be no difference there. The difference, of 

course, is that we’re going to be very much more proactive in 

delivering — and I hesitate to use the word because it sounds a 

bit eight-cylinderish — but we’re going to be more proactive in 

delivering what one might call more sophisticated program 

which what is the people want: — more institute programming, 

more university classes. We’re going to be more proactive on 

that and as part of that the regional colleges will be very hooked 

into our distance education initiatives — you know, the use of 

the new technology to deliver more and more programming to 

more and more areas in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So I don’t know whether that answers your question relative to 

curriculum or what courses or whatever, but it gives you some 

sense of what I see happening there. We see this as a very 

positive step for communities such as Assiniboia and area. I 

think it’s also fair to say that the south-east regional college 

which they have chosen to become a part of has been a very 

proactive and very . . . a very busy and aggressive community 

college and the board is currently under the chairmanship of 

Mary Halbert, who’s a person who very much has her heart in 

adult education and doing a good job. And I think you’ll be well 

served. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I think it’s that hiatus period 

that I am concerned about. We seem to be in a never, never land 

here in the midst of this process of change. And what a number 

of people in my constituency are asking me is, what will 

effectively be available to them in the fall when they may be 

interested in pursuing some of the services and some of the 

programs through their local community college. They are 

pretty familiar with both the type of service that has been 

offered and the procedure by which they access that service 

over the course of the last number of years. But there has been a 

tremendous amount of change in the last few months. The 

process of change continues. As you say, things can’t really 

begin to settle down into some new pattern until the legislation 

is adopted or amended or whatever, and while everything is up 

in the air people are asking a lot of questions in terms of 

specifically this fall and how they  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1780 

 

 

will have access to the types of programs and courses they 

want. 

 

And you may well not be in a position to answer their questions 

tonight but I wonder if you could indicate, Mr. Minister, 

specifically how people with questions about community 

college services in the Assiniboia district, how they can find 

answers to their questions in due course. Is there going to be, 

for example, a catalogue published that will indicate to them 

what the changes are, what new courses they may have access 

to, what they previously have had access to that'’ no longer 

going to be available? It seems to be a rather confusing situation 

at the moment and I think people are anxious to know exactly 

what’s available to them, and how they properly go about 

taking advantage of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I know, as the hon. member knows, as 

I suspect he’s had some letters and calls too, that . . . I mean, 

initially the calls were of the nature of, what area are we going 

to be in and that kind of thing. And as the processes unfolded, 

all these things have been addressed. 

 

I mean, I suppose when it came to things like the boundary, we 

could have sat in our little offices and said, well here is a nice 

boundary. But the view was that we ought to get some sense of 

what the people wanted. And that took a month or six weeks or 

maybe even more. And I think because of that, we’ve made the 

right . . . We’re on the right line, if you like. 

 

But I know during that process, of course, until it's drawn and they 

know for sure where they belong, there's some uncertainty. And 

then there's the additional situation of the cumbersomeness at this 

very point in time of dealing with two offices in some sense. 

 

But I can assure you and assure the people there that if they have 

some inquires and want some further understanding of what might 

be available, to contact their local contact person if they know 

them, or the Assiniboia office. If it isn't staffed, it will be shortly, 

with a secretary or a receptionist — that kind of thing at a 

minimum, I'm sure. The Coteau Range office in Moose Jaw, since 

they are still sort of technically the office until the legislation 

passes, I'm sure would be another contact point. 

 

And finally to address your very question — and a sensible one, I 

might add — about, is there some kind of catalogue published or 

whatever. And there will be a calendar coming out shortly. And I 

think what you'll find in that calendar will verify what I said 

earlier, that we're not talking about less courses; we're going to be 

talking about more offerings. And the less, if there is any less, will 

be because some hobby courses . . . The hobby courses will have 

been dropped. So as much as there's certainly a transition period 

here, I don't see it holding us up or causing any great problems. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the minister for that 

information. I want to move on to another area. It has been 

discussed earlier in the estimates in some general way. 

 

And it has to do with the new formulas adopted by the  

Department of Education in relation to capital funding for school 

projects. And, Mr. Minister, I have received a number of inquiries 

about this. Perhaps the most telling one was a letter that I received 

some time ago, a copy of a letter that I received some time ago 

from the Unity Roman Catholic Separate School Division No. 88. 

 

There are portions of this letter that I would like to read into the 

record, Minister, in order to solicit your reactions to them. Maybe 

I could send you a copy of the letter over so you might be able to 

follow the point that I'm anxious to make. The letter, Mr. Minister, 

is dated June 19. It's addressed to the Premier and I understand 

that a copy was also forwarded to you for your information. I 

won't read the whole letter but I do want to read a couple of 

paragraphs that I think explain the predicament that this school 

division is in. And again for the record, the letter comes from the 

Unity Roman Catholic Separate School Division No. 88, and it 

reads in part as follows: 

 

To better explain the situation, let us compare the 

requirements of the old method to the implications of this 

new formula. 

 

And again references are made to the capital funding formula for 

school projects. 

 

From what information we have, under the old formula, the 

amount paid on an average capital project by a larger school 

division, when the 2.5 mill cap did not come into play, was 

13 (per cent) to 17 per cent. If this larger school division 

were now required to pay the average 20 per cent of a capital 

project, the greatest effect this requirement would have on it 

would be to double its cost. However, it paints an entirely 

different picture for a small school division. As an example, 

let us use a school division with a $5,000,000.00 assessment 

being granted approval of a $5,000,000.00 capital project. 

Under the old formula the cost to the division would have 

been $12,500.00 or 2.5 mills. Using the new funding 

method, and applying the average requirement of 20 per cent 

of the project, the cost to the same division is a $100,000.00. 

This amounts to 20 mills for this school division, and is an 

800 per cent increase over what was required in the past. An 

increase of such magnitude would be devastating to any 

school division, large or small. 

 

Mr. Minister, the letter goes on to discuss certain issues related to 

the ability to pay, and then concludes with this paragraph: 

 

Fearing for our very existence we, of course, feel very 

strongly about this issue and hope that our information can 

help you to realize the unfairness of the situation. Perhaps, 

due to the many other duties of government, you were not 

fully aware of the implications of this new method of 

financing school projects. Now in your awareness, it is our 

hopes that steps can be taken to correct the unjustness of it. 

 

And the letter is signed by Mrs. Wildeman, the secretary-treasurer 

of the Unity Roman Catholic Separate  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1781 

 

 

School Division No. 88. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe this particular school division has raised a 

very valid point in terms of the escalation in the demands being 

made by the department on local school divisions in terms of the 

local share that they will have to pick up in new capital projects. In 

the one example this school division uses, it amounts to potentially 

an 800 per cent increase. 

 

As the letter points out, for larger school division, that's a 

substantial problem. For smaller school divisions and separate 

school division, it can be almost a catastrophic problem and I 

would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you could, to turn your attention 

specifically to this case referred to by the school at Unity, and if 

you will also in your answer, more generally to the principles 

upon which you and the department based your decision to 

increase your demands upon local school divisions in terms of the 

capital projects that they wish to undertake. What it might result 

in, Mr. Minister, is a state of affairs where those projects simply 

don't get done because local school divisions can't afford them any 

more. I'm sure you would agree with me that that would be a 

rather tragic state of affairs, especially for these smaller school 

divisions across rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, there's no 

question that there's been some changes in our approach on capital 

construction funding, and I outlined the reasons for these earlier in 

these estimates. And to some degree — maybe even to a large 

degree — I think we could say that there is a larger question of 

fairness that enters into the decision to change the formula, and I'll 

not get into the details of that argument again. 

 

But it seems to me . . . I guess the question that I would raise here 

in answer to your question is, what this board was faced with on a 

. . . I understand the project was something in the neighbourhood 

of 635,000. Under the pervious formula they would have had to 

cover the down payment, albeit a smaller number, in one year. 

 

That does cause a big strain on smaller school divisions. There's 

no question about that. It causes a strain on lots of school 

divisions, and on larger school divisions even when they have to 

do capital projects, and that's why they are always well thought out 

and planned and not taken into consideration lightly, albeit smaller 

school boards probably don't do them as soon. 

 

It was because of the fact that they had to come up with their down 

payment all in one year, that was part and parcel why we changed 

the formula, the process, so that instead of coming up with it all in 

one year they now come up with it over a period of 10 years. They 

can amortize it over 10 years. 

 

Now the third point that's valid here, as it relates to a small school 

board, is the provisions in our formulas in education that have 

always made adjustments and have compensated for smaller 

school divisions and rural school boards are in the capital formula 

as well. So you get that same kind of compensating adjustment, 

which once again becomes . . . It satisfies the argument of fairness 

to those who are smaller and have less resources. 

And the fourth thing that you should know here — and I'm not 

trying to suggest that this project will somehow be really easy for 

the local taxpayers, but of course given that this isn't really a cost, 

it's an investment in education and their children's future, I don't 

know as they look at it as burdensome ever — is that that school 

board has a $120,000 surplus which is about equal to what they 

will have to come up with for the down payment. 

 

(2015) 

 

So as much as I am sensitive to the change in formula, I also 

believe that the change in process, in some ways, won't cause the 

strain on a yearly basis because it will be spread over 10 years. So 

what I'm saying is: — yes, there's changes. Are they going to 

create insurmountable hardships? I don't think so. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I don't know if this particular letter 

that I've sent across to you, dated June 19, from the Unity Roman 

Catholic Separate School Division No. 88 to the Premier, has been 

referred to you for reply, although it does indicate that you 

received a copy of it for information. 

 

Could you tell me if a formal detailed reply to that particular 

inquiry has been prepared and returned to Mrs. Wildeman, the 

secretary-treasurer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'll have to take notice and check. I can 

follow up on that for you. We have a lot of material with us here 

but obviously we don't have access to all of our correspondence 

over the last few months. I'll look into it for you, and provide as 

you've requested. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I thank the minister for that. I know the school 

division, the last time I spoke with them, a matter of some two or 

three weeks ago, my information then was to the best of their 

knowledge a reply had not yet come. I wonder if the minister 

could attend to that. 

 

And could he also indicate, either tonight or in the near future, 

how many capital projects across Saskatchewan were caught in 

mid-stream by the policy change? It would appear that this is one. 

 

And I wonder if you have any information tonight, or if you could 

provide it shortly, as to which projects, how many of them in total, 

what type of projects, and for how much money, were caught in 

this problem of a policy change, beginning their planning on one 

grant formula basis and finding out that, before they were finished 

their plans, the formula had changed and they were suddenly 

going to have to contribute much more locally than they had 

anticipated when they originally envisaged the project. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In a very technical sense, I don't know if 

there's any projects that were caught in mid-stream. The projects 

that were approved last year, and there's a number of steps in 

project approval, and the ones that were at the . . . had the right 

stamp of approval as opposed to a look and concept, etc., etc., etc., 

were done under that. And I suspect, you know, if I look at the 

history of this thing, as I understand it, there's some school  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1782 

 

 

divisions that put their projects forth 2 and 3 and 4 and 5 years 

sometimes before they're high on the priority list and go forward. 

So I don't know in the technical sense if there's any caught in 

mid-stream. 

 

When they were planning last year to build a new project, albeit 

for 2 or 3 or 4 years down the road, they might have been working 

on one set of assumptions, but as you know, things do change 

from year to year, and this is one of the things that has now 

changed. 

 

I don't know as they're caught totally off guard, because how we 

got to where we got to on this new formula was as a result of some 

consultations that were held about nine or 10 months ago with a 

number of . . . with virtually I think, all of the board chairmen and 

directors across Saskatchewan. And there was a number of issues 

raised that I talked about earlier in the House; you know, roof 

repair formulas, and all those kinds of things. They themselves 

raised points. I suspect that what we're seeing here is some ideas 

that came forward from a number of meetings. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Minister, I thank you for that answer, although I 

think you've at least implied in your answer that you acknowledge 

that there is some disruption and some difficulty for some school 

divisions as a result of the change, and only time will tell whether 

it's for the better or the worse. But there are certainly some school 

divisions that are presently very apprehensive about the proposed 

change. 

 

I want to move on to one other subject, Mr. Minister. I have three 

other areas in total I would like to raise with you this evening, and 

I'll try to do that as briefly as I can. 

 

One has to do with what has happened in the last six months to the 

education development fund. And I have before me a list of 

concerns expressed on behalf of the Regina public school teachers' 

association in May of this year. They make the point that, as 

recently as January of 1987, the Department of Education was 

emphasizing the importance of long-range planning. School 

boards and teachers were being encouraged to plan and implement 

innovative programs through the EDF (educational development 

fund) system in a long-range, well-planned, thought out in 

advance way. The Regina public school teachers' association 

indicated in their presentation to me that in their school division 

they had committed to 11 ongoing projects before the EDF was 

changed. As a result of the EDF changes, the watering down of 

that fund from a five-year period to a 10-year period, they saw six 

of those ongoing projects cut immediately, and of the five 

remaining projects, they wonder if few of, or any of them, will 

continue into the future, and they note that no new projects have 

been invited for this year. 

 

Mr. Minister, they made the point that they were encouraged to 

start their planning with respect to the EDF, in an innovative, 

long-range approach, and they find that a year or so into that 

process, the rules of the game once again change and they're are 

dealing with a much weaker program than they had originally 

anticipated. 

 

And I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that I hear that complaint  

coming from more than just Regina. I recall a conversation I had 

with a number of educators in the Humboldt district who made a 

number of the same points and indicated that they were in a rather 

awkward predicament, having budget originally for both the new 

programs they wished to undertake and the new staff that they 

wished to engage, all flowing from the EDF process, but once 

EDF was watered down, they had money left either to pay for the 

program or to hire the staff but not to do both. And obviously the 

one is useless without the other. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what firm, confident assurances 

you can give to these professional educators who see what was 

originally a very good idea that a lot of people in Saskatchewan 

applauded, see that idea being watered down to the point where in 

many respects for at least some school divisions, it's almost 

rendered as being useless to them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well relative to the education 

development fund . . . And I'm not so sure . . . Before you were a 

member of this House, were you the one that said it would never 

be put into place in the first place? well the reality was, it was put 

in place, and it's still in place. The $150 million fund is still intact. 

It started out as a five-year fund, yes. It soon became a six-year 

fund. And this year it's now become a fund that's going to be 

stretched out over 10 years. I acknowledge all that; we've been 

into that debate several times in this House. 

 

The important point is the money is still there. If I back up and 

explain to the hon. member as to why we stretched it over 10 

months, in my discussions leading up to this budget and 

particularly after the Hon. Minister of Finance tabled his economic 

statement, I recall meeting with the president of Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association and some other representatives there, 

specifically discussing, given what our expectations can be that 

education for the most part will be shielded from the budget 

exercise. And I think if you look at the blue book, all things 

considered, most people say that given the times, we've done not 

bad there. And I think you would acknowledge that the number 

this year is somewhat slightly larger than last year, and school 

operating grants are 99 per cent level they were last year. So all 

things considered, I think most trustees acknowledge that it's been 

a reasonable budget for them. 

 

What they indicated to me in this strategy was this, and this is why 

we have what we have. As I said, given what the economic 

statement says, above all, preserve the base operating grant. And 

that's what we did at 99 per cent level of last year. 

 

They said, if you have to use something as a shock absorber, so to 

speak, use the EDF because many school districts and boards 

didn't spend up all their allocation that they were allocated. And 

rightly so, because the idea was, don't rush into this money and 

spend it just because it's going to be there and it might not be there 

next year. And that's why we've made certain that we've kept it in 

place for 10 years, so that you could plan and do it as needed and 

as made sense, and in well thought out projects, etc., etc. 

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1783 

 

 

So I think the important thing to note here, in terms of the 

commitment that you asked for, is the $100 million fund intact? 

The answer is yes. Will projects get done that they wanted to get 

done? And I think again the answer is yes. Maybe some not as 

quickly as before, and let's not forget why the fund was put in 

place. It was to enhance the change and the K to 12 process as it 

relates to the Directions and curriculum change and all those kinds 

of things. And I've said in this House before that our commitment 

there is still very much on the front burner and, if anything, we 

want to speed it up. 

 

So as much as one can find examples of uncertainty, once again, 

more than the real examples of what's happened as a result of it, I 

think at the end of the day, you'll see that the process has not been 

an unreasonable one and not going to cause any jeopardy in terms 

of the quality of education, particularly. 

 

In fact, we ought to be very happy that the minister and our 

Premier had the foresight before I came into this portfolio to 

establish it. Because the one thing I've sensed and learned since I 

got into this portfolio as I've met with other ministers across 

Canada and indeed, across Europe, I would suggest to hon. 

member that once again Saskatchewan could hold its head high. 

And the fact that we've got into the directions process and 

established this excellence fund that puts us ahead of others right 

across Canada and, indeed, right across the world. And I guess 

that's where we've always been in Saskatchewan education, is 

ahead of the pack. I think this will keep us there. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder, in light of that answer, 

if the minister can give us two assurances. First of all, that there 

will not be any further extension of the time frame for EDF; that it 

won't go from five years to six years to 10 years; and some point 

in the future, even beyond that, that there's no risk of any further 

watering down. And will he also give us the assurance that there is 

some prospect that the government may, in fact, reverse that trend 

and decide to tighten it up once again and counteract the watering 

down, perhaps as early as next year's budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If you would give me the assurance that 

our government will be re-elected, I think I can say that the fund 

won't be tampered with while we're here. And if you give me that 

assurance, I'll give you the equal assurance on this side. 

 

I mean, I think I've said in this House before, and I say again, that 

the fund is intact, albeit it stretched over 10 years. If you're asking 

me if I can predict anything in the next four years that would . . . 

or five years that would alter that course, I can't say that I . . . 

There would have to be a pretty catastrophic event. 

 

(2030) 

 

At the same time, I can't give it to you in blood, if you like, but our 

commitment and our view and our planning, if you like, is all 

based on the fact that, yes, the $150 intact is going to be over 10 

years, and that's the way we're going to proceed. 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I'll move on to one other item. It 

has to do with university financing in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I'm interested, Mr. Minister, in the state of 

affairs that might exist today between you and the University of 

Regina. 

 

I recall this spring's convocation at the University of Regina where 

the president of the university delivered a very strong address 

which dealt at some considerable length with the issue of 

accountability . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the president of 

the university was very vigorous that morning in dealing with the 

issue of accountability as he saw it. And I just quote one line to 

refresh the minister's memory from the speech of Dr. Barber. He 

said on that occasion: 

 

Universities have served society well and will continue to do 

so, but not if they are forced into a bureaucratic strait-jacket 

in the name of accountability. 

 

I wonder, just briefly, if the minister can give us a report on that 

state of affairs in relation to the relationship between his 

department and the University of Regina, and whether the series of 

concerns that have been expressed earlier in the spring have since 

been resolved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, I like 

to think that the relationship between myself and the university 

president, the University of Regina, and the board of governors, 

for that matter, is a constructive one. Certainly we've had many 

opportunities at dialogue. That doesn't mean to say that the 

president doesn't express his views when he wishes, as should be 

the case. 

 

I think we've heard further . . . previous discussion in this House in 

estimates about . . . albeit that we presented a brief to both boards 

of governors, that their autonomy is very much intact. It has not 

been trampled on or anything like that. 

 

The board of governors continues to operate the college there, 

albeit that they have had to make some tough decisions in their 

budgeting process. Any decision, I suppose, to alter programming 

will always hurt somebody, but I think their priorities have been 

very much in the right place — maintain that essential core, that 

critical core, which is what we transmitted to them as being our 

view of the approach that they should take. It was up to them as to 

identify that core; this they have done. They have, I think, a game 

plan in hand to deal with their deficit. 

 

I've been very happy with the feedback and the dialogue I've had 

with the university, both the president and the board of governors, 

and that doesn't mean to say at times that the discussion hasn't 

been very frank because it has been. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, would you not agree, as a result of 

what transpired in the spring in relation to the universities, the 

restrictions with respect to expenditures at one university, 

enrolment limitations applied, in other places tuition increases 

going up, a memo from you to the universities offering them 

certain, one might say, advice  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1784 

 

 

. . . I think you would have to concede it was expressed in 

somewhat stronger terms than just advice. Would you not agree, 

Mr. Minister, as a consequence of all of that, that we do have a 

state of affairs in Saskatchewan at the present time where the 

accessibility to our universities is less than it used to be, and the 

academic freedom available to our universities is, in fact, less than 

it used to be? 

 

I know those are two things that are rather intangible and hard to 

measure, but in terms of education in Saskatchewan, they are 

critically important. And there are many people in this province, 

both inside and outside the university community, who believe 

that those institutions are now less accessible and, in fact, there 

have been some constraints imposed upon legitimate academic 

freedom. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think the hon. member, when he 

addresses the question of accessibility — as other members in this 

House have — I think one has to be very careful on this one to not 

take a simplistic analysis on it. And I don't mean to be criticizing; 

I'm just saying that you have only engaged in simplistic analysis. 

 

But I think too often, at first blush on looking at that question, you 

come to the conclusions that you have. And I guess I can say to 

you quite frankly that having examined the issue in something 

more than just that first blush, that quite frankly what you say, the 

opposite is true. 

 

And how would I support my argument that accessibility to our 

education system — our post-secondary educational institutes — 

has increased? Well you only have to look at the Issues and 

Options paper that the University of Saskatchewan put out. And a 

very good paper, I might add. I think president Kristjanson and his 

whole team there that have been spearheading that process have 

done just a fantastic job. And as I said in this House before, 

they've been prepared to lay out where we're at and where we 

ought to go and in that process there are certainly some challenges 

and some tough questions that face us. But they're haven't put their 

heads in the sand on this; they're looking at the questions. 

 

But to address specifically the question of accessibility and the 

comments that they made in there about how accessibility to our 

institutions has in fact increased, I would remind the hon. member 

. . . Perhaps he wasn't in the House in estimates in days past, when 

I talked about how if one was to back up 50 years and look at the 

per cent of the adult population that could in fact enjoy a 

university education, the number was something in the order of 3 

per cent. 

 

And we got into the ’50s and the ’60s and the numbers rose, albeit 

slowly, to now where we’re at a point where it’s 15 per cent plus. 

And in the city of Saskatoon they surveyed a school board there 

— high school students — 35 per cent, I think, is the number I 

read into the record here a couple of nights ago. We can check it if 

you like. 

 

Thirty-five per cent. Thirty-five per cent — more than one in three 

— from that Saskatoon school board that they surveyed went on to 

university. Now I say, what a tremendous mark of 

accomplishment in this province, 

where we’ve gone from 3 per cent to a school board in Saskatoon 

— albeit that not all may be like that — where one out of three 

went on to university. 

 

I’m sure maybe even more would have, but there were obviously 

some who didn’t choose that. They went into institutes and 

technical courses and other post-second institutions. If you talk 

about accessibility, is that not something we should be proud of — 

that the numbers have gone up even in the last six, seven years? I 

think the enrolments have increased 35 per cent. 

 

And some people see those, I think, as you do sometimes, on 

looking at it at first blush, that that's a problem, that we should be 

somehow unhappy that enrolments went up 35 per cent because 

our classrooms are very busy and there's scheduling problems 

sometimes because of those. But the fact of the matter is, as 

enrolments went up 35 per cent, funding went up 60 per cent and 

inflation was 35 per cent at the same time. So we've kept pace 

with enrolments in terms of funding and it's a mark of 

accomplishment that we have the enrolments that we do have. 

 

But more than that, you may have heard me talk in earlier days in 

this House about what we want to do in terms of making 

accessibility even, or making courses, university programming, 

available to all Saskatchewan. We've talked about the distance 

education and the regional colleges, and their explicit mandate to 

deliver technical and institute and university programming across 

this province. And we saw a story in the Leader-Post where the 

University of Saskatchewan can deliver English and history, I 

think it is, to 14 communities. 

 

So not only are we making the institutions more accessible, but 

we're not going to provide more programming into the Swift 

Currents and the Meadow Lakes and the Assiniboias and the 

Weyburns and the Estevans and the Nipawins of this province. I 

think we have made great strides forward and we'll continue to 

make great strides forward. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think on that last point, 

we could have an interminable debate, and I won't wade into it at 

the present time. 

 

I have one other technical area I wish to raise with the minister. In 

terms of the blue book, Minister, for the estimates of your 

department, could you give me the total figure when all of your 

funding for post-secondary education costs, operating grants, and 

otherwise, is added together — the total figure for that category 

for this year? 

 

When I add up the numbers I come up with a figure something in 

the order of 205 or $206 million, and I wonder if that's 

approximately in the right ball park. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The best number I can give the hon. 

member, because it's . . . It's not broke down that way, because 

we've got the amalgamation, we've got some efficiencies there. 

And so it's hard to know whether we should assign 42 per cent of 

one number to K to 12; and 63 per cent of another number. I'll 

give you a best guess, and it's $270 million. 

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1785 

 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Would the minister . . . Was that number 270, 

270 million? 

 

Will the minister just briefly indicate what categories of things go 

into that calculation. And perhaps if it's not possible to do that 

tonight, he might provide that to me in writing at a later stage, but 

at his earliest convenience, just so that I can have for reference the 

total number committed by the Government of Saskatchewan in 

the 1987-88 fiscal year for post-secondary education in total, and 

what categories go into making up that total. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, presuming the minister will provide that in 

writing at a later stage, I would like to ask the minister one final 

question in relation to the contribution to post-secondary education 

coming from the province of Saskatchewan as compared to the 

amount that comes from the Government of Canada and the 

amount that is contributed by students in the form of tuition fees. 

There has been, in my judgement, a worrisome trend in the last 

number of years which has seen the federal share steadily 

increasing, the share contributed by students steadily increasing, 

and the share actually contributed out of the resources of the 

province of Saskatchewan going down. 

 

(2045) 

 

It's one thing for the minister to refer to global increases in 

revenue in a budget for education, but it takes on a much different 

light when one considers the source of at least part of that 

provincial money is not the resources of the province of 

Saskatchewan, but in fact transfer payments from the Government 

of Canada. And I'm concerned to know, out of the total for 

post-secondary education, how much of that is Saskatchewan 

originated, how much of that originates in Ottawa, and how much 

is left over for students to pay themselves in the form of tuition. 

 

We have seen suggestions, Mr. Minister, that in the coming year, 

we could have the rather peculiar state of affairs where tuition fees 

would in fact amount to a larger contribution to the costs of 

post-secondary education than the amount being put in by the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And that, I think, is important to 

get straight in terms of the relative shares. How much originates in 

Ottawa, how much originates with the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and how much originates with students 

themselves? As I say, if you're not in a position to provide that 

detailed breakdown tonight, I'd be happy to receive it in writing at 

your earliest convenience. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We'll get that to you as soon as we can, 

maybe even yet tonight. 

 

Your second point relative to the money that comes from the 

federal government, and is the government passing it on or is it 

somehow being stuck in the Consolidated Fund and not being 

passed on — we went through those arguments here in this House 

in estimates in the last couple of days, but I'm happy to go through 

them again. And in fact the students at the universities have raised 

the same question for me. 

 

And here are the facts. Saskatchewan's expenditures on  

post-secondary education increased by 17.1 per cent from '83-84 

to '85-86, the highest rate of increase among the provinces. That 

was what that report said. And just to dispel any view that 

somehow we're not passing the money along, I'll give you another 

fact. Saskatchewan's expenditures on post-secondary education 

have risen by 50 per cent over the last five years, while total EPF 

(established program of financing) entitlements rose by only 35 

per cent during that period. So no matter which way you come at 

it, no matter which way you look down the tube, our funding of 

post-secondary education, I mean, is virtually second to none. And 

I know there is a report that questions, you know, who's spending 

what on what. I think virtually every province is of the view, and 

rightly so, that there is some understating going on there by the 

feds, and in our case, I think I read into the record $35 million the 

other evening when we were discussing this same point. So I will 

assure you, as I assured the other members of the NDP opposition, 

that we're passing along what we get and then some, in spades. 

And I absolutely and sincerely and categorically stand by that 

statement. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, is it correct to say that in fiscal 

1987-88 the total of tax transfers and such transfers to the province 

of Saskatchewan from the Government of Canada for EPF will be 

in the order of $200 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'll have to refer you to the Minister of 

Finance in his estimates because that's where that transaction falls 

under. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I will pursue that, Mr. Minister, with the 

Minister of Finance, but it would seem to me that if your total 

commitment to post-secondary education is in the order of 270 

million, as you've suggested in an earlier answer, and if roughly 

200 million of that comes from the Government of Canada, then 

two-thirds, more than two-thirds, of what's being expended by the 

province of Saskatchewan in post-secondary education is actually 

originating with Ottawa. And that seems to get quite aways away 

from the principle of equal sharing federally and provincially in 

relation to post-secondary education. And I think it does indicate 

that there has been, in the last decade or so, not entirely under your 

government — certainly under the previous administration — an 

erosion of the provincial side of the bargain. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are a number of other questions that I would 

like to have the opportunity to pursue with you, some of which I 

may raise when we get to the detailed clause by clause items. But I 

would just like to leave you with one final message as I conclude 

my questioning. And that is, when no one in Saskatchewan wants 

to remain stuck in the past and allow the future to pass us by, I 

think it would do the government well to be cognizant of the 

worries — and I don't think it's too strong a word to use: — the 

distress — which a good many of the changes which you have 

proposed have created in the minds of many Saskatchewan 

people. And the people of Saskatchewan will be watching closely 

and critically to determine for themselves whether or not the rosy 

picture, which you have done your best to convey in relation to 

education, in fact comes to pass, or whether the changes that have 

been instituted in the last six months will lead to a situation where 

education in this province declines rather than moves forward. I 

think you are dealing with a  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1786 

 

 

cautious and a sceptical public that has been rather shell-shocked 

by the conduct of the government in a number of respects over the 

last six months. And there's a lot of goodwill, on the part of this 

government, that needs to be earned back because in the process 

of what's happened in the last six months a lot of goodwill has 

been squandered. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Item 3 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — With respect to item 3 in the budget item, the 

first budget item, the staff component in person-years has gone 

down from 62.2 to 61.1, yet the amount expended has gone up 

from 2.319 million to 2.407 million. Could you explain what has 

happened there, and how come we've got an increase in budgeted 

amounts in view of salaries being frozen other places. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The training division that you're 

inquiring about a half a person reduction — I don't really think 

that's a big issue, and the reality is, the money has gone up. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I would ask for a repetition. I wasn't able to 

hear that last portion of the statement. In this . . . I think you said 

the money went down, but I'm not certain. The money did quite 

clearly go up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I'm advised that, albeit we're 

dealing with a small . . . I guess your question is: — if we've got 

half a person less, the money went up a little bit . . . I think the 

difference is merely because the mix of salaries has changed 

during the course of the year. We maybe have some more people 

there now who are at a slightly higher salary level. There's no 

particular reason other than that kind of thing — the mix that 

existed at any one point in time in that division. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — It has nothing to do with increments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, it does not. 

 

Item 3 agreed to. 

 

Item 4 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — In item 4, the staff component went from 9.9 

to 7.9, down two. The average staff . . . The average cost in '86-87 

was 32,800. By my figures the average cost in '87-88 is 38,000, 

which is quite a hike. Could you explain the reason there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'm advised that the . . . What you see 

before you, the basis for it is that there were some staff that were 

transferred to the institute and for the most part clerical, whose 

salaries were lower, which left those that were left with a 

relatively speaking higher salary, and hence that's why you get that 

particular mix. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Item 5 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Once again with respect to the staffing under 

item 5, does the same answer apply as to item 4, or is there 

possibly some severance pay that's being paid here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, there's some severance involved in 

this one, I'm advised. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Could I be advised as to the amount of 

severance if you have it here today. If you don't have it here today, 

would you give it to me soon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'll have to forward you that information 

and there may be some . . . We have to have some legal advice on 

what we can forward relative to severance settlements. And what I 

can give, I will give you, but we don't have it here tonight. 

 

Item 5 agreed to. 

 

Item 6 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 9 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I ask you a question, Mr. Minister, with 

respect to day care facilities that were built at the Northern 

Institute of Technology. My understanding is there were 

approximately $40,000 spent to develop the facility, and my 

understanding is, to this date the licence has not been granted. The 

place is not licensed to operate as a day-care centre. Is it your 

intention not to ever license this, or what has happened there? 

Why is the facility lying without a licence so that the staff and the 

students can have the facility open the way it should be as a 

practical situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, it has to be licensed. It's licensed by 

social services, and we're of the view that it will be licensed this 

year and operational. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, earlier in 

these estimates the minister promised us that he would give us 

information on a contractual arrangement that existed between his 

government and his department and the Moose Jaw Exhibition 

Board — $121,000-a-year contract. 

 

(2100) 

 

The Moose Jaw Exhibition Board was renting out facilities to the 

truck driver training and heavy equipment operator training 

programs which his department has chosen to cancel. I wonder if 

he can now indicate to this Assembly whether he is going to be 

paying out that contract to 1991 with the Moose Jaw Exhibition 

Board, or whether he is going to be buying the Moose Jaw 

Exhibition Board out for a lesser price, or whether he is cancelling 

the contract completely. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don't know as I can give you a much 

different answer than I gave you the other day — that the property 

management corporation is handling it, and we don't view this as 

an either/or situation. There's negotiations that are ongoing, and I 

don't know what more I can tell you, quite frankly. 

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1787 

 

 

It's in the hand of the officials of the property management 

corporation. We're aware of it, and we don't know whether yet 

there might be some space that we might need to use it, or whether 

we buy it out. But I mean, we're aware of our legal obligations. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, another question. Just briefly, 

clarification with respect to tuition fee increases. 

 

Mr. Minister, you originally said that tuition fee increases at the 

technical institutes would be limited to a 15 per cent increase. 

Would you acknowledge now that this is in fact not the case — 

that if courses run longer than average, in fact, tuition can be far 

higher than a 15 per cent increase? It can be up as much as 25 per 

cent. Would you acknowledge that and explain to this House why 

that's the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The tuition fee increase, to be very 

specific about the numbers, is it's a 14.2 per cent increase based on 

a 38-week course length. Now in the past it didn't matter whether 

the course was 38 weeks or 40 weeks, or 42 weeks, it was the 

same tuition fee. Okay? There was no discrimination, or to put it 

another way . . . 

 

An. Hon. Member: — It wasn't weighted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It wasn't weighted, would be another 

way of putting it. 

 

Now there is no cap, so if you're a 40- or 42-week course, it's been 

adjusted to reflect that, and then I suppose that'd be a one-time 

event. So if there is some increases that are larger than 14.2 per 

cent it would be because those courses are probably 40 or 42 

weeks in length. Do you understand what I'm saying? 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, in effect is that somebody who is 

taking a 42-week course and is going into their second year, could 

find that they've got a tuition increase as much as 22 per cent. Is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'm advised that there might be some 

instances where it could be that high. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think you should have been 

clearer with students about that before you implemented that. 

Because, in fact, in many cases your tuition rate increase is much 

higher than you earlier indicated. 

 

I want to just ask two other brief questions. One is with respect to 

the Regina Plains Community College. Can you advise me how 

many staff positions have been eliminated there? And can you 

explain to this Assembly why you chose to cut back on instructors 

in areas such as life skills training and native life skills, when your 

government is supposed to be emphasizing a new initiative in the 

area of literacy, and encouraging people who have been out of the 

educational system for some time to get back into it? Don't your 

cuts to native life skills, and life skills and career planning 

instructors fly in the face of that initiative, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'm advised as it relates to Regina  

Plains, there were two in scope and two out of scope at the 

administrative level where the positions were abolished. Due to 

program adjustments, there may be, as well, some instructors' 

positions abolished in the programming. In both instances all 

efforts are being made to accommodate the individuals. 

 

But once again this initiative relates somewhat to the whole 

process of amalgamation and how that all tucks together. But I can 

give you every assurance that we're trying to . . . as we've done at 

the institute level, and very successfully, at accommodating those 

who face lay-offs. 

 

The other point I want to make is the hon. member made just a 

quick shot about student tuition fees. A quick comment about how 

we arrived at the number this year — 15 per cent or 14.2 per cent. 

I guess I would just read into the record a letter I received June 16, 

1987 from SECTIS, the Student Executive Council of Technical 

Institutes in Saskatchewan, which is the umbrella student 

organization. And I want to commend them for their intelligence 

and their constructiveness with which they approach this, and the 

responsibility and the very responsible nature in which these 

students approached this business of setting a tuition fee in 

conjunction and consultation with myself. And the letter goes: 

 

Dear Mr. Hepworth: — In regard to our meeting of May 25, 

1987, the stance SECTIC (which is a student organization) 

put forward is as follows: 

 

(1) 15 per cent increase this year in tuition; 

 

(2) putting a package together for September 1, 1987 that 

will address tuition for the next five to 12 years. 

 

So the number that we arrived at, Mr. Chairman, was based on in 

consultation with the students who, I might say, I congratulate 

them for taking a very responsible attitude here. They too have a 

vested interest in excellence and recognize that some changes have 

to be made. 

 

And I wanted to let the hon. member know that this wasn't a fee 

increase that I dreamed up in isolation. It was done in consultation 

and in fact on their recommendation. 

 

Item 9 agreed to. 

 

Item 10 agreed to. 

 

Item 11 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — With respect to item 11, curriculum 

development, I see that you've down-sized your staff form 25.8 to 

21.8. This is the department which would be responsible for 

implementing the core curriculum, I would expect, Mr. Minister. 

How do you expect to do this with four fewer staff members, 

particularly new staff members in there when you let a lot of 

people go? And I also noticed, Mr. Minister, the average salary 

has gone up to 38,000 to 46 or closer to 47,000. How much of that 

is due to severance pay? The end result that I see here, Mr. 

Minister, is that you've got fewer staff but it's actually  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1788 

 

 

costing you close to $30,000 more to operate that particular . . . the 

personnel services under that particular item, curriculum 

development. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We're down four positions. Two were 

position abolishments, two were early retirements, although I'm 

advised that because of the early retirements it may well be that 

over the long haul there will be some replacement there. And yes, 

the number which is an increase reflects as well some settlements, 

and I'll give you the same undertaking on that as I did for the 

earlier question tonight. 

 

Item 11 agreed to. 

 

Item 12 agreed to. 

 

Item 13 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, the other day I had an opportunity to raise some 

questions regarding special education services during these 

estimates. And one of the themes that you've been trying to 

develop from to make your case in this estimate is the whole 

theme of consultation. When I was raising the question of special 

education, and shortly thereafter I had a chance to talk with the 

chairperson of the public school board here in Regina. And that 

chairperson informs me that the changes in the special education 

funding which your department will administer, was not done in 

consultation, to his knowledge, with the school board, and that he 

was not aware of the changes from a per pupil basis to a block 

funding proposal. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: — if this is the sign of 

consultation that you so proudly talk about, are the rest of the 

school boards in the province going to find out about changes to 

their funding through whatever, whether it's special education or 

any other program deliveries, are they going to find out after de 

facto manner — after you've made the decision, and after the fact? 

Or will you, in fact, before you make changes to the block funding 

program for special education and implement those changes, will 

you consult with school boards throughout the province before 

you make those block funding changes? 

 

That question applies to number 14. It's my mistake. I thought we 

were on number 14; we're on number 13. The same question will 

apply when we reach number 14. 

 

Item 13 agreed to. 

 

Item 14 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'm advised that there's been extensive 

consultation relative to this issue. In fact, I'm advised that the 

director of special education took an entire year, set it aside to 

produce a report that was in consultation with virtually everybody. 

and the final point I would make is the changes are not yet made, 

as I think I mentioned in the very first time we addressed this 

issue. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, just a very brief question. Was  

the person in charge of special education for the Regina Public 

School Board, were they involved in the decision-making or 

consultation process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, I don't know whom the director 

talked to specifically, but I can tell you, emphatically tell you, that 

there was extensive consultation, and I don't mean that in some 

moot way. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — One question on this issue, Mr. Minister. Will you 

undertake then, prior to any changes that you implement in terms 

of funding for special education in the province, will you meet 

with those people from the school boards affected in the province 

to discuss it before you in fact implement those changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I would suggest that that's already been 

done. 

 

Item 14 agreed to. 

 

Item 15 agreed to. 

 

Item 16 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Just one question. There's been six positions cut 

here. Can the minister indicate what is being cut at the school for 

the deaf? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — For school of deaf, five early retirements 

and one vacancy that was eliminated. And these are a reflection of 

the demographics that I addressed earlier that the rubella outbreak 

which produced a number of that disability, passed through the 

system, if you like. 

 

Item 16 agreed. 

 

Item 17 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Item 17, education media services, has been 

cut by eight staff. The average salary has gone from 22,000 to 

31,000. Is that once again largely due to severance, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, there was some . . . or will be some 

settlements there. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Then would you give me the same undertaking 

for this item? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Item 17 agreed to. 

 

Items 18 and 19 agreed to. 

 

Item 20 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, the other day in the questioning on 

the estimates, you were going to give me the number of staff that 

had been in the library system from 1982 through to 1987. Do you 

have that number? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Can we carry on and I'll get it to  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1789 

 

 

you as soon as I can. I think we have . . . the sheet was here and I 

think I had it and I've misplaced it. But I'll give it to you as quickly 

. . . I'm sure we have another copy; I'll get it to you as soon as we 

can. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well I will be pleased to receive the figures that 

you would give to me. But when I was looking back in the 

estimates, I discovered that the number of professional and 

technical staff that have been cut from the Saskatchewan Library 

from 1982 until now has been 20 staff — 20 staff cut; and four 

staff cut just in the last year. The budget has gone down, the 

library has been subsumed into the Department of Education 

because it's here as a special vote here instead of being as a 

separate, autonomous, independent public institution. And for me 

it's just another example of how your promotion of the information 

age in the knowledge-based industry is just a lot of hot air hype. 

 

Item 20 agreed to. 

 

Item 21 agreed to. 

 

Item 22 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, this item 22 is a new item to the 

Education budget, total expenditure of $23,850,000. We have no 

information whatsoever as to just what the purpose of this 

expenditure is, and I would like to have some detailed answers as 

to how you are spending money under this item. What are you 

getting for this money, and what are we getting for this money, 

Mr. Minister? We want to know what spaces you are leasing, by 

location and by square footage. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Departments now are charged for 

accommodation space they occupy and for mail they send and 

have delivered to them, and the moneys are allocated in each 

departmental budget, which were previously budgeted in the 

Department of Supply and Services. So that's the difference. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Are any of the spaces that are . . . Is all the 

expenditure due to spaces . . . to the rental of spaces, Mr. Minister? 

And are any of these spaces vacant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I've mentioned, there is space 

facilities. The other thing is the mail. Is there vacant space? Yes. I 

mean, I think your colleague raised the question of the Moose Jaw 

space. With the amalgamation, administratively, we've been able 

to free up a whole floor, and I suspect there's maybe some other 

instances. 

 

Some of it may be in a fluid state yet, relative to the revamping of 

the new institute and the amalgamation of the urban colleges and 

institutes. So it will be in hand in property management, and the 

bottom line on this is: — this is an example of more efficient 

government. And albeit that we've got some freed up space here in 

the transition period, but at the end of the day the taxpayers of this 

province will be well served by this initiative. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — What I wanted to know then, Mr. Minister, is: 

— I'd like to have a paper with some detail on it as to exactly what 

the location of the spaces are and  

where they’re being leased. Will you give a commitment to make 

that available to members on this side? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I've got some stuff here on some 

briefing notes, and I'll undertake to meet your request. Perhaps I 

can get that done for you tomorrow. 

 

Item 22 agreed to. 

 

Items 23 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 28 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all just a 

question of clarification to the minister. Can he indicate with 

respect to university capital projects whether that falls under item 

30 or whether I should be addressing it now? I assume it's item 30, 

but I want to be sure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Under item 30, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

My second question is with respect to the decision that the 

University of Regina has made to phase out the School of Human 

Justice in this province, and to phase out the community education 

centre in Saskatoon. I think my colleague will be addressing the 

phase-out in Prince Albert. 

 

But I want to say that you, Mr. Minister, have talked a good deal 

in this House about how you want to take initiatives in distance 

education, and yet I see the social work extension program as 

being a model in this province for distance education. And I'm 

wondering how you see the severe cuts to extension offerings that 

the School of Social Work is now being forced to make as 

squaring with your commitment to expanding distance education 

in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As it relates to the universities and the 

boards of governors, whether it be at the University of 

Saskatchewan or the University of Regina, and their decisions in 

so far as what programs they will offer and what they will not 

offer, clearly that falls within the realm of their autonomy, and I 

don't think the hon. member would want me to interfere with that 

autonomy. 

 

As it relates to the specific programs we've talked about, my 

understanding is that as they wind down or down-size them, or 

whatever, that they are going to undertake to make sure that 

people in the middle of that programming will have an opportunity 

to finish, and I think that sounds very, very reasonable. 

 

Now if the hon. member is saying to me that as I went across 

Saskatchewan — Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, rural and 

urban Saskatchewan — did I hear people pounding on my door 

saying, you know, we want human justice, we want human justice 

courses; I didn't hear that. What I heard them saying is, we want 

access to first and second year Arts and Science, we want access 

to more institute programming; that's what I heard them saying. 

 

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1790 

 

 

And so, first of all, I'm not about to second-guess the universities' 

decision because, secondly, I think it's not inconsistent with what I 

heard across Saskatchewan. And, as I said, I'm not about to 

interfere with their autonomy. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would say to the minister 

that there are a number of ways of eroding the autonomy of the 

universities in this province, and one of them, Mr. Minister, is 

consistent underfunding so that the universities are forced to make 

cuts that under ordinary circumstances they would never choose to 

make. And I would suggest to you, sir, that this is one of those 

cuts. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question with 

respect to the funding of the universities, and that is that I simply 

want to plead with you again: — will you lift your two-year 

budget freeze on the University of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan and fund them at at least their real cost increases 

that they face in the coming two fiscal years — in other words, 

their rate of inflation? Will you not, please, one final time, 

reconsider your decision to freeze their budgets and provide them 

with the funding they so desperately need to offset the crisis in 

post-secondary education that we face on these two campuses. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our game plan, as we can best 

determine it and the best direction that we can give universities 

and their boards of governors, was laid out in the briefs to them. 

And to this very day, we stand by that. The funding has been far 

ahead of enrolment increases; it's been far ahead of inflation. We 

have an admirable track record, as high as you'll find anywhere in 

Canada. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned that where you 

went, that you didn't hear anybody saying, we want human justice 

and we want social work. And I assure you very sincerely that I 

can take you, and within 15 minutes of hitting the city of Prince 

Albert, I can take you to a place where people will be telling you 

that right sincerely and desperately. 

 

We've got a pipeline there of people in the School of Human 

Justice and the School of Social Work that will take up to seven or 

eight more years to finish their courses, because these are people 

who are working on the job and taking two or three courses per 

year and finding that that's a very efficient way for them to do it. 

 

I want to emphasize, Madam Chairman, just how unique the 

School of Human Justice and the School of Social Work in the 

community education centres were and are regarded by the people 

that work there and the people that have gone through the courses. 

And when I asked them about it, they told me that the biggest 

advantage was that the courses were being taught in their natural 

communities, as opposed to their artificial communities. And they 

told me that field learning occurs in all of the classes. 

 

As a result of them having taken classes there, they say that, not 

only does it give them the qualifications, but it leads to other 

concrete developments right in the community. They're able to 

provide services to drug  

abusers, to handicapped children, to schools, and to the elderly. 

 

It actually . . . The phase-out . . . The freeze of money to the 

universities which resulted in this phase-out actually contradicts 

the objectives of your department as stated in this book, Preparing 

for the Year 2000, where it talks about providing greater access to 

adult education and training in more organized manner for people 

living outside major urban centres. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, whether you're considering, in view 

of the universities having their funding cut and having to cut this 

facility to the city of Prince Albert, will you consider setting up 

some alternate type of funding for it and do something to ensure 

that this valuable service to the community is not lost? 

 

Mr. Chairman, I didn't get an answer to my question. The question 

was: — will you undertake to provide some alternate type of 

funding other than . . . seeing as how the funding will no longer 

come through the universities because of the cuts to the university 

and they refuse to fund it. Are you prepared to look at a concept of 

a university centre or something like that in Prince Albert so that 

this valuable service is not lost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, I'm not going to get into duplicating 

the role of the university and operating it out of the Department of 

Education. But I would say that, as we pass the legislation for the 

new institute and it's up and running, they will have the mandate 

explicitly to deliver as programming that the communities wish, 

and I'll leave it at that. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, just one more point for 

clarification. Mr. Minister, I assume with respect to the funding, 

the funding cuts to the feed testing lab at the University of 

Saskatchewan and to the College of Medicine at the University of 

Saskatchewan, that neither of those directly relate to your 

department. Is that true, that they come out of Agriculture and 

Health? I just want to be sure about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My understanding is those are not out of 

this budget, our of Education estimates. 

 

Item 28 agreed to. 

 

Item 29 agreed to. 

 

Item 30 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to ask the 

minister a question about the College Avenue campus in Regina. 

When can we expect, Mr. Minister, that you will put in place 

funding for either a new find arts building for the University of 

Regina, or major renovations to the College Avenue campus for 

the University of Regina? That's been at the top of their capital 

construction planning list for some time. When can they expect a 

funding commitment from your government for that kind of a 

project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I can't . . . As I know as the hon. 

member would expect, I can't give you any  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1791 

 

 

commitment on that project. I'm advised that there's been some 

pretty active negotiations and some discussions around it. It's not 

as though there's nothing being done, but I can't lock myself into 

anything. In fact, I'm advised that there's a number of alternatives 

that may be there, may present themselves, and so I'll just leave it 

at that. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, you know this project has 

been waiting for a long time for some response from your 

government, and I would urge you to give it a higher priority in 

future budgets. I think it's unfortunate that it's not in this one. 

 

I want to ask you two other questions about capital funding. One is 

with respect to the College of Agriculture at the University of 

Saskatchewan. What moneys are designated for College of 

Agriculture construction in this budget? It's a specific figure. And 

over what time-frame do you see constructing that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In this year's budget for that particular 

project there's $2 million. And just to address your initial point 

about who waits for what projects: — the project you raised 

earlier, the fine arts, waited a long time when your government 

was in power. And I'll tell you what, every farmer and every 

university researcher and faculty member in agriculture knows 

that the agriculture university building waited a long, long time 

and never did come to pass under your government — 25 years, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well the minister didn't answer my question, 

which was: — over how many years do you anticipate that 

building being constructed? 

 

I want to ask you one other question, too, which I'll do at the same 

time for . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . A five-year commitment? 

Okay. 

 

My other question to you is: — when can we expect funds from 

your government for a new drama facility at the University of 

Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . When can we expect 

a funding commitment from your government on a new drama 

facility at the University of Saskatchewan — a facility that's 

desperately needed, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well relative to what's planned for the 

URDF (university renewal and development fund) and university 

capital projects — I read this into the record before — 

administration buildings, heating plant, computer system, animal 

resource centre, the ag college, waste management facility, 

pharmacy addition, library acquisitions — several projects that 

individually should not total 100,000 but several of them, so that's 

a substantial sum there as well — equipment for high technology 

initiatives, utility tunnels, library upgrading, and other numerous 

projects. So although you can identify pet projects and important 

projects, all of which are important to various sectors, the reality is 

the track record is an impressive one as far as what's been 

undertaken in capital projects at the universities. 

 

Item 30 agreed to. 

 

Items 31 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 

Item 36 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — With respect to item 36, operating grants to 

schools, Mr. Minister, could you give us a report on the progress 

of teacher negotiations in view of the fact that a contract has not 

been settled to date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The negotiations are ongoing. I think 

there's been something in the order of 11 or 12 meetings over the 

last six months. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, your statements earlier and prior 

to the House sitting, and also statements of the Minister of 

Finance, referred to there being no money in the operating grants 

given to school boards for increases in teachers' salaries. I have 

had several people — teachers — who are quite concerned about 

that statement saying that that is interference in the collective 

bargaining process. Are you planning to get more involved in this 

collective bargaining process by directing it, or are you going to 

take that statement back? What is going to happen so that these 

negotiations can proceed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, I have not and will not interfere in 

the collective bargaining process. And the economic statement that 

was tabled, and any mention that it made of salaries for 

governments and crown corporations, was clearly a case that was 

setting forth the framework, if you like, for the government's 

position. It was our view that schools and other third party groups 

would accept the spirit of that broad statement, albeit that we 

recognize that we do not have direct hands-on in some of the 

negotiations, and I could give examples, like universities, etc., etc. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I wasn't going to ask you about the 

pension, but I know that you're interested in that, seeing that the 

next election may be much closer than you anticipate, and you'll 

be looking for some revenue for keeping yourself in . . . 

 

(2145) 

 

Madam Minister, I was going to say, but we haven’t started with 

our estimates yet. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you mind telling me, since you have 

interfered with the fundamental negotiations by simply declaring 

that there will be no financial remuneration for the teachers, are 

you prepared, and is your team prepared, at this particular time to 

at least consider some of the other items that the teacher 

bargaining team has put on the table. It's my understanding that 

even though that they have met 11 or 12 times . . . Mr. Chairman, I 

would appreciate very much if you ask some of the ministers over 

on the other side there to tone her down a bit so I can be heard. 

Okay? 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister . . . There goes the Minister of Finance 

again. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I would ask members from both 

sides to come to order. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, all I can hear is noise from  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1792 

 

 

the other side. I didn't hear any on this side. I simply ask you to 

ask those people on the other side to let me speak. I think it's 

totally unfair for saying quiet on both sides when the noise only 

comes from one side. I would ask the minister again. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would remind the member that I will be the 

judge of that as chairman here. Would you ask the question, 

please. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I can only observe . . . I can only 

speak on what I observe, and I want to ask the minister again: — 

since you fundamentally interfered with the negotiations that took 

place by indicating that there will be no financial remunerations 

considered for the teachers, will you tell us today what your team 

has considered in the bargaining sessions that have gone on, and 

has any progress been made on any items. Would you please 

inform us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, I don't accept what the hon. 

member says about fundamental interference in the collective 

bargaining process, etc., etc. What I will tell him is that the two 

parties have agreed not to release information on progress since 

they believe an agreement can be achieved. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, are you telling me that you've had no 

progress report from the members of the government side as to 

what has been discussed and what progress has been made? 

 

Would you mind telling us, have you had any discussions at all 

with the members? Have they reported to you, and what progress 

have they made in negotiations? Or has no progress been made at 

all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said earlier, there's been a total of 

13 meetings held between the bargaining committees. The last 

meeting took place on June 16 with negotiations scheduled to 

resume August 27, and in the interest of maintaining the spirit of 

the bargaining that's gone on for years and years and years, the 

two parties have again agreed not to release information on 

progress if they believe an agreement can be achieved. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I've just one further statement to 

make. I don't see how the minister can say he's not going to 

interfere when he . . . I can't recall in the history of this province 

when the minister or a government has said, before negotiations 

take place, that there will be no negotiations for financial 

increases, and then comes to this House and says, I will not 

interfere with negotiations. If you're going to say that there will be 

no financial increases, Mr. Minister, how can you say that you 

haven't interfered already with the fundamental process? 

 

All I'm asking you is: — what progress has been made? Because 

when the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) reports back 

to the teachers, they indicate to us very clearly that the members 

on your side, the members on your team, simply cannot give any 

answers because they have no authority to do any negotiations. 

How can you say that you're not interfering when you don't allow 

your members on your team to negotiate? 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I 

don't know what more I can say other than the meetings are 

ongoing, negotiations are ongoing. I think both parties are in those 

negotiations believing very much . . . despite what you say, despite 

your perceptions and misinterpretations, they are very much into 

those negotiations with the view that agreement can be achieved. 

And I applaud them for that kind of spirit. 

 

Item 36 agreed to. 

 

Item 37 

 

Mr. Prebble: — One question to the minister. Excuse me. In the 

last election the minister promised in his own constituency that a 

new elementary school would be built. There has been no 

announcement to date. Are you planning to keep that election 

promise to your own constituents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I'm hopeful that I can keep that 

election promise to my constituency. I also very much respect the 

responsibilities that go with the office of the Minister of Education 

in that I'm responsible for the entire province. I'm also very 

respectful of the priorization and evaluation process, that the 

Department of Education has had in place for years and years and 

years, that determines which project should go ahead first, and 

that's based on a set of credentials and indices that have served this 

department well for some several years. 

 

And if you're asking me if I'm going to use political 

jiggery-pokery to put my project ahead of some others, the answer 

is no. If you're asking me if I want to see that project, or the 

whatever the right project is to service the Weyburn area, it will 

get the same consideration that all other projects get, and I don't 

think members of this legislature would want it any other way. 

 

And I think it's a credit to that system that we've seen in this House 

in estimates review that projects in opposition constituencies, if 

you like, go ahead. Because so often governments are criticized 

for somehow, you know, building in certain ridings. And I think 

what you see in the project array speaks well for the process, and 

it's one that I have some fair amount of faith in. 

 

And I have no doubt that if I can't announce a project in the next 

month, I'm going to take some heat locally. But I have faith that 

that project, or whatever the right project is for there, will happen 

if it's of a high enough priority when the time is right. 

 

Item 37 agreed to. 

 

Item 38 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, when we talked about 

libraries the other day, it became obvious to me that you weren't 

clear and didn't understand the granting formula for the regional 

libraries. 

 

This item 38 is the grants to the regional libraries, and I asked you 

several times about the base formula for the grant, and you didn't 

seem to know what I was talking  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1793 

 

 

about. This grant is based on three items. It's based on the 

population and the population density of each one of the regional 

libraries; it's based on the service points that those libraries have; 

and it's based on the levies to the municipalities. 

 

That formula is quite complex and it's used to create a base grant 

for each one of those regional libraries in the province. You have 

cut that grant by 10 per cent. And that means next year, as I read 

this and as you've said in the House, that that becomes the base for 

any increases that might come in the years ahead. 

 

So by taking $7,000 out of that money and putting it into a 

separate book budget, you have decreased the amount of money 

for the regional libraries. You have decreased the base formula. It's 

very clear here. And there's no money for the regional centres such 

as Weyburn, Swift Current, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Prince Albert, 

and North Battleford. 

 

This is another example of the destruction of the public library 

system in Saskatchewan, the fact that it's no longer under the 

Saskatchewan Library. And I want you to tell me please: — do 

you think this sum of money includes any money for library 

construction, for public library construction in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'm going to really quickly go through 

what the process was on the libraries. The regional library budget 

had a reduction of 10 per cent, the cities have 30, and then there 

was the establishment, based on need, of the special book fund, 

Mr. Chairman, of a half a million dollars. It's been greeted with 

much ado, and I'm very proud of it. 

 

And I think the hon. member herself must have to question her 

own rhetoric when she uses terms like destruction, when it comes 

to the library system, given the numerous initiatives that our 

government has undertaken, whether it's at universities, schools, or 

regional libraries, when it comes to libraries in this province, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I'm not surprised that the minister didn't answer 

my question because he had his head back and wasn't paying 

attention or listening. My question was: — does this money 

include any public library construction in the regional library 

systems? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My understanding is that the library 

hasn't been into funding capital projects for some several years. 

But they are eligible, under . . . I think it's under Parks and 

Recreation, the capital facilities construction grant program of 20 

or $25 per capita, that program. And I suspect there may well have 

been some libraries build there, but you may want to address that 

question when those estimates are up. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I will be addressing that question. I want to point 

out how much you've cut the regional libraries in their operating 

grants, and the facilities program budget has been cut from 6 

million to 2 million. So there's no money in either budget for any 

library construction, for any public library development, 

maintenance and development of library buildings. 

Item 38 agreed to. 

 

Items 39 to 42 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 43 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if the minister 

could provide . . . could commit himself to providing us with a list 

of all his trips that he's made in the last fiscal year, and all trips 

made by staff accompanying him? In other words, I want an 

indication of your own trips, Mr. Minister, and an indication of 

which staff members accompanied you on those trips. I would like 

also to have a list of all trips that your Legislative Secretary has 

made in the last fiscal year, and I would appreciate getting the 

costs associated with those sets of trips, please. Could you give us 

a commitment that you'll provide that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, yes. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, just one other question to the 

minister. I'd be much more satisfied with the idea, sir, of voting in 

favour of your salary if you would agree to reinstate the salaries of 

the 142 technical institute instructors that you fired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And I ask you for one final time: — will you 

restore some confidence in your position, and your justification for 

receiving a salary as a cabinet minister, by reinstating the fired 

instructors at Saskatchewan's technical institutes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, and then conducting any 

adjustments that need to be made in the programs at those 

institutes, in consultation with the technical institutes and the 

instructors affected. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I want to address this 

question of firings, and that's an improper term, because there 

were no firings and that says something about what their records 

might show. There were lay-offs. 

 

But I want the hon. member to give me the commitment, when 

he's asked about the fate of those instructors, that he looks those 

people in the eye and says what he heard from this seat, from the 

minister when he was asked, not once, not twice, but three times, 

that very question. And every time I said this, and I say it again, 

and I ask that you would relay this, as a honourable gentleman that 

I know you are, that every one of those instructors who wished 

employment were offered employment, except in once instance. 

And that is the track record, and I stand by it. And I want you to 

stand by it, because that is the truth, and it is the facts. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, this is a matter of confidence and a 

matter of justification for your salary. My question to you, sir, is: 

— will you not acknowledge that while a large number of the 

instructors that you fired — or in your terms, laid off — bumped 

into other positions? As a result of that bumping, other technical 

institute instructors were, in effect, laid off, and that therefore there  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1794 

 

 

has been a large number of firings and unjustified lay-offs in the 

technical institute system. And I ask you, sir, again, will you 

reinstate the salaries and positions of those instructors who have 

been unjustifiably laid off, and only then do you deserve your 

salary as a cabinet minister, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, once again the hon. 

member should hear this answer. Even those that were bumped in 

this whole domino effect, the treatment there and our track record 

there is no different than it was on the instructor's side. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, the item 43 — payment to the 

members of the Executive Council is a new item in the '87-88 

budget. Previous to this it was put in under the vote under the 

Executive Council. This really is not a new item in terms of 

additional funding to the Department of Education; it's simply a 

shift of funding, a camouflage, taking money from Executive 

Council and putting it into Education budget, making the 

Education budget look a trifle bigger — 35,000 in this case — but 

making the Executive Council budget look like it has been 

decreased by approximately $700,000. Will you deny that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, what my understanding is, is that 

item 43 is the allowance for myself and the Legislative Secretary 

to myself. I think for $35,200 they're getting a pretty good buy, 

personally. 

 

Item 43 agreed to. 

 

Items 44 to 46 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 5 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Education Development Fund — Vote 64 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 64 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Education 

Vote 141 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 141 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Items 1 to 36. Are there any questions? 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Education Development Fund — Vote 64 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Education 

Vote 141 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Carried. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 8 

 

Vote 8 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Advanced Education and Manpower 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 

Vote 5 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Advanced Education and Manpower 

Vote 141 

 

Vote 141 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Library 

Vote 29 

 

Vote 29 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you. I want just a half a minute to thank 

the minister and especially to thank all of his officials for coming 

here and sitting through what was rather a long series of estimates, 

but I certainly do appreciate their presence. I know that some of 

them have work piling up on their desks which they are very eager 

to get to, and now they'll be able to do so, and I look forward to 

working with them in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I, too, would like to 

thank my officials who have been with us here in the House for 

two or three weeks — not only for their help through these 

estimates, but for their fine work throughout the entire year. I, too, 

would like to include in that group my Legislative Secretary, the 

member for Regina Wascana, who provides me with extra eyes 

and ears and legs throughout the year and has been most helpful, 

particularly in areas like the Northern Lights and addressing the 

whole of the Scharf report. So, I want to acknowledge their fine 

work. 

 

Both these documents have been tabled in this legislature, Mr. 

Chairman: — the Directions document, setting out the future 

agenda for the K to 12 school system, the Preparing for the Year 

2000, laying out the blueprint on adult education. And I think 

these documents will go down in history as setting our educational 

process in  

  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1795 

 

 

Saskatchewan on an exciting future agenda. 

 

And I, too, want to thank the NDP for their questioning. There 

were, in the four or five hundred pages of Hansard, I think there 

were at least two or three sentences of constructive proposals that 

you put forward, and I think you for them. 

 

If I was to register . . . As I take my place, Mr. Chairman, if I was 

to register one note of disappointment, extreme disappointment in 

the assessments process, that is if you go through the probably 

several hundred pages of Hansard that recorded this estimates 

debate, the disappointment that I would express — and I express 

this sincerely — is that the numbers of times that the NDP 

opposition mentioned the words students, children, parents, 

teachers, excellence or opportunity, we can probably count on one 

hand. And that's unfortunate. And that's sad, Mr. Chairman. And 

it's equally unfortunate that the numbers of times that 

Weyerhaeuser and oil companies were mentioned were way, way, 

way too numerous, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The issue here is a question of addressing change that these two 

blueprints outline. It's an exciting agenda. I ask them to join with 

us. We have excellent officials serving us in this province, not 

only the ones in this Assembly tonight in these officials, but across 

the entire province. And I will look forward to this very exciting 

agenda. I look forward to being here next year to go through it 

again. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:15 p.m. 

 


