


















































June 25, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 25, 1987 
 

 
751 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We adjourned for supper, and the member from Quill Lake will 
be pleased to know that I only have approximately 10 minutes 
left. However, I would only ask of him that perhaps he listen to 
some of it. 
 
We had been talking about oil policies, Mr. Speaker, before we 
adjourned at 5 o’clock, and I had left off in explaining what a 
price-sensitive royalty system was. 
 
And to simply go over it one more time, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
rather simple method of defining your royalties. And it simply 
is when the price of oil is low, your royalties are accordingly 
set; and when the price of oil goes up, so does your royalty 
level. 
 
It’s also interesting to note with the new fiscal regime, Mr. 
Speaker, that in fact, the regime that we’ve put into place when 
oil gets to a certain price, the royalty rate will be somewhat 
higher than it was previous to January 1 of 1987. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our objectives, or our goals, on setting our oil 
policies were rather straightforward. We wanted to diversify the 
Saskatchewan economy by developing the natural resources of 
the province. And I really don’t think that the opposition can 
disagree with that. 
 
We also wanted to maximize the short- and the long-term 
benefits to the province from such development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thirdly, we wanted to minimize the environmental 
impacts associated with oil and gas development. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well you didn’t succeed. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the member says we didn’t succeed, 
and we’ll be able to take issue with that probably in estimates 
when we get into them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in attempting to achieve these goals, we have done 
some consulting, and we’ve indicated some co-operation, and 
we’ve searched for the best expertise that we could find. 
 
We also understand that our province must compete for 
investment dollars, and if the opposition does not believe that 
that has to take place in order to get some  

development going in the province, then they have their heads 
in the sand. 
 
We also, Mr. Speaker, established a reasonable economic 
environment for the industry. We removed some administrative 
red tape, and we simplified some procedures. We also 
recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the benefits from such 
development extend far beyond government royalty and tax 
revenues. And I believe that the Leader of the Opposition would 
agree to that. 
 
We also recognized it increases employment, jobs for our 
people, growth of service and support industries and businesses. 
It gives municipalities a broader and a greater municipal tax 
revenue base. And it gives us an expanded surface lease rental 
opportunities for farmers and for individuals. And those are 
some of the benefits that have to be considered outside of what 
government takes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by developing policies which take a long-term 
view of the industry and its potential . . . and the provinces 
passed Bill 42 and the federal national energy program, and I 
know that the NDP didn’t like that — have provided some 
ample evidence of the result which can be expected from 
short-sighted policies. And I would like to think they are 
policies which view the industry simply as a cash cow, or more 
commonly, as people would say as they view the oil industry, 
the goose that laid the golden egg. It hasn’t been effective on 
the short term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition claims this budget did not tax the 
oil companies. His new members obviously agree with that. 
What he did not tell his members is, Saskatchewan still has the 
highest royalty rates in North America. What he did not tell 
them is, if the royalty rate is too high, the wells are shut in. 
And, Mr. Speaker, shut-in wells don’t pay royalties and they 
don’t pay the taxes and they don’t keep the jobs. 
 
Basic economics, basic economics for the member from Quill 
Lakes. What he did not tell him, Mr. Speaker, and nor did the 
member from Regina North East, who used to be a Finance 
minister, was that earlier the NDP had had an incentive 
program. That incentive program was in place, Mr. Speaker, 
until they left office. That incentive program paid 75 per cent of 
the actual cost of the wells. Now that’s not bad, except that it 
also paid 75 per cent for a dry hole — no oil. Mr. Speaker, he 
did not tell them that when he left office in 1982 he left the 
province and the taxpayers with $300 million liability owing on 
the NDP incentive program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about that program 
because they say our incentive program shouldn’t be in. That’s 
what they say out of this side of the mouth; on the other side of 
the mouth they in fact had put one in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that program, as I said, covered 75 per cent of 
drilling and completion costs including dry holes. Mr. Speaker, 
it favoured the big oil companies. Why? Because it was based 
on production, and the big oil companies had the majority of the 
production in this office. It was also complex to administer. 
And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately it resulted in part of the benefit  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

752 
 

being transferred to the federal government through the then 
taxation system. However, that was maybe not their fault. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to think our program is based on success, 
because we don’t pay for dry holes, and it’s neutral in 
application to all companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the NDP leader was busy not telling the 
whole story, he told a much different story about a year ago. 
And I don’t know if the new members are aware of that. 
Interestingly enough, his story was told to the newspaper with 
the now president of the NDP, Mr. Lingenfelter. If the new 
members across the way are not familiar with the NDP energy 
philosophies, then I think it deserves some attention in this 
House. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, started off by 
saying, and I quote: 
 

We’d like to see continued increases in production, sustain 
the drilling, and we would like to believe that exploration 
drilling will take place other than in established fields. 

 
We agree, Mr. Speaker, we totally agree with the Leader of the 
Opposition on that point. Obviously he agrees with us because 
it’s the same policy. The Leader of the Opposition went on to 
say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

We have no objection to tax holiday incentives for 
exploration. 

 
An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The Leader of the Opposition said that. 
He also went on, Mr. Speaker, to say: 
 

. . . that the NDP incentives program implemented during 
the 1970’s did have holes, so to speak, in that it made it 
“fair game” in the business of buying and selling these 
credits. 

 
He went to say: 
 

We’re not sure about incentives for dry holes. 
 

That’s where we differ, Mr. Speaker. We’re sure; we’re not 
going to pay for dry holes. 
 
But he went on to say — and I ask the members to listen, the 
new members of the NDP, for this is what you believe in: 
 

. . . we do believe in generous incentives and we have no 
objection to royalty tax holidays. Every government today 
has to realize that this is no longer the 1970’s. It was a 
seller’s market, therefore, there were strong royalties, and 
so we try to get what we could for the provincial treasury. 
Now there are compensation packages for explorers and 
for royalties. It is not the same realm as the 1970’s 
because of the market. There are changed economics. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if that’s what the Leader of the Opposition says is 
the NDP energy philosophy, then I suggest that the next leader 
of the opposition, the member from  

Saskatoon Riversdale, has a different view of the energy 
philosophies of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time the article was written, the leader went 
on to add a couple of other things. He did say that: 
 

Now there is a little uncertainty creeping into the scene 
due to OPEC . . . 

 
That was in January of 1986. But he said: 
 

. . . we hope it’s not too significant. 
 

And I want to tell the members, it was very significant, very. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition debate on this budget has been far 
from reason and fact. We’ve all had choices to make, and we 
have chosen what we think is a realistic path in a transitional 
period of time. We have chosen to maintain a high level on the 
education and health programs. We have chosen to down-size 
government. At the same time we’ve done that, Mr. Speaker, 
we have chosen for some tax increases, but we also chose some 
tax reductions, namely for low-income families and single 
parents. We have chosen to pursue economic diversification 
through such policies as the energy policy, and we’ve chosen to 
acknowledge the difficulties in our farm sector and our resource 
sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are no assumptions built in for sky-high 
prices with this budget. We have chosen to take a realistic 
approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while those are some of our choices, what may I 
ask are the choices opposite? Like the Manitoba counterparts, 
perhaps, for the member from Quill Lake. Is it a choice of 
bigger government, or have you got a broader vision than that? 
Perhaps it’s a choice of bigger deficits. Then I ask, for how long 
and how much? 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it’s back to nationalization — perhaps 
it’s back to nationalization, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Please allow the 
minister to make her remarks without constantly interrupting 
her. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I can only assume that perhaps I touched 
a soft spot. Mr. Speaker, the word “nationalization” . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, order. I have just asked the 
members to not interrupt the minister, and already, as soon as 
she is on her feet, they are interrupting her. Please allow her to 
continue with her remarks. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the debate on 
how we do things in this province, there’s obviously some 
differences between this side of the House and that side of the 
House. Nationalization has been one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder how often that most of the members 
actually think about what nationalization is. They talk about 
wanting to own the resources, and yet the  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

753 
 

nationalization is simply the act of taking tax money to buy 
what the people already own — nothing more and nothing less. 
The leader has chosen to simplify, I believe, for politically 
motivated reasons, by saying that we chose the oil companies 
over ordinary citizens. And I say, nonsense. The facts will 
speak for themselves. He’s had the voice of rally, and I might 
add, so has the member from Saskatoon South, Regina North 
East, Moose Jaw North, Regina Rosemont, Prince Albert and 
Saskatoon Riversdale. The voice of rally, when all that 
Saskatchewan asks in dealing with this democratic institution 
are voices of reason. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I have not heard any reasonable 
arguments from across the floor as to why the budget should not 
be passed. I’ve heard rhetoric and a lot of allegations, but no 
solutions. And to be perfectly blunt about it, I believe their 
credibility has slipped several notches with their contradictory 
statements and the leader’s stated positions on the energy 
policy. 
 
But more significantly, Mr. Speaker, has been their strategy of 
instilling fear. That has been a choice made by the front benches 
across the way. That is the tactic, the tactic of fear. That’s not 
ours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we reject that, and we reject it, as I do, along with 
the amendment that the member from Regina North East has 
put forth. And I believe, actually, it’s an amendment of fear, an 
amendment that lacks a whole lot of realism, and an amendment 
that lacks solutions with vision — there is none. We’re back to 
the 1967s, as the member from Saskatoon Riversdale got into 
today in his early days in the House. Mr. Speaker, this is 1987. 
 
For those reasons I will be supporting this budget and be voting 
against the amendment. 
 
(1915) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
privilege to rise this evening to participate in the debate on this, 
the first budget of the Tory administration since they were 
re-elected. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Tories opened the 
legislature with their throne speech last fall, the members 
opposite were greatly reduced in numbers, sadly lacking in 
spirit, and they decided that the only way they could escape 
further retribution was to say nothing, to do nothing, and to 
promise nothing. 
 
Unfortunately for them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Finance 
minister couldn’t leave well enough alone. He has given us the 
longest budget speech in Saskatchewan’s history. It started last 
January and it finally concluded on June 17, maybe — maybe. 
Because yesterday he said he hadn’t quite finished yet. 
 
This budget speech was not only the longest, but it was the 
sorriest budge tin the history of Saskatchewan because it 
represents three things: a betrayal of the people of 
Saskatchewan; a fiscal disaster; and a triumph of ideology over 
common sense. 

The Finance minister claims that this document will continue to 
build, to protect, and to diversify. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
say that the lane to hell is paved with good intentions. 
 
For what we have here in this budget is long-term pain with 
very little gain, unless you are an oil company or a bank or 
some foreign multinational corporation. The only things that the 
Conservatives are building are deficits. The only things they 
protect is their corporate friends from taxation. Mr. Speaker, 
they talk about diversifying our economy, but the only 
manufacturing that this government is currently accomplishing 
is manufacturing excuses. 
 
To build, they say, to protect, to diversify — the slogans roll 
from the lips of the Finance minister. It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Finance minister is a man of vast and varied 
misinformation, is secure in the belief that a little inaccuracy 
saves a world of explanation. George Orwell, in his novel 
Nineteen Eight-Four, told of a world in which we had a 
ministry of truth and a new language, Newspeak. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Orwell’s ideas are alive and well in Saskatchewan — 
to build, to protect, to diversify, they say. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what does that really mean? It 
means, in fact, to cut, to slash, to destroy, to undermine the 
programs that we have here built in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, Newspeak is alive and well in Saskatchewan. And let 
me quote from the throne speech last fall. Let me speak in 
respect to what they said. You know what it indicated? 
 

My Government intends to implement its programme in a 
spirit of co-operation and participation. Recent months (it 
goes one and says) have afforded my Ministers the 
opportunity to . . . make themselves aware of the public’s 
ideas and aspirations. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to know: what rural and 
urban municipalities asked the government for a slash in 
revenue sharing? What hospital boards asked for a cut in their 
operating grants? I say you’ve betrayed their trust. 
 
What school boards petitioned for a $20 million cut in 
education grants? You betrayed their trust. What farmers asked 
for a $24 million reduction in farm fuel rebate programs? I say 
that members opposite betrayed their trust. 
 
I ask you, what drivers throughout Saskatchewan came to this 
government and asked for a 7 cent a litre increase in gasoline? 
What agricultural fairs and exhibition boards asked for the 
elimination of provincial grants and support? I say, what 4-H 
club members asked for the elimination of support to their 
programs? And I’ll say there were none. In each instance they 
betrayed a trust of the people of this province. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, what students asked to have their courses 
cut, their future devastated, and destroy the quality of education 
in our institutions of higher  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

754 
 

education? And I’ll say there were no students that were 
consulted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask you, what battered women came to you to ask that their 
grant to their transitions houses, in fact, be slashed? And I say 
they betrayed their trust. 
 
But the buzz words of the Minister of Finance are: to build, to 
protect, to diversify, Mr. Speaker. These are really hollow 
words. They’re hollow words to the farmers, to our working 
people, to our young people, to our senior citizens across this 
province. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, you have made them, the 
government has made them unwilling participants in the most 
savage attack against the people and the programs that they 
have developed over our history. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you 
that the people here will not co-operate with the savage slashing 
of the programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I’ll tell members opposite, you can tell 
them to clear out their desks, they’re fired. You can shut down 
their dental chairs and say there will be no more dental care for 
our children. You can tell the seniors to pay for their drugs. You 
can tell them to pay more for their gas, and you can tell them to 
pay more taxes. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that they may 
participate, the people of Saskatchewan, but they will not in fact 
co-operate. They will participate, but I’ll tell you that they will 
not forget. 
 
I want to say to the government opposite, I remind you that you 
are the instruments of your own destruction. And I’ll tell you 
that this budget has sown the seeds of despair and desolation 
across this province. And in doing so, that you have planted and 
will in fact reap the rich harvest when you pick up your courage 
to face the people of this province again. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have a 
long memories. I say that the people of Saskatchewan will not 
forget what this budget has done to them. And I will tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, we will not let them forget either. 
 
Every day is one day less for this government, and the people, I 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, are already counting. On every farm, in 
every hamlet, in our villages, and towns, and cities, they will be 
counting and they will be waiting. You have betrayed their 
trust, and I will tell you their retribution will be harsh and fast 
when given the opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that the slogan of the people of 
Saskatchewan will be 62 in ’90 or ’91. The people, I’ll tell you, 
of Saskatchewan are not that vindictive you know. You know 
what they’re going to do? I predict they will leave them about 
two seats in this House — maybe. But that’s only so they will 
never forget what these people have done to the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their theme, to build, to protect, to diversify — 
such hypocrisy from the members opposite. For the past year 
we have heard that, Saskatchewan Builds. And I want to say 
that on lot after lot, empty lot after lot, you’ve  

got the big blue signs saying, Saskatchewan Builds. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what are we building here in Saskatchewan 
under the present government? As I say, we’re building deficits, 
tens of millions of dollars of deficit, hundreds of millions of 
dollars, billions of dollars of deficit — larger and larger deficits. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we are the only province 
here in Canada where we’re really building because the other 
thing, besides building this massive amount of deficit, we have 
built unemployment, massive unemployment in this province. 
And I’ll tell you, there’s skilled people unemployed, there’s 
unskilled people unemployed, there are educated people 
unemployed, there are young people and there are old people 
unemployed in this province. And the regrettable fact, just as 
we had in the last administration, that right-wing administration 
under the late Ross Thatcher, people are again — young people 
— are leaving this province faster than ever before in the 
history of this province. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Builds. I say to you that if we 
aren’t building, then let’s take a look at the second pledge — to 
protect people. I want them over there, the government, to tell 
the people faced with paying for expensive drugs that that’s 
what they’re doing, is to protect them. I want them to tell the 
young people that they disqualified or cut off of the dental 
program that they’re protecting them. I want them to tell the 
battered women that they have cut off the grants for the 
transition homes that they are protecting them. I want them to 
tell the people who cannot obtain a hospital bed that they’re 
protecting them. Tell that to the people who can’t find a social 
worker that you’re protecting them. Tell that to the people in 
Saskatchewan who can’t find jobs that what you’re doing is 
protecting them. I say, Mr. Speaker, this budget represents the 
greatest hypocrisy that this legislature has seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, what about their third theme, to 
diversify, they claim? Well let’s look at what they’re 
accomplishing here to diversify. This year there was a 
significant decline in the number of people employed in 
manufacturing and in finance, but still they’re diversifying. 
 
Saskatchewan Trends Monitor says last year, we said new 
housing starts would weaken further in 1986. They did. We 
anticipate another decline in 1987. And this is diversification. It 
really looks like an economy that’s really on the move. 
 
Vacancy rates in apartments and homes are rising. Bankruptcies 
are setting records in ’86, exceeding the previous record of ’82, 
and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that at that time in ’82 the operative 
slogan was, “open for business”. 
 
(1930) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to diversify. Manufacturers say that 
production will be lower in the next six months. Investment is 
down, and their theme goes on — to build,  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

755 
 

to protect, to diversify, Mr. Speaker, when these difficult times 
call for leadership, a philosophy, a program, this government 
gives us slogans. 
 
This budget, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, is a disaster looking for 
a place to happen. And unfortunately for the people of this 
province, it’s happening here. The worst fears of the people of 
Saskatchewan have suddenly been realized. This government in 
this budget supplies no leadership, has no overall program, but 
has a philosophy based on political expediency and a 
discredited ideology of neo-conservatism. But then, Mr. 
Speaker, should we have expected anything more from the 
members opposite? Mr. Speaker, I can only say to you that we 
have a government here that has its wishbone where its 
backbone ought to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You know, the other day I was talking to a 
constituent of mine, and he came up to me — he’s a farmer and 
well-established farmer — and he came up and he told me, he 
said, do you realize, he said, Murray, he say, there’s no fool like 
an old Conservative. And I say, why? He says, you just can’t 
beat experience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — No, Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t expect more. 
Because to the members opposite, Conservative philosophy is 
sort of like a rocking chair — it provides a sense of motion, but 
it doesn’t get you anywhere. And I say that because I think a 
Conservative is a person who doesn’t think anything should be 
done for the first time. Yes, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Tories, I suggest, and I 
suggest to the people of Saskatchewan, are a mean, callous, 
uncaring political party who worships at the altar of ideology 
that says that the only way to create prosperity is by taking it 
from those who have least and giving it to those who have most. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are telling us — 
they’re telling us in letters, by rallies, by phone calls, on the 
streets, in our stores, in the restaurants, on their farms — 
they’re telling us that they have had enough. They have said to 
us that it is time to say, no more, to this government. No more 
to the members opposite, who believe that they should build a 
society based on greed and selfishness and handouts to their 
corporate friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a better way than that demonstrated in this 
budget by the Minister of Finance, but it will not be found in 
the abstract market-place. It will not be found in the writings of 
the Fraser Institute, or their research which is being used by the 
members opposite. No, Mr. Speaker, the solutions to our 
problems will not be found in the budget delivered by the 
Minister of Finance. This budget does not solve problems, it 
causes problems. 
 
This budget, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, is a sorry document. It 
breaks every major Tory commitment to the people of this 
province. It breaks the promise . . . It breaks, first of all, the  

promise to cut income taxes, which was given in 1982, to cut 
income tax by 10 per cent. In fact they have reversed it and 
massively increased the income tax on the people of this 
province. 
 
The promise to eliminate sales tax has not only been forgotten, 
it has gone the other way — an increase from 5 per cent to 7 per 
cent. The promise to reduce gas tax has suddenly been 
forgotten. In the last legislature, before the last election, I can 
remember the Premier indicating and scoffing at the New 
Democrats and saying to us: New Democrats, people should 
know, they will bring back a gas tax. 
 
And here the very Premier, who deceived the people of the 
province and basically won an election on the removal of the 
gas tax, has forgotten that promise. The promise of open 
government has been forgotten. The promise of co-operation, 
forgotten. The promise of participation by the people of this 
province, forgotten. The promise of jobs to our young people, 
miserably forgotten. The only thing that this government has 
not forgotten is how to reward its friends and big business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, their corporate friends continue to 
wallow in the public trough. For them, it’s business as usual. 
For them, Tory times are good times. But I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not for the poor, for the unemployed, for the sick, 
for our seniors, our young, our students. For ordinary people, 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, Tory times are hard times. 
 
And I say to you that the people of Saskatchewan will never 
forget. Nothing will save the members opposite from the 
damage and the mistrust that they have placed in the minds of 
the people of this province. This budget will be the instrument 
of the destruction of that political party because it is an 
instrument which really maps out all of the deception that has 
gone on by that party with the people of this province. 
 
I can say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people have listened and 
the people have learned, and they know that they have been 
betrayed. And they say, never again will you have an 
opportunity to betray, to deceive, to hurt, to lie to the people of 
this province. I say, Mr. Speaker, that they will look to a return 
to a Saskatchewan tradition of people working together, not just 
for themselves, but for all members of society. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan will be people working together, 
not just for their future, but for all our children. People working 
together, Mr. Speaker, not just for our children but for the 
children of the world, not just for ourselves but for a better 
world. People working together bound by common ideals, 
common objectives, working together in a common purpose and 
a common dedication to a great cause — that cause, the 
liberation of humankind. 
 
People working together, Mr. Speaker, in the tradition of our 
great leaders: the J.S. Woodworth, the Tommy Douglas, the 
Woodrow Lloyd, and our current leader, Allan Blakeney; and 
all of those pioneers who worked to  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

756 
 

build the Commonwealth Co-operative Federation here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget can destroy all what these pioneers 
have built here in Saskatchewan, but I’ll tell you one thing, they 
cannot destroy memories. 
 
We will remember the programs, as we remember those who 
built with their toil and their effort. They were people with a 
vision, people with a dream. And I’ll tell you here tonight, 
members opposite in the government, that we’re going to 
survive this nightmare, a nightmare of the exercise of power for 
power’s sake. I say, Mr. Speaker, that our pioneers dreamt of 
how power could be used. They dreamt of using power for the 
benefit of ordinary people, for the good of all, and they dreamt 
of building a better world by building a better province. And I 
say they dreamt well, and they built well, and they gave us 
much to be proud of. They gave us their lives in our service. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have indeed 
betrayed the people of this province’s trust. The members 
opposite have forgotten, or perhaps they never knew, that the 
real measure of individual and national life is the quality of that 
life. And what we provide so that people can live useful and 
meaningful lives is the real measure of political worth. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we in the New Democratic Party look at 
this budget and see what I has done and see what it is doing and 
see what it will do, we can only call upon the people of 
Saskatchewan to respond to the oil scriptural call — be strong 
and of good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, effort and courage are not enough. We must 
also have the purpose and direction today; there can be no status 
quo. Change is the law that binds society and those members 
together. And members opposite who look only to the past are 
certain to lose the future. 
 
We need a budget that realizes that the risks are great, that the 
burdens are indeed heavy, and the problems are difficult. But 
I’ll tell you, we need a budget that does not advocate its 
responsibilities by adopting simplistic solutions by promoting 
appealing slogans or by seeking out convenient scapegoats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a budget and government that not only 
seeks great ends but also the concrete means of achieving them. 
We need a government and a budget that is not afraid to act, 
that is prepared to exercise its full powers to assist its people. 
We need, Mr. Speaker, a budget and a government that is 
prepared to accept its full responsibilities to help all those in 
need and suffering. We needed a budget that recognizes that 
yesterday is not ours to recover but tomorrow is ours to win or 
lose. We need a budget that will pursue the right without 
self-righteousness. We need a budget that will pursue unity 
without conformity. We need a budget that will allow us to 
grow in strength with pride in ourselves. We needed a budget 
that will speak the truth and serve justice. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this budget does none of these 
things. Mr. Speaker, we must ask the people of  

Saskatchewan to join with us. We ask the people of 
Saskatchewan to give us your hearts, and each day shall be a 
better world. We ask the people of Saskatchewan to give us 
your hearts and we will be the spades that dig the foundations 
for a new and better world. We ask you to give us your hearts 
so that we can change men and institutions for the better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — We ask the people of Saskatchewan to give us 
your hearts so that we can change our province, our nation, and 
our world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget has been the biggest betrayal that the 
people of Saskatchewan have ever had laid upon them. And I 
say to you that the people of Saskatchewan will never forget. 
 
In 1967, Mr. Speaker, history has repeated itself. In 1967 the 
Thatcher government came into power and immediately 
afterwards heaped upon the people of this province all of the tax 
increases the like of which could hardly be believed. 
 
And today we have history repeating itself. Here was a 
government, when it went out in October, telling the people of 
this province that we’re going to build; that everything was fine. 
And I say that was hypocritical; that was misrepresenting the 
truth; that was deceiving the people of Saskatchewan. And I’ll 
tell you, the people of Saskatchewan have long memories, and 
they will not forget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that 
this is a harsh, and mean, and an uncaring budget. But could we 
expect anything else? 
 
All of us who sat here in the four and a half years prior to the 
election knew exactly what they were going to do. They were 
following the Fraser Institute blueprint for changing 
Saskatchewan as we know it. That’s what they’re doing. 
 
And I’ll tell you, during the first four and a half years they did 
pour money out — unlimited. And we knew deficits were 
growing. And the Minister of Finance: can you believe that he 
still sits in that chair as Minister of Finance? A man that came 
into this legislature before the last election, his final budget 
then, and said there would be $389 million of deficit, and had 
the utter audacity to come forward and say, well I slipped a 
little — it’s a $1.2 billion, $1.2 billion. And can you believe it, 
that they have so little talent over there that they can’t even find 
a replacement for that incompetence? 
 
It’s a sad commentary that the best that they could have as a 
Minister of Finance is a retreat Liberal brought in for the 
purpose of power. So I say, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats are 
serious and New Democrats are angry. The people of 
Saskatchewan are angry, and I’ll tell you, you boys across the 
way, you’re going to have the roughest time, the  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

757 
 

roughest time that you have ever seen. Because you have 
betrayed the people of Saskatchewan. And the people of 
-Saskatchewan are joining with us, and I’ll tell you, we’ll drive 
you out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the 
amendment and voting against this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I rise 
tonight I think it’s the fifth or sixth budget debate that I have 
taken part in since I was first elected to this legislature, and I 
must say that in preparing for this budget, it was one of the 
most difficult, arduous, and challenging processes that I’m sure 
any government has faced for some several decades, Mr. 
Speaker. But in the end, the right balance was found. 
 
We said to the people of this province some several months ago 
that before we asked the family or the people of this province to 
tighten their belts, the government would tighten their belt first. 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a budget that 
recognizes the priorities of the people — health, and education, 
and protection of families and individuals and seniors. It’s a 
budget of understanding, it’s a budget of fairness, and it’s a 
budget of sensitivity. And there is no question, Mr. Speaker, 
that not all of the measures in this budget are popular nor did 
we expect them to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I can say, Mr. Speaker, without a doubt, that although this 
budget may not be entirely popular in terms of some of the tax 
increases that are necessary to get our economic house in order 
and some of the expenditure changes that had to be made, Mr. 
Speaker, we can say for absolute certainty that this is a 
responsible budget, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the right budget. It’s 
right because, Mr. Speaker, the public interest is put ahead of 
the special interest. And so I say congratulations to the Minister 
of Finance on a document that has fairness and responsibility 
and understanding and compassion. 
 
Before I get into my further remarks tonight, Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to pay tribute to some remarks made in the 
speech in this House in the budget debates earlier on this week, 
June 22 to be exact, by the member from Athabasca. And why a 
part of his remarks particularly stood out, Mr. Speaker, was for 
this reason: there was some thought had gone into it and some 
new thought, Mr. Speaker. And that was a rare commodity as 
we’ve listened to the opposition speeches over the past several 
days. This stood out, Mr. Speaker, like none other across there. 
The member from Athabasca made reference to a tragic hockey 
accident involving Brad Hornung, which I think we’re all 
familiar with, Mr. Speaker. He raised a problem, but more 
importantly, he raised a solution that might prevent these 
accidents from happening in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I commend that member because it’s been a rare 
commodity that the NDP have taken a look at a subject and 
proposed a possible solution that’s worthy of some study. And 
so I commend the hon. member from  

Athabasca for taking that initiative, and a rare initiative it is 
over there. 
 
I’d also, Mr. Speaker, like to say thank you to those who I have 
worked with over the past several months in the portfolio, the 
Education portfolio. I think of people like the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees, the LEADS (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents) organization, 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the university boards 
of governors, the presidents of universities, the faculties and 
staff of institutes, the teachers themselves, and certainly some 
of the students who have hosted me as I visited some of the 
schools in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I must say, that although in some of these instances there 
has been some nose-to-nose debate, if you like, certainly I have 
found, for the most part, the attitude non-confrontational; but on 
the contrary, Mr. Speaker, rather constructive. And I want to 
thank them for that, and for their continued advice and guidance 
and input; I find them very genuine and sincere people. 
 
And I also would like to acknowledge the work that the officials 
in the departments of . . . the new Department of Education, if 
you like: formerly made up of Saskatchewan Library; the 
Department of Education, K to 12 as you traditionally knew it; 
and the department of advanced education and manpower; as 
well, the staff at the Public Service Commission. 
 
I particularly want to acknowledge the work that the Education 
department has done under the former minister in putting out 
the blueprint for the future, a booklet entitled Directions — the 
blueprint for the K to 12 system as we track towards the 21st 
century. And then more recently, Mr. Speaker, the document 
entitled Preparing for the Year 2000, done by those who work 
in post-secondary education. Excellent documents, Mr. 
Speaker, ones that we’re very proud of and ones that the people 
of the province . . . It will serve the people of this province very 
well as we move towards the future. 
 
I would like to spend a few minutes tonight, Mr. Speaker, 
talking in a few areas. First of all, talk about education and the 
exciting future that I think we have ahead of us. I want to talk a 
little bit as well about priorities and about making choices. 
Thirdly, I want to spend a few moments on my constituency 
and what this budget means for the constituents — my 
constituents of the Weyburn area, Mr. Speaker. And finally I’d 
like to end with a few remarks on the legislature in general. 
 
I want to talk to the members here tonight about our plans for 
the future, the future of education. One could talk about the 
past, our record — the facts, Mr. Speaker, if you like, and 
certainly I think the facts do need to be told. Facts like, Mr, 
Speakers, in the last four years our government increased 
funding to post-secondary education by more than 50 per cent 
— a record not matched by any other province in this country. 
And that’s a fact, Mr. Speaker, 
 
Fact two, Mr. Speaker, that during the NDP administration, for 
some 11 years, university buildings went unrepaired. There 
were no replacements —  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

758 
 

equipment went unreplaced, buildings were allowed to run 
down and depreciate because of fiscal neglect by the NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker. But what is the record under our 
administration, Mr. Speaker? Well, at the University of Regina, 
we will be providing more capital funding this year than the 
NDP did in its last six years of office, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a 
fact. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the Devine government at the University 
of Saskatchewan will be building, along with the university and 
some of their corporate patrons, the new agriculture college, 
Mr. Speaker. The new agriculture college, which is pictured on 
the recent College of Agriculture Highlights ’86, University of 
Saskatchewan, their annual report. A very, very fine facility, 
Mr. Speaker, and one that the farmers and the researchers at the 
university and the professors in agriculture of this province 
have waited something over one quarter of a century to happen, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And under our Premier, it is now happening and it’s happening 
because this is a man who understands the heart and soul of 
farming and agriculture in this province, Mr. Speaker. And it 
surprises me day after day that the NDP wonder why they have 
no constituency in the farm population across this province. It’s 
no wonder when for 25 years, Mr. Speaker, this building that 
was sorely needed did not get built, and to look at the priorities 
and the choices that they made and put ahead of this project, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another fact, Mr. Speaker. The University of Regina, in 
conjunction with a company called University Microfilms 
International took $1 million of their money, of the corporate 
sponsor’s money, $1 million from the Government of 
Saskatchewan and parleyed it into a 200 . . . in excess of $200 
million worth of library print material, Mr. Speaker, or library 
materials — but not in the conventional form as we know it, in 
the form of microfilm — $2 million bought in excess of $200 
million of library material in this new technology. And I 
thought it was tremendously appropriate that on the pamphlet 
that they had that day, the headline or the top line was “The 
margin for excellence, the first step.” 
 
And that’s what we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, in all of 
these initiatives, whether it’s building anew agriculture college, 
microfilm acquisitions, new initiatives in computers. We’re 
talking about providing quality education for our young people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I congratulate Ernie Ingles and his fine staff over at the 
University of Regina Library for being innovative and being 
creative and taking $2 million and turning it into $200 million, 
Mr. Speaker — that’s innovation. With these projects and 
initiatives, by making these resources available, Mr. Speaker, 
what we’re talking about is quality. 
 
And I now want to talk about the other very important issue 
when it comes to education, and that’s accessibility. What are 
the facts on accessibility, Mr. Speaker? We’ve heard time and 
time again in this debate about how there are cut-backs, student 
enrolment is down, Mr. Speaker. At least that’s what the 
opposition say. 

But what are the facts, Mr. Speaker? The facts are these, Mr. 
Speaker, More than 5,000 additional students per year now have 
access to university because of the additional resources and 
facilities that are provided, Mr. Speaker. A 30 per cent increase 
in students has occurred at a time when the main population 
group aged 15 to 24 has shown virtually no increase. A 30 per 
cent enrolment when that age category has basically stayed 
static, Mr. Speaker — 5,000 additional students. 
 
Fact, Mr. Speaker, technical institute funding up 72 per cent. 
The opposition would have us believe that somehow the 
technical institutes are falling apart because of cut-backs in 
funding. Mr. Speaker, it was this government, it was this 
Premier that built the new Prince Albert campus. Mr. Speaker, 
it was this government that has seen institute enrolments up 35 
per cent. And the facts, Mr. Speaker, are the same for student 
aid. They’re the same for training programs for those on 
welfare, and they’re the same for institute extension programs 
in rural Saskatchewan — a very, very fine record when it comes 
to accessibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me turn now to the K to 12 school system, for here the same 
contrast between the NDP neglect and our government’s 
performance continues unabated. When we came to power in 
1982 we found a school system running out of money, running 
out of time, and running out of patience. We ended up by 
having to increase funding by $100 million a year before we 
finally met the need. 
 
(2000) 
 
In the five years from ’77 to ’82, when the NDP were in 
government, Mr. Speaker, municipalities had been forced to 
increase the school mill rate a total of 59 per cent to compensate 
for underfunding. In the five years under our Premier’s 
leadership, ’82 to ’87, by comparison school mill rates have 
increased by only 14 per cent. Compare the record, Mr. Speaker 
— 14 per cent versus 59 per cent. But the news gets better, Mr. 
Speaker, because between ’84 and ’86 there was no increase at 
all in mill rates. 
 
Now we have also made major investments in new construction 
and in new equipment for our schools, Mr. Speaker. Over the 
last five years we have undertaken 600 school construction 
projects totalling some $350 million and construction related 
activity. And under the new $150 million education 
development fund we have supported 1,800 projects, including 
the purchase of several hundreds of computers for schools and 
more than 20,000 school library acquisitions and countless 
other pieces of equipment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These then are the facts relating to education policy over the 
last five years. It is a record of accomplishment. It is a record of 
accomplishment, Mr. Speaker, that no other province in this 
country can match. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Now I can hear members opposite 
asking: if we have done so much why are people talking about 
cut-backs in education? I could give the  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

759 
 

easy answer to this question, Mr. Speaker, and blame it on 
opposition scaremongering or media sensationalism. But the 
real answer, Mr. Speaker, is much deeper. Teachers, professors, 
and administrators in our schools and universities are feeling 
cut back because they sense they aren’t keeping up with the rate 
of change in their environment. 
 
As the figures show — as the numbers that I have just read into 
the record, Mr. Speaker — as the figures show, there have been 
a dramatic success in objective terms in increasing enrolment 
and accessibility. We have more of every form of service then 
we did just five short years ago — almost double in some cases. 
Yet the feeling of inadequacy persists, Mr. Speaker. To many it 
appeared as though we were on a treadmill where the objective 
keeps receding as we reach out to grasp, but never quite getting 
to it. 
 
The solution to this dilemma is not simply more money, more 
borrowed money. The solution, Mr. Speaker, requires that we 
stand back and ask whether we have the right mechanisms to 
get the job done. So let’s pause for a moment and consider how 
our world is changing. 
 
As members on both sides of the House will agree, we see 
around us the forerunners of enormous change in Canada and 
around the world. Across a number of international fronts, 
economic forces are in play which will result in a major 
restructuring of the global economy. Socially and 
demographically, new pressures and new challenges are 
springing up to which governments and all of society must 
react. And at the same time as these forces for change are 
accumulating around us, we are beginning to experience a new 
generation of technology that will revolutionize the very 
processes we use to comprehend and manage the world around 
us. 
 
It is as if, Mr. Speaker, we had jumped from a slow moving 
passenger car plodding along a sedate country road to a fast 
moving race care accelerating down a steep hill. In this new 
environment, Mr. Speaker, there is only one constant, and that 
is change. If we are to survive and prosper in this new world, 
we must come to grips with the reality of change. 
 
This new information age will have an impact at least equal to 
the Industrial Revolution, perhaps greater even. But whereas the 
Industrial Revolution occurred over at least 100 years, the 
information age has hit full speed in a 10th of that time. 
 
All economies are vulnerable to this new technology, but none 
as much as Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Our whole economy 
since the Prairies were settled has been based on agriculture and 
resource extraction. 
 
In the past, each new technology simply brought a more 
efficient means of production. We went from an era where the 
strong back on the farm was the symbol of success and 
prosperity, to an age when the farmer with several teams of 
good horses, that was the symbol of prosperity on the farm, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In other words, we went from an age of manpower to an age 
where we had the sophistication of horses and the  

horsepower. And then we went from the horsepower to the 
tractor, Mr. Speaker, and its mega-horsepower. 
 
But for the first time in our history we face a new technology 
which has the potential to relegate natural resources to a 
secondary role. Diversification is the order of the day. The basis 
of this new technology is knowledge or information. And 
overnight our economic development strategy is cast in a new 
light. Suddenly brainpower and the human intellect — not 
horsepower, not manpower, but brainpower and the human 
intellect — become the primary resources or the primary 
considerations, Mr. Speaker. Education becomes the primary 
concern in our efforts to maintain our standard of living. 
 
Now members opposite may say, well that’s all well and fine, 
Mr. Speaker. Education, you say, is a priority; it’s going to be 
our main concern. Just pour in the money and away we go. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s just like saying that horsepower could 
have competed with the internal combustion engine if we had 
just hitched a few more horses in front of the stone boat. That is 
the reality of the kind of change we’re talking about, Mr. 
Speaker. We don’t need more horses; we don’t need more 
horses in front of the stone boat. We need the new and different 
technology that information and knowledge will bring us. 
 
There comes a time, Mr. Speaker, when money is not enough. 
And the issue is simply this, Mr. Speaker, and I raise this 
particularly for the NDP. The issue is simply this: are you 
willing to face the need for change? That is the simple question, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last 12 months, our government has begun 
the process of preparing for change in our education system. 
We decided to take a long, hard look at what we were doing; 
decide where we are strong and can build, and where we are 
weak and must change. Beginning with the K to 12 school 
system, that is precisely what we are doing with the Directions 
exercise. 
 
We looked, we listened, and we saw where we must build. We 
set out to reinforce those basic learnings which go to the 
development of intellect, to the ability to communicate, and to 
the power to reason, Mr. Speaker. In co-operation with teachers 
and administrators, parents, and other interested groups right 
across this province, Mr. Speaker, we established and 
announced just some several short months go, a new core 
curriculum, and identified essential learnings that all children 
must receive. And I am pleased today and tonight to advise the 
Assembly that curriculum advisory committees are being 
established for each of the required areas of study and will soon 
begin their work. 
 
What this means, Mr. Speaker, what this new policy means is 
improved standards for our education system, quality in our 
education system, Mr. Speaker. Because I don’t want to pick up 
the newspaper as I did some several weeks ago, several months 
ago now, as the Star-Phoenix — I don’t have the date on it — 
and the headline was, “Academic standards dropping”. That has 
no place in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Or another headline 
from  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

760 
 

November 20, 1986, the Leader-Post, the headline went, 
“Illiteracy rate in province set about 32 per cent.” Mr. Speaker, 
that has no place in Saskatchewan. 
 
What I want to see, Mr. Speaker, and this is what the headline 
was after we announced the new curriculum, “Revised 
curriculum boosts English,” Mr. Speaker. Because people 
recognize that as much as we must have the new technologies 
and the new literacies, to be computer literate and 
technologically literate, at the end of the day people still must 
grasp and grasp fully the three R’s of reading, writing, and 
arithmetic, Mr. Speaker. Basic literacy and basic numeracy, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the kind of headlines that we want for this new 
core curriculum, and that’s what the people of this province 
wanted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I mentioned the accomplishments of 
the educational development fund since its inception two years 
ago. And I am pleased to say that nearly 14 more millions of 
dollars will be allocated this year for projects aimed at yet 
further improvements in quality in our educational system. That 
will bring the total to $55 million allocated in the first three 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to say a few words about our French education 
system, Mr. Speaker, and I will take time to read a brief 
statement in French to the legislature and then repeat my 
remarks in English, Mr. Speaker. 
 
L’éducation française continue d’être une priorité de notre 
gouvernement. Depuis 1982, nous avons vu un progrès 
considérable. Pendant cette période, il y a eu une augmentation 
des inscriptions dans les programmes de les écoles désignées de 
281 pour cent. Nous avons, 8,784 élèves dans les programmes 
de français de base. 
 
Nous continuerons le soutien aux associations fransaskoises 
telles que l’Association culturelle franco-canadienne, le Collège 
Mathieu, la Commission culturelle fransaskoise, les Archives 
Provinciales, l’Eau Vive et l’Association jeunesse fransaskoise. 
 
Enfin, je voudrais souligner la contribution de nos partenaires, 
les commissions scolaires et le gouvernement fédéral dans cette 
entreprise. Ensemble, nos réussirons à relever les défis en 
éducation française. 
 
French education continues to be a priority of our government. 
Since 1982 we have seen considerable progress. During this 
period there has been a 56 per cent increase in enrolments in our 
core French programs and a 281 per cent increase in our 
designated programs. We have 8,784 students in designated 
programs and 72, 238 students in core French programs. We 
will continue to support French associations such as the 
Association culturelle franco-canadienne, the Collège Mathieu, 
la Commission culturelle fransaskoise, the Provincial Archives, 
l’Eau Vive and the Association jeunesse fransaskoise. 
 
Finally, I would like to underscore the contribution of our  

partners, the school boards and the federal government, in this 
enterprise. Together we will succeed in meeting the challenges 
of French education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now I would like to say a few words about the 
future of post-secondary education and training for the future. 
 
The need for change here is all the greater because the 
proximity to the work place is so immediate. The technical 
institute system exists to train for employment, and yet it was 
being managed and operated in a manner that was 20 years out 
of date. Even the opposition realized that it was time for 
change, that change was long overdue, for in March of this year 
the member for Saskatoon University held a press conference to 
call for an autonomous board structure for the institutes. He said 
this would result in higher quality education in our institutes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the education critic, the member for Prince 
Albert — and I refer to a May 7 Prince Albert paper story 
headlined, “Autonomy for tech schools very popular says NDP 
survey.” And I’ll just quote a few paragraphs from this. It went 
on to say: 
 

According to Kowalsky, respondents to the questionnaire 
indicated local control was important in trying to distance 
the technical schools from partisan politics. One person, 
he said, stated the issue succinctly: the institutes may 
become learning institutions instead of arenas for political 
games. Programs could be designed around the needs of 
the people in the province, not designed to buy votes for 
the least amount of money, he quoted. 

 
And it further went on to say: 
 

There should, however, be an umbrella organization with 
representation from all four boards to consult and 
co-ordinate the operation of the institutes. 

 
A further paragraph was quoted: 
 

In this way it is hoped that the problem of maintaining 
standardization in the curriculum will be eliminated, he 
stated. The improvements which could result from more 
autonomy, according to the questionnaire results, could 
also include increased speed in decision making and the 
ability to stretch budgets through entrepreneurial activity. 

 
End of the quotation, Mr. Speaker. Well I am pleased to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that I agree entirely with what was said here, and 
what the hon. members have said about the need for autonomy. 
It’s just too bad that those members changed their mind, Mr. 
Speaker, when we did change the governments. And now we do 
have a new form of autonomy — at least we will have as soon 
as that legislation is passed, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure the hon. 
members will give their whole-hearted support to this 
legislation when it comes up in July or June or August, as they 
did in May, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

761 
 

(2015) 
 
And interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, ever since we made this 
announcement about the new blueprint for our new technical 
institute in this province, the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology, the NDP appear to have gone 
underground with their survey, Mr. Speaker. It was not sent to 
me; there was no advice for me on it; there was no guidance on 
it; and if it hadn’t been for the press conference that we 
happened to see and some of the press clippings, we would 
never have known they were in favour of a changed structure, 
Mr. Speaker. In any event, we have taken the decision to 
reorganize the community college and the institute, and I might 
say, along the lines, certainly, of what the members proposed — 
perhaps not exactly, but certainly the goals and the objectives 
are all the same and we can agree to disagree about the exact 
structure. 
 
A few examples of new initiatives in the next year may be 
instructive, Mr. Speaker. Listen to this. Listen to this, Mr. 
Speaker. We will be more than tripling the amount of upgrading 
and retraining of journeymen in the trades area. We’ll be 
implementing a new mining program in the P.A. area. 
 
The hog producers who wanted managers and foremen and 
some of the technical people to help with increased hog 
processing in this province have been working together with 
officials from the department to develop a new curriculum that 
can be delivered across this entire province. 
 
And we’ll be putting together a program for parents concerned 
about alcohol and drug abuse. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we will be providing 25 
per cent more spaces — 25 per cent more spaces. Talk about 
accessibility, Mr. Speaker — 25 per cent more spaces than 
existed in 1982, Mr. Speaker. Now does that sound like 
cut-backs to you? Does that sound like declining enrolments? 
 
I say no, Mr. Speaker, because more people than ever have 
more opportunities in this province than ever. Despite 
opposition forecasts of doom and gloom and cut-backs, that’s 
6,000 more young people who will receive institute training this 
year than when the previous government was in power. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the training will be more 
relevant. It will be more up to date and it will be more 
marketable. The students themselves realize the importance of a 
relevant training program. 
 
In the area of education outreach, Mr. Speaker, we have 
established a $3.2 million fund to finance more education and 
training outside the cities — outside those cities, Mr. Speaker 
— where the universities and the technical institute campuses 
are located. And to help me put that distance education policy 
and the education outreach policy in place, I’ll be establishing a 
distance education council. 
 
We are pursuing a proposal to develop a common first-  

and second-year arts and science curriculum for extension 
throughout this entire province. Talk about accessibility, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m talking about province-wide accessibility here. 
 
Turning to the universities, I am pleased to say that the 
relationship between the government and the boards and the 
administrations of both universities are in good shape. We are 
working with Luther College at the University of Regina to 
establish a trade language centre. Members will hear more 
about this later, Mr. Speaker, and I’m extremely excited about 
this initiative. 
 
And we are working with the University of Saskatchewan to 
establish an agriculture commodities research institute. And 
why are we doing that, Mr. Speaker? Because of stories like this 
one in the Star-Phoenix of May 15 of this year. And it went on 
to say, the headline did, “Education — a key grain marketing 
tool.” This is exactly what we are talking about in the world of 
the future, Mr. Speaker — information. Knowledge is what’s 
going to separate the winners from the losers. 
 
Or another story here, Mr. Speaker, that talked about, education 
boosts sales. Mr. Speaker, education is going to be the key to 
the future of this province. 
 
Let me mention one further initiative in the area of adult 
education. We will be announcing a major campaign against 
adult functional illiteracy. This silent enemy in our midst has 
reached unacceptable proportions. We must organize now to 
overcome it. I will be proposing this to the Canadian Ministers 
of Education Council when we go there this fall, Mr. Speaker, 
and I hope it will be the start of a national assault. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I believe the person 
telling somebody else to slow down should slow down. Just be 
quiet for a minute. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If I’m going to make these new 
initiatives and to achieve this new sense of urgency and 
purpose, we have united the two education departments in the 
Saskatchewan library into one new and strong Department of 
Education, Mr. Speaker. In so doing, the amalgamation resulted 
in one-half millions of dollars of savings administratively. By 
coincidence, Mr. Speaker, that is one-half millions of dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, that no, we did not give back to the Minister of 
Finance, but instead, Mr. Speaker, have established a new and 
special fund for our regional libraries for their branches, Mr. 
Speaker, a fund to allow these branches to buy books, Mr. 
Speaker — the heart and soul of the library system. Books for 
our branches across this province, Mr. Speaker, and in fact 
we’re going to make the rate available, the amount available 
double in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
These are some of the new initiatives we’ll be undertaking in 
the year ahead, Mr. Speaker, and despite what the opposition 
wants to have us believe, we are not doing less, but we have 
re-allocated resources to what we believe are higher and 
changed priorities. 
 
Yes, yes, Mr. Speaker, this has been difficult and certainly 
yesterday — I was at the health sciences graduation at Kelsey 
— certainly a sense, by some of the  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

762 
 

graduates there, that although the dental assistants’ program 
will be continuing in Regina, certainly there’s the sentimental 
attachments with having had that program delivered in 
Saskatoon. 
 
But I think everyone agrees, Mr. Speaker, when they look at 
this objectively, as will the hon. member across the way, the 
advisory committee recommended that the dental auxiliaries all 
be delivered in one place. There is no argument, Mr. Speaker. It 
makes sense to have it all delivered in one place. 
 
Now the argument then becomes Saskatoon versus Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s an age-old argument in a way, but my officials did 
their homework, Mr. Speaker, and have convinced me that the 
best technology . . . Two out of the three auxiliaries were in 
Regina already, and it made eminent good sense to have all 
three of them here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, there has been difficulties, Mr. Speaker, and there has been 
some hardship involved. But in saying that we should not have 
done this, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is really saying it 
believes that we should, at all costs, hang on to yesterday. Well 
it is our belief on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that we 
must grasp tomorrow. We believe we must grasp tomorrow as 
opposed to clinging to the policies of the past, the rhetoric of 
the past, the narrow ideology of the past. 
 
And as I said earlier in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, of the one 
thing that has intrigued me as I have sat and listened to speech 
after speech, with the exception of some remarks, part of the 
remarks made by the member from Athabasca, there was not 
one new idea in their speeches, not one alternative, not one 
solution. Just as my colleague, the Minister of Health, said 
earlier some several days ago, mostly inflamed rhetoric, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And as I listen to the Leader of the Opposition in his budget 
speech debate, I thought to myself that this could have been a 
speech he could have delivered, as I think maybe he did, in ’83 
and ’84 and ’85 and ’86, because when he talked about 
alternatives, it was the same tired old three or four clichés and 
half-baked scenarios. They almost fall into those three or four 
categories, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When it comes to alternatives, what’s the first one that comes to 
the NDP’s mind, the socialist mind? Tax the oil companies, Mr. 
Speaker. The oil companies are robber barons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take our government’s oil 
policies any day over what the NDP were doing, because I’ll 
tell you what it did in Weyburn, Saskatchewan. It boarded up 
half of downtown Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It boarded up places like the El Rancho Hotel, that until this 
government came along and changed those policies, it did not 
become unboarded. And today, Mr. Speaker, they have done 
renovations there that make it on a class that'’ comparable to 
anywhere in Canada. A very, very fine dining room. 

So, Mr. Speaker, the city of Weyburn, the people of Weyburn, 
the people of the south-east oil patch, the several thousands that 
work there, they don’t want nor do they believe, nor do they 
buy that old NDP bogyman dogma about oil companies are 
robber barons. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Okay. So what’s the other target? 
Okay. After oil companies it’s . . . (inaudible) . . . and the 
member for Regina Rosemont did a great job the other night. I 
think he referred to Hees International, North Canadian Oils, 
who by the way, Mr. Speaker, have a head office here in 
Saskatchewan in a beautiful tower in downtown Regina filled 
with lots of people working and paying taxes to this province. 
 
And what is the thanks from the member from Regina? He 
kicks them around because they are an oil company and they’re 
a multinational and they’re vertically integrated. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
just bought part ownership in Robin’s Donuts. Now that 
probably makes them a big, bad multinational, and vertically 
integrated, and a bogyman, too. 
 
That’s the old category number two after, you know, sort of the 
old robber barons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well what’s the other category they fall back onto in terms of 
alternatives? Well the other one is, Mr. Speaker, more 
government. Big government is good government, Mr. Speaker. 
Or to put it another way, it’s me and my family of Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, in the past decade, in the past 
decade, when they were in administration here, Mr. Speaker, 
they made choices all right. They made choices, and they put 
land bank ahead of class-rooms, and they put potash mines 
ahead of computers, and they put uranium mines ahead of 
universities, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they did. That’s where 
the choices they made . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Carry on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And then this afternoon we heard the 
hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale. Now this is the free 
trade critic. We heard him — that’s the other bogyman for the 
NDP. They’re against free trade. They’re anti-U.S., and they’re 
anti . . . just about anti-everything when it comes to the trade 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here we are, Mr. Speaker, a trading province, an agricultural 
trading province, a resource trading province by every measure, 
fighting a siege of protectionism, and they don’t want to look at 
ways to increase trade with (a) the United States, or for that 
matter the rest of the world, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to 
pursue a course of prosperity and a course of more jobs. 
 
Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, with every one of these old 
bogymen, it’s the same old lines. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, the opposition leader in his speech talked 
about not blindly adhering to a single ideology;  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

763 
 

that we should look at choices. And it perked my interest for a 
while. 
 
He went on to say things like this in the June 23, 1987, member 
for Regina Elphinstone, and I quote: 
 

Members opposite may feel that everything in government 
is bad. 

 
And he went on, Mr. Speaker, to talk about SGI. And I quote 
again: 
 

I want to say this: if members opposite decide to get rid of 
parts of our common heritage because of narrow 
ideological reasons, I think a future government of 
Saskatchewan will feel free to counteract this narrow 
ideology. 

 
He further went on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote again: 
 

We think it’s good for people to have a choice, and we 
don’t think it should be barred because of the narrow 
ideology of members opposite. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree, we ought not be bound by narrow 
ideology, we ought not be bound by narrow ideology. I’ve said 
in this House time and time again that the issues that we face 
today in society are so complex, simplistic analysis will not do. 
Reducing every issue to a simple black/white, either/or, 
them/us, right/wrong, NDP/PC is passé. That’s part of the ‘70s. 
That’s the logic of the ‘70s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The issues that we face today are complex and every option 
deserves to be looked at. And I would tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that is exactly the course that this government has followed 
because . . . Find me a Tory who 10 years ago would’ve said 
that this government, with its Fraser institute mentality as they 
talk about, would’ve introduced debt moratorium legislation. 
Well I’ll tell you we introduced it because the reality is our 
farmers needed protecting, and we protected them then, and 
we’ll protect them into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And they say that Fraser institute 
mentality, Mr. Speaker would prevent us from pursuing and 
using the Crown corporation as a tool of public policy. Well, I 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, it was this government that set up the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation to have a one-stop shopping 
centre when it came to water management in this province and 
drought-roofing and irrigation, Mr. Speaker. Does that sound 
like narrow ideology? 
 
But on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, when it made sense to have 
the citizens of this province own the oil companies, their 
resource, we sold it back to them. And I’ll tell you what, there 
are lots of moms and dads and grandpas that own those shares 
across this province today. Why? Not because of some narrow 
ideological view, Mr. Speaker, but the reality is we can get our 
fair share and then some, as the Minister of Energy outlined 
today, from the people’s resource through taxation. 

And, Mr. Speaker, these NDP across the road here would say 
that the Fraser institute mentality would never see a Tory 
subscribe to the economic theories of John Maynard Keynes, 
for example, Keynes, Mr. Speaker. Well, I’ll tell you what, I 
believe there is a time and a place for the government to step in 
and stabilize the economy, to fuel the economy. It sure as heck 
was not in the ‘70s, Mr. Speaker, when inflation was going like 
this, the economy was run away with the inflation. 
 
But I’ll invite you in the ‘80s, Mr. Speaker, when our 
agricultural economy was hit and hard hit, we stimulated the 
economy with a $1.2 billion production loan to our farmers 
because it made sense for the farmers. And we did not blind 
ourselves with ideology that said, no, we can’t do that, that’s 
Keynesian economics. We have done what is necessary to 
protect the people and to build this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The only people . . . And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, whether you’re talking about making change in 
education or making change in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
difficult going from the known to the unknown, but there has to 
come a time. The NDP as a party must realize this, Mr. 
Speaker. Even in Soviet Russia, the reform wing as this 
headline says, “Reform wing could be gaining ground in Soviet 
economy”, glasnost, and all of that, Mr. Speaker. Tremendous 
change in the economies of Russia and China lately. Even they 
realize it. 
 
(2030) 
 
But of course I refer to the Leader of the Opposition. And as 
has been speculated, he may well not continue to be the Leader 
of the Opposition. So we’re going to have a new saviour for the 
NDP Party across the way. And we heard for the most part, the 
one that’s being acclaimed, albeit prematurely, the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale today, wax eloquent. This is apparently, 
Mr. Speaker, the new saviour, the heir apparent. And as he 
pointed out, it was his first speech, his first real speech since he 
got elected last fall to this House. And so in a way, Mr. 
Speaker, I suspect that he used this opportunity to make a 
policy statement, to talk about the health education, which was 
noticeable by its absence, agriculture. But what did we hear, 
Mr. Speaker, when it came to agriculture policy, we heard 
virtually — or lack of agriculture policy — we heard nothing 
new other than the same old rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll make this prediction, I’ll make this prediction, Mr. 
Speaker, that the NDP, despite the fact that they themselves 
know they have to change, that they have to get the pulse of the 
rural farm community in this province, I’ll bet you dollars to 
donuts that they’ll be opposing and blockading for example, the 
federal legislation plant breeders’ rights. 
 
In a way, Mr. Speaker, that legislation typifies the view of those 
on the one hand who want to cling to the past, and those who 
recognize that new information and new technology are the 
secret to our success in the future. And I’ll bet you they’ll trot 
out the old rhetoric, they’ll get the  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

764 
 

NFU (National Farmers Union) policy manual, and they’ll read 
“plant breeders’ rights,” we’re against it, when everybody else, 
everybody else is saying, well maybe we ought to take a look at 
that option at least. And that’s what I would say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? Well I say that because of 
headlines like this, and it was in The Globe and Mail, June 24, 
just very recently. And the headline reads . . . it talks about 
“Hybrid potato plant packs its own insect repellent.” Now by 
golly, Mr. Speaker, if we can get a wheat plant, if these genetic 
engineers can produce a wheat plant that would pack its own 
grasshopper repellent, now we’ve done something in this 
province. Because every farmer that I’ve talked to is sure as 
heck tired of using those sprays, paying for those sprays, getting 
sick using those sprays, contaminating the environment with 
those sprays. It costs him money; he doesn’t want to do it; but 
he knows it’s the only thing he’s got at this point in time to 
counteract those grasshoppers. 
 
And why do I say it, Mr. Speaker? Because The Globe and Mail 
earlier this spring: “Custom designed poultry near with lab 
success of gene transfer.” Mr. Speaker, this is the heart of the 
issues. This is the heart of the issues, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
new technology of the future. We’re going to have, not wire 
splicers out there mending the fence, Mr. Speaker, we’re going 
to have gene splicers of the world of the future. Genetic 
engineers, bio-technologists, they’re going to be developing the 
foods of the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, that’s what I believe, Mr. Speaker, because we saw not 
one thing today in Saskatoon in the opposition House leader’s 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that they have changed their 
views on agriculture one little bit. There was not one word on 
diversification, not one word on livestock processing, not one 
word on livestock feeding, not one word on inland grain 
cleaning, not one word on irrigation, not one word on special 
crops. 
 
This guy still thinks that genes are what you wear. We’re 
talking genetic engineering, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking 
products of the future to decrease our fertilizer costs, to 
eliminate some of the insecticides we’re using, and to have the 
seed and the cell of the future. We’re talking about the star wars 
of agricultural science, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is going to be the success for our farmers in the future. 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to farm policy in 
this province — when it comes to farm policy in this province 
— you ask any person out there in the country who would they 
trust on their combine, our Premier with the permit book or the 
labour lawyer from Saskatoon. And I’ll tell you who they’ll 
prefer every time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I was so proud, Mr. Speaker, I was so proud when I read 
the accounts after President Mitterrand was here and visited 
with our Premier to sort out this bizarre global subsidy wars, 
Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you what, every farmer across this 
province felt good and they felt proud. They had a guy in 
charge of agriculture here in this province, who’s the Premier, 
who understands this stuff, and the headline or the caption out 
of The Globe and Mail the day after President Mitterrand had 
been here — I don’t  

remember the exact words, Mr. Speaker — but it went 
something like this: that Saskatchewan would be the first to 
benefit when we put an end to this global protectionism. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what our Premier was doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just close with 
a few remarks about my constituency. 
 
I’d offer the Weyburn oil show, the second annual 
Saskatchewan Oil Show or biannual Saskatchewan oil show, 
another tremendous success, Mr. Speaker, given the downturn 
in the oil economy. Certainly everyone there is cautiously 
optimistic. And of course, it was buoyed that day when our own 
Minister of Energy announced that land sales are back up — 
back up, Mr. Speaker — where we all like to see them, most 
recent land sale yielding $23.4 million. And I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, if there was one spot where there was lots of land 
bought, it was south-east Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’ll tell you what. Unless the NDP get back in, it’ll be a long 
time before you see that El Rancho boarded up again because 
it’s going to be hopping and popping down there again in the 
third and fourth quarter of this year. I really believe that. 
 
Over at Canada Wire & Cable, the individual line service that 
SaskTel is putting in across the province, the lines are very busy 
there putting that in place. Sask Power continues to be a very 
good customer, and we’ve seen an expansion there in the 
work-force over the years. They’re putting together cable now 
for Alberta and as well for the northern power line. We’re very 
appreciative to SaskTel and Sask power and the confidence 
they’ve shown in Canada Wire & Cable, that plant in Weyburn. 
And it’s a testimony to the people who work there, Mr. 
Speaker, and that they produce high quality cable and they’ve 
even been ahead of their allotment which speaks well for the 
people on the line. 
 
Fillmore, the people there are excited. Their new hospital, 
nursing home, Mr. Speaker, is going to open in a matter of 
months. 
 
Down the road at Stoughton, Mr. Speaker . . . You know, we 
had all these cut-backs in health, according to the opposition. 
Well we opened the new nursing home there. It’s just a fantastic 
facility, Mr. Speaker. The people there are very, very proud, 
and as well there have been low-income housing units go up in 
Stoughton and, as well, in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to close . . . As I said earlier in my opening remarks that 
I wanted to touch on four areas, and the fourth and final one is 
that I want a address a few comments to the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. And this first came to mind, I suppose, when I sat here 
on the opening day of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, on budget 
day, and I sat here over the last couple of weeks, and we’ve all 
heard them — words, phrases, part sentences, some many — 
into the record, some from their seats. And I know, Mr. 
Speaker, you yourself made reference to some of these words 
and  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

765 
 

phrases today, earlier in question period. 
 
And what I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker, are things like this. 
When Regina member, Regina North East member on page 537 
of Hansard referred to words like this: “a dishonest cabinet”; on 
that same page, and I pick a couple or three words out again: “ . 
. it lied. Plain and simple”; or Saskatoon Riversdale on page 
640 when he used words like: “a blatant falsehood”; or the 
member from Regina Elphinstone, Mr. Speaker, page 645: “a 
more inaccurate and hypocritically inaccurate statement,” 
“blatantly false” is another one. And another quote on that same 
page: “That was deception. And the government opposite 
continued its deception.”; or the member from Moose Jaw 
North, Mr. Speaker, on page 586, referred to: “moment of 
honesty running through his veins” or another couple of words, 
Mr. Speaker, on that same page: “sadistic way”; or on page 588, 
the same member: “this plan of destruction and deceit”; or 
Saskatoon South said on page 597: “the deceit by the Premier 
and the cabinet opposite,” another one, “liars.” 
 
Why I raise those, Mr. Speaker, and not to suggest that no 
members from all sides of this House at one time or another, 
including myself, may have been guilty of unparliamentary 
language. But the bottom line is, it became readily apparent on 
opening day here, with all the public here and those watching 
across Saskatchewan, this kind of thing does not dignify this 
legislature. It doesn’t dignify our role as politicians and as 
individuals here. The people are not well served by it and, quite 
frankly, it just adds to the skin of cynicism and scepticism that 
exists in the public’s mind. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, why that concerns me is if we continue to 
fuel cynicism and scepticism, what that does is it chips at the 
faith that the people have or must have in their political 
institutions. And if you start to chip away at their faith in 
political institutions, then you’re starting to chip away at their 
faith in democracy. If you start to chip away at democracy, Mr. 
Speaker, you’re starting to chip away at freedom. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is something that should concern us all, 
and I raise that because every time I have school students in 
here and I talk to them after they’ve seen question period, the 
thought that I always like to leave them with at the end of the 
day as they depart and we’ve had a visit, is that despite all the 
warts of democracy, Mr. Speaker, and the harangue sometimes, 
which I think we must look to control, is that this democratic 
system is the best there is. 
 
And I have been fortunate enough to travel and to be in Africa 
and to be in the East Bloc countries and to be in Europe, and we 
forget, Mr. Speaker, what a wonderful, wonderful thing these 
freedoms are that we take for granted. There are no guns and 
check-points here; there is nobody asking us for our passport 
every time we turn around; there is no terrorism at our airports 
in Regina, Saskatchewan. 
 
And we must, Mr. Speaker, we must preserve that and not take 
it for granted. And that is why I raise the question, Mr. Speaker. 
Not that I’m calling into question your judgement, Mr. Speaker, 
because I know you, yourself,  

raised this same point earlier today. But the public, Mr. 
Speaker, do not deserve this nor does this institution. 
 
The simplistic analysis must stop, the overstatement, Mr. 
Speaker, the fearmongering. It’s not fair to the citizens of this 
province. Something is wrong. It is we who have the ability to 
put it right, and I believe we will, Mr. Speaker. And with that I 
just say in closing that I will not be supporting the amendment, 
and I will be heartily endorsing this budget because it is right, 
it’s fair, and it’s responsible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m relieved to finally 
be given the opportunity to enter this debate that has been going 
on for the last five or six days. 
 
The budget demonstrates, and my colleagues have clearly 
illustrated in numerous speeches to date, that the Progressive 
Conservatives are a party of double standards and hypocrisy. 
Dale Eisler, a noted reporter, even says that this party promotes 
and markets the big lie at every opportunity. 
 
At the federal and provincial levels, the Conservatives whine 
and squeal during the election campaign to the voters, asking 
them to vote Progressive Conservative. They say, vote PC, elect 
a PC government because if you do, we will ensure there is less 
government, that there is less bureaucracy, that there is good 
government, that government will play a lesser role in your 
lives if it is a Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Well, what do we have in Canada now? We have a government 
who has whined, who has coerced, and who has tricked people 
into believing that they should govern. This Progressive 
Conservative government in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is no different. 
 
In this province they promised lower taxes, and of course we 
see in this budget, higher taxes — the biggest tax grab in the 
history of our province, over $1,000 for a family of four. 
 
They promised better health services. And what do we see? The 
abolishment of the dental program and the gutting of the 
prescription drug program. They promised fewer political hacks 
on numerous occasions, and what have they done? They’ve 
doubled the number of political hacks that these taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan are paying for, over $7 million a year. They 
promised more efficient and less costly government — well, 
what a lark, what a laugh. 
 
With this government in power, we have seen the most 
inefficient and bureaucratic government with the fastest 
growing deficit in North America, second to none. They’ve 
promised us a business-like approach, and what do you know? 
We have here in this province the most incompetent, the most 
grossly inefficient, mismanaged administration in our history. 
 
The new vision people have of the Progressive Conservative is 
a vision of a lot of Progressive Conservatives and their friends 
salivating at the public  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

766 
 

trough, PC no longer stands for Progressive Conservative, it 
stands for patronage Canada. 
 
It’s becoming more widely known that in October the PCs held 
a post-election caucus meeting with their defeated MLAs. They 
met to discuss ways to punish urban voters for having voted 
NDP. What we have experienced and witnessed over the past 
five months is the punishment the Progressive Conservative 
government has decided is appropriate for people who line in 
the urban areas. 
 
This budget is the final beating administered to ordinary 
Saskatchewan people, at least until yesterday when Mr. Lane 
announced further tax increases. 
 
(2045) 
 
The unfortunate surprise for this PC government, which you 
will soon discover if you’ve ignored all the signs to date, is that 
the punishment that you’ve meted out, the punishment that 
you’ve handed out in massive doses in a prolonged stretch is 
hurting far more people in this province than you expected. 
 
In fact, the people it will hurt most live in small communities 
and on farms. Your punishing programs will hurt both urban 
and rural families, be they NDP, PC or Liberal supporters. This 
punishment of people reminds me of a three-fingered salute that 
one Grant Devine, when he was running for the leader of this 
party . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Members have been 
asked to refrain from using other members’ names in their 
debate, and I would ask the member to not use other members’ 
names. Use their seat or position when referring to them. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I recall vividly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
when the Leader of the Conservative Party was running for 
leader and he administered this three-fingered salute to his 
convention delegates, he talked about God and the family and 
the PC Party, and he talked about the NDP under his thumbs — 
the NDP under the thumbs of the Conservative Party. 
 
What he didn’t realize, but now we see very clearly, is that 
people who voted NDP number hundreds of thousands in this 
province. More people voted NDP in this province in the last 
election than voted for those people opposite. And what we see 
now is the result of this dictatorial salute of people under the 
thumbs of government. I think it’s disgusting. I think what is 
going to happen in the next election is that the people of this 
province are going to break his thumb off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I listened with interest and somewhat 
disbelief at what the Premier said about Manitoba the other day, 
when he made a fool of himself in question period on the 
incompetent handling of a question put to him by the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
He and other members opposite, the member from Shaunavon 
and the member from Rosthern and others, talked about the 
massive deficit in Manitoba and  

compared it to the deficit in this province. Well I did a little 
research, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I find that again, here’s 
another example of hypocrisy and double standards. What they 
say is what is not the truth. 
 
I did a little research and what I found is that in the last five 
years the accumulated deficit in Manitoba was $2.4 billion. In 
the last five years in this province we’ve had a deficit of not 2.4 
billion, but $3.4 billion. Saskatchewan’s deficit in the last five 
years, on an accumulated basis, is 42 per cent greater than the 
one in Manitoba in the last five years. That’s competent 
administration? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What I also found out, that in this fiscal year 
this government who is handing us a bunch of garbage about 
them being efficient and competent in terms of managing the 
economy and managing the budget and the deficit — our deficit 
is $577 million projected for this fiscal year. Manitoba’s is not 
577, it’s $415 million, less by 39 per cent than this incompetent 
Conservative government that we have in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are critical times for the people of 
Saskatchewan. There’s a deep sense of foreboding among our 
people with regard to the future. The actions taken against 
Saskatchewan people by this Conservative government have 
left our people frightened and bewildered. The final insult to 
them, in the form of this budget, has been devastating. An alarm 
must be sounded throughout our province. Saskatchewan and its 
people have been betrayed by this Conservative government — 
manipulated, swindled, and betrayed by as skilful a bunch of 
slickers and carpet-baggers as we have witnessed in recent 
history. 
 
The budget is cause for alarm, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But when 
this budget is reviewed within the context of actions taken by 
the Conservatives against the people of our province, a 
frightening scenario of what Conservatives are attempting to do 
is revealed. 
 
Seen in a historical context, the real intentions of this 
government can only be the result of the mental construct of a 
small group of people who have deliberately, with malice and 
forethought, conspired to undermine and destroy a way of life 
developed and enjoyed by Saskatchewan people — a way of 
life created and built over a long period of time, as has been 
suggested; a way of life that up until the reign of the 
Conservatives has been a beacon of hope for people in our 
province, in our country, and throughout the world; a way of 
life that up until the time of the conservative rule protected our 
people from the vagaries and cold, ruthless manipulations of the 
market-place. 
 
Such is the government of the Conservatives — a new 
kingdom, administered from top to bottom on a leadership 
principle reminiscent of the harshest dictatorship of the past, 
having little of the efficiency it talks about as being part of the 
so-called free enterprise ethic, poisoned by greed, beset by 
constant confusion and cut-throat rivalries, augmented by 
muddling interference of party potentates, and often rendered 
impotent by the terror of the Conservative cabinet. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

767 
 

At the top of this swarming heap are a small group of fanatics in 
the Conservative government who destroy those who oppose 
them, who regiment the province’s institutions, who suppress 
the freedoms of workers and the elderly, and place more and 
more wealth in the hands of fewer and fewer people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is a government with a purpose. 
This budget is the blueprint for the final victory of the 
Conservatives over common sense and decency in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As I visit people in my constituency and throughout this 
province, and speak to them about the issues that concern them, 
they no longer ask why is more and more control being placed 
on their lives by their provincial Conservative government. 
They don’t ask that any more, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now when 
I knock on almost any door or speak to anybody in my 
constituency or throughout this province, the resounding 
question is: how can this government be stopped? How can this 
out-of-control juggernaut of waste, mismanagement, and 
desecration be stopped? That is the question I hear from people 
from throughout this province and in my riding. 
 
There are a number of issues of deep concern to Saskatchewan 
people raised by this budget. And while the contents of the 
budget have been published and discussed, it is the more 
sinister purpose of this Conservative government, of which this 
budget is only a reflection, which is rapidly becoming clear, and 
I want to say a few words about that. 
 
There are a number of fundamental questions this budget raises, 
questions that reveal the hidden purpose, the real conspiracy 
being perpetrated by this government on its people. It has been 
said, and I quote: 
 

When we refuse to see things as they are, there is nothing 
more mystifying than the obvious. 

 
There are some obvious questions we must ask ourselves, and 
the answers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are painfully obvious. The 
Conservatives say they must combat the deficit. They claim it 
has been caused by outside forces. The question is: how do you 
combat this deficit caused, as they say, by outside economic 
forces by handing over control of Saskatchewan’s economy to 
those same outside forces like Peter Pocklington and 
Weyerhaeuser, the banks and the bond dealers? 
 
The second question is: who really benefits from cuts to the 
civil service, from abolishing the dental plan, or gutting the 
drug plan, or the sale of oil leases? Who benefits from the fire 
sale of assets belonging to Saskatchewan people? Who really 
benefits? 
 
And thirdly, why are there continuing attacks, direct attacks on 
the most powerless and vulnerable people in our society; the 
attacks on the abused and battered women and children; the 
attacks on the poor and the workers in the unions and the 
elderly and the handicapped; and in this budget, a massive 
attack on the middle-income salaried workers? Why does this 
PC government attack these people. 

The answers to these questions are clear. And these answers are 
found, Mr. Speaker, I maintain, in the present context in some 
shocking parallels in history. 
 
Well how about this Devine government’s claim that it can only 
get rid of the deficit by cutting public services and raising the 
taxes of ordinary people. The words and actions of the 
Conservative government bear an eerie similarity to some other 
words spoken in history, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the words I 
quote are from Dr. Hans Frank, who was the commissioner of 
Justice and Reich law in 1936 in Nazi Germany. They are 
especially frightening when considered in the light of what has 
occurred in the Saskatchewan public service over the past few 
months in particular. Hitler, too, did not want any opposition. 
His lackey, Dr. Hans Frank, said the public servants, and I 
quote: 
 

Say to yourselves, at every decision you make, how would 
the fuehrer decide in my place. In every decision ask 
yourself: is this decision compatible with the conscience 
of the people? Then you will have a firm foundation 
which, allied with the unity of the Nazi people’s state and 
with your recognition of the eternal nature of the will of 
Adolf Hitler, will endow your own sphere of decisions 
with the authority of the Third Reich . . . 

 
The following year, Mr. Speaker, the Nazi put in a new civil 
service law which called for the dismissal of all officials for, I 
quote, “political unreliability.” 
 
We’re no longer far removed from that time, nor are we far 
removed from governments who seek to bend and break people 
to suit their purposes. 
 
This Conservative government has similar ends in mind, make 
no mistake. They want public employees as lap-dogs, as 
yes-men, as servants who unquestionably carry out the mad 
economic schemes of their Conservative masters — a public 
service so gutted of objective criticism that it cannot be a 
balanced forum for reasoned decision making. 
 
If anyone disbelieves what I say, they have only to speak with 
heads of government departments in this government and ask 
them how much actual input they’ve had into this budget. 
 
The Saskatchewan public service, once paramount among its 
peers across this nation, has been reduced to a level of a 
publicity arm for the silly schemes of this government. And 
when they don’t agree with their Conservative masters, they are 
fired or given so-called early retirements, paid off and shut up. 
 
While the human suffering is of primary concern, we must 
again look at what this means. The Devine government said that 
it is costing money, yet all of us know the horrendous costs of 
so-called early retirement: huge pay-offs and pensions for 
people who have been cut out of the work place. Why? The 
answer is obvious again. These people have the knowledge and 
experience to know that by going along with the Conservatives 
they are helping to destroy the very network of protection set up 
to  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

768 
 

assist them in being masters of their own destiny. 
 
So the Conservatives are getting rid of the fathers and the 
mothers and the grandmothers and the grandfathers in the 
public service. That way the Conservatives can mould the 
government to fit their own image, the Tory image, for a new 
Tory Reich, a Tory kingdom in Saskatchewan. 
 
Meanwhile, they leave the young, the new people, those who do 
not remember the past because they are caught up in the 
present. If early retirement is such a good thing, Mr. Speaker, I 
say that the people of Saskatchewan should give this 
government early retirement and as early as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — We need to liberate the people of this 
province from the corporate . . . Conservative axis before it’s 
too late. We need to give all Saskatchewan people a role to play 
in shaping their destiny. This Devine government has, thus far, 
successfully divided the Saskatchewan family, pitting sister 
against sister, brother against brother, farmer against labourer, 
and children against parents, in the name of deficit reduction. 
 
And the Conservatives talked about saying over the months and 
weeks leading up to the budget that they have no choice. We 
have no choice, they say. That, as most statements this 
government makes, is simply not true. 
 
There are many ways for the provincial government to cut costs 
and raise revenues without savage cuts to services or record tax 
hikes or unmercifully punishing those who can’t fight back. 
 
Why not an employment strategy instead of an unemployment 
strategy? An employment strategy that provides jobs for all who 
want to work, that would stimulate the entire provincial 
economy, reduce unemployment insurance and social assistance 
costs, and increase general provincial government revenues. 
 
Instead of spending $300 million a year, Mr. Speaker, on oil 
companies such as the like of Shell and Texaco and Exxon 
outside this province, which provide zero multiplier effect or 
zero economic activity, if they spent that money in this province 
on job creation rather than spending $300 million of tax dollars 
that leave the province with no benefits, we’d have a multiplier 
effect of another $900 million, Mr. Speaker. And that in itself 
would be enough to sustain some of the hemorrhaging that is 
now going on in this province. It would also make a few people 
happier — maybe 20,000 people in terms of jobs, and business 
people will have some revenue walking in their door instead of 
walking out of their door. 
 
(2100) 
 
But Conservatives don’t want everybody to be doing well. They 
just want some people to do well. The Conservative Devine 
policies have meant that over the past 12 months, according to 
Statistics Canada, that Saskatchewan was the only province to 
experience an actual decline in its labour force and an actual 
decline in the number of people employed. Last month 
Saskatchewan was also the  

only province in Canada to experience an increase in the 
unemployment rate. 
 
It’s been said that this has been a wonderful government, Mr. 
Speaker. Well, it is a wonderful government. It’s wonderful that 
they’re able to stay in power with the record that they’ve got. 
 
The fanatic ideology of Conservatives is no more evident than 
in their secret allegiance to the oil companies. The member 
from Weyburn talked about the secret allegiance and the way 
they embrace each other. Oil companies pay conservative 
election bills for a price. 
 
In 1979 there were 9.4 million cubic metres of oil produced in 
this province. The value of that oil was about $729 million. The 
province received a little over half of that in royalties under an 
NDP government. 
 
The big oil companies weren’t all that happy with that, but they 
didn’t pull out. They wanted the oil and they were making a 
reasonable profit. Yet more importantly, this meant there was 
no flat tax, that there was no need to fire people helter-skelter 
from their jobs, and wholesale from their jobs. There was no 
need to increase nursing home costs by 15 per cent. There was 
no need to deny preventative dental care for our children, or 
need of drugs to the sick. 
 
Then along came the Conservatives in 1982, the promise-a-day 
Conservatives. And they were richly funded in their push for 
power by the same big oil companies. The oil companies then 
called the tune. The Conservatives responded and danced with 
the oil companies. The Conservatives held those oil companies 
in a tight embrace, whispering promises of lower oil prices in 
their ears. 
 
In 1985 Saskatchewan produced 11.9 million cubic metres of 
oil, with a value of, not $729 million, Mr. Speaker, but a value 
of $2.4 billion. And of course, that’s three and a half times the 
value of the oil in ’79. But what do you think the province 
received in revenues? Oh, about $655 million. Now what that 
means is that we lost in that year, and the years leading up to 
that, over $600 million in our treasury. 
 
Even though the oil companies were making huge profits, the 
Devine Conservatives continued to dance to the oil companies’ 
tune and make promise of royalty holidays again. 
 
More than $1.7 billion in tax revenue was lost in total in the last 
five years. And there weren’t any more people working; in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, there were fewer people working in this province. 
 
The infamous dictator, Adolf Hitler, got and maintained his 
early power by making some people scapegoats. He said the 
economic ruin following the first war in Germany was the fault 
of outsiders, then it was the fault of agitators, and then it was 
the fault of unions. 
 
Finally in one of the most horrid periods in our history, the 
scapegoat became the Jews. It was a successful ploy by Hitler. 
Scapegoating seems to be a successful ploy so far,  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

769 
 

Mr. Speaker, in this Conservative government. 
 
Blame your problems on someone else, take the heat off 
yourself by abusing the innocent, and the vulnerable, and 
abusing the powerless. Smash the students, rip off the oil and 
the sick, deny the young, persecute the workers. Punish, punish, 
punish, especially those who vote against them. Find someone 
that’s easy to kick around; that’s the legacy of the 
Conservatives. That’s the brave new world Conservatives are 
wet with joy over. 
 
Conservatives have a purpose in mind. Let us continue to 
consider the budget deficit in a light of some other interesting 
factors. We know this conservative Premier and government are 
unabashed supporters of Prime Minister Mulroney. On every 
major federal issue the Premier has stood four-square with 
Brian Mulroney. He has never changed his filial devotion to the 
federal Conservative leader. 
 
As we saw last fall, the Premier’s devotion paid off for 
Saskatchewan farmers. What we didn’t see — what we didn’t 
see at that time was the same federal government cutting federal 
transfer payments for health care and post-secondary education. 
 
And do you know how much that cost the taxpayers in this 
province? Well, I just happen to have the figures handy here for 
the Minister of Finance and for members that are present. It’ll 
cost over $300 million over the next five years. And the 
Premier of Saskatchewan was consistent. He kept his mouth 
shut. 
 
But that’s not all. In addition, Brian Mulroney’s drug patent 
legislation will cost you and I $75 million over the next five 
years. And the Premier of Saskatchewan agrees with that. He 
supports this clear, monopolistic piece of legislation, and he 
didn’t say a darn thing against it. 
 
In fact, those two federal changes alone will cost us $75 million 
each year, or the equivalent of a full percentage point increase 
in the provincial sales tax. 
 
What did our Premier do? What did our Premier do? He said. 
Go to it, Brian. Sock it to them. In fact, I’ll even make it easier 
and gut the drug plan we have here. It’ll help those big drug 
election companies — election contributor companies sell more 
drugs at higher prices in Saskatchewan. Three hundred and 
seventy-five million dollars in five years; a loss to our province 
because our gutless Premier is Brian’s lap-dog. 
 
Four hundred million dollars for the farmers; $400 million from 
our health and education system. Give with one hand and take 
from the other ; there’s that Conservative double standard, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We must, for our very survival, look at the obvious. Hitler’s 
economic miracle came about because of rearmament — a 
philosophy of war. The Mulroney government, in parallel, now 
wants six submarines built that were supposed to cost $8 billion 
— not million, but $8 billion. Now estimates are that the cost 
will skyrocket to not nine, or ten, or $11 billion, Mr. Speaker, 
but the price will skyrocket to somewhere in the tune of $16 
billion. Six boats at $16 billion, to sail around under the  

ice in the Arctic. 
 
At the same time, he wants to cut back on health care and 
post-secondary education in Saskatchewan. And where’s our 
Premier? The Premier of Saskatchewan stands four-square 
behind the simplistic, silly, tragic, prodigal waste of money. 
 
Then the Finance minister, the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, has the consummate gall to try and ram a 
fairy tale budget such as this down the throats of the people 
who live here. Such narrow presumption on his part, such an 
emptiness of conscience, such political pettiness. It’s a real 
scam. 
 
Health services have been cut. The Premier and his cabinet have 
a personal staff of 183 hacks costing $7 million per year. 
Conservatives can’t afford $34,000 for The Voice of the 
Handicapped, but they can afford a personal staff of 183 
political hacks for their cabinet ministers, costing Saskatchewan 
taxpayers $7 million. 
 
Conservatives can fire instructors at the technical institutes to 
save money. Yet they can spend $66 million to buy an Alberta 
oil company, guaranteeing Alberta jobs — cutting 
Saskatchewan jobs but guaranteeing Alberta jobs. 
 
What a wonderful government we have here, guaranteeing jobs 
in Manitoba, guaranteeing jobs in Alberta, guaranteeing jobs for 
their friends around the world, but firing people in this province 
wholesale — not providing any job creation, not providing any 
leadership in terms of the economy, totally vacuous. 
 
And then Conservatives reduce police protection by firing 40 
RCMP officers in the name of restraint. Still Conservatives are 
going ahead with spending $120 million on the Rafferty dam 
project which all studies say is more of a political move than an 
economic move. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, where would that be located? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The member asks where this dam is going to 
be located, and where the project is going to be located, and 
where the benefits will go? Everyone knows that the Minister of 
Education, the member from Weyburn will benefit, and his 
constituency will have some modest benefit. The Premier, the 
member from Estevan, who we can’t really talk about because 
he’s not around, his constituency will benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members know that it is 
not the custom of this House to indicate whether members are 
present or absent. So I’d like to ask you not to do that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I appreciate the information, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an ominous shadow hangs over our province. 
Thoughtful people are making the comparisons and drawing the 
parallels between this Conservative government and their illegal 
move by not opening their actions to the scrutiny of the people. 
They’re comparing that with Hitler’s stifling of the Reichstag or 
the German  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

770 
 

parliament — if people hear no opposition, there can be no 
opposition. That was Hitler’s tactic, and that is the tactic of this 
Progressive Conservative government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now after the longest delay in the history of the province, 
where they have refused to provide this House with the Public 
Accounts, the first time in history that this province has ever 
received the Public Accounts at such a late date; as a matter of 
fact we haven’t received them. 
 
It is now four months later than scheduled, and the question we 
have to ask, Mr. Speaker, is: why are they not providing this 
House with Public Accounts? What are they hiding? Have they 
expended money that they can’t find? Have they expended 
money on people that they want to try and hide in the next few 
months? We’d like to know exactly, Mr. Speaker, why that kind 
of delay is taking place? 
 
But now we’re presented with this budget. They’re saying, take 
the budget, members of the opposition, have a go at it, and then, 
Mr. Speaker, that will placate us and get us off the mark. But it 
certainly won’t. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, is a blueprint for future wickedness. 
Insatiable in their lust for power, and not content with having 
public servants under their heel or terrorized into various forms 
of abject submission. Conservatives through this budget carry 
their work of destruction among teachers, students, the elderly, 
the sick, and the handicapped. This terrible Conservative 
political machine, which we and the rest of Saskatchewan so 
foolishly allowed the Conservatives to build up year after year, 
feeds on the most destructive elements in our society — 
grinding up human lives and trampling down the homes of 
hundreds of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Conservatives have pillaged the provincial treasury. Now we 
see the slippery sleight of hand of the Finance minister, the 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, selectively picking the 
pockets of ordinary people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday, last Saturday, 7,000 peaceful 
people came to this Assembly, to this legislature, to tell this 
Conservative government that what it is doing is simply not 
wrong — for if it was a mistake, Conservatives could be 
forgiven. No. Those 7,000 people came here, Mr. Speaker, to 
tell the Minister of Finance and the Premier and this 
government that they will not allow them to determine their 
future. And they say that they will not allow this government to 
determine, by their fanatical ideology, the future of the people 
and children in this province on the basis of their Conservative, 
corporate elite philosophy. 
 
What fills me with even greater trepidation, Mr. Speaker, is the 
neutrality of the press, the neutrality of other professional 
groups of Saskatchewan to what this government is doing. 
Don’t they realize that a government like this, so single-minded 
and narrow of purpose, will not ultimately turn its attention to 
them when they’re finished with the rest of the people? 

This is not idle speculation on my part, Mr. Speaker. It is the 
march of history. And if the press and teachers and lawyers and 
doctors and farmers think they are safe from Conservatives 
now, they’re living in a dream world, a dream world that will 
soon be a nightmare for them when the Conservatives who are 
now at their feet will soon be at their throats. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a quote that I’d like to share with members 
in this House, and I quote: 
 

Those who profess to favour freedom and yet depreciate 
agitation, are men who want crops without plowing up the 
ground. They want rain without thunder and lightning. 
They want the ocean without the awful roar of its waters. 
This struggle may be a moral one, or it may be a physical 
one; or it may be both moral and physical; but it must be a 
struggle. Power concedes nothing without a demand. It 
never did, and it never will. Find out just what people will 
submit to, and you have found out the exact amount of 
injustice and wrong which will be imposed upon them; 
and they will continue until they are resisted with either 
words or blows, or with both. 

 
And I finish: 
 

The limits of tyrants are prescribed by the endurance of 
those whom they oppress . . . 

 
And that’s by Frederick Douglass, 1857. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Said over 120 years ago and more relevant 
today, Mr. Speaker, than it’s ever been, in particular, in this 
province. And it’s relevant, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
government that we have in this province that is continuing to 
rule by dictatorship, continuing to rule without accountability. 
They refuse to call the Assembly. They refuse to call members 
to work. And we’re paid — highly paid for some of us, some of 
us not so highly paid — to do the people’s business; to hold 
government accountable; to look at what they’ve done in terms 
of their programs; and to look at what they’ve done in terms of 
their budget, and clarify and inform people in this province 
where the weaknesses are and what kind of problems they have. 
They have refused to call us to this Assembly until just recently 
to do that. They are not an accountable government, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that; it’s very clear. 
 
They have restricted our party and our opposition from 
providing alternatives to what they are putting forward. That is 
our role as we prepare to govern. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
what is going to happen is the people of this province . . . the 
people I speak to in my constituency are very upset, are very 
angry at what has happened. 
 
I relay what has happened just recently, as of three days. I had 
two groups of students come in from my constituency  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

771 
 

and they saw what was going on in question period. And I 
visited with them afterwards, had refreshments, and took our 
pictures together, grade 5 and 6 and 7 and 8 students from 
elementary schools in my constituency. And they were 
absolutely stunned, Mr. Speaker, they were absolutely stunned 
with the way that this government has destroyed and abolished 
the dental program. The dental program . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And the reason they were stunned is because 
these grade 4 and grade 5 and grade 6 and grade 7 students, 
who were always afraid of going to the dentists because of the 
machinery, because of the drills, and the pumps, and the big 
chairs, and the heavy equipment, and the fact that dentists don’t 
have a lot of time to spend with them, advising them, and 
educating them, and consoling them, and making them more 
aware of preventative dentistry, and how they can prevent 
rotting teeth in their mouths, and how they can become more 
aware of how to live better lives because they’ve had this 
service. 
 
They were stunned, Mr. Speaker, because they believed the 
dental program was one of the most important programs that 
they had in their education system. And if they were able to 
walk down the halls from their class, everybody was prepared 
to leave their classroom and take this service that was provided 
by the dental hygienists. 
 
And what has this government done? Now these children — 
they can’t walk down the hall and get their teeth checked out. 
They can’t walk down the hall and be counselled and advised 
and educated and consoled in terms of what they should be 
doing with respect to dental hygiene. 
 
Now what they have to do, Mr. Speaker, is through a hit and 
miss system. If their parents can get some time off work, if their 
parents can find a way to get to the dentist, if their parents can 
make an appointment with a dentist that’s satisfactory to the 
child and the parent and the dentist, then perhaps they’ll have 
some dental care that’s decent. 
 
But even if that happens, Mr. Speaker, what we’re stuck with 
are the five and six and seven-year-olds who are going to 
dentists absolutely petrified. 
 
My six-year-old came home from school and started — she was 
absolutely thrilled and tickled pink because she was able to go 
to this dental hygienist and say — she pointed to a filling in her 
tooth and she said, “Lookit dad, look what the dental hygienist 
did?” 
 
And she did this with some thrill and some excitement because 
she realized that the dental hygienist was there to help her, help 
her learn about what was going on. And this government has 
destroyed that system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And they destroyed the system that has 
helped children, not only in the cities, not only in the small 
towns, but in particular in the rural areas, for the  

benefit, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit, Mr. Speaker, of those who 
have wealth and those who have power, because they will be 
the ones that will be benefiting from this new program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other problem that I have seen with this 
budget that absolutely floors me — we didn’t raise this with the 
school children because they obviously don’t understand it — 
but what absolutely floors me is the continued delay in the 
release of the Public Accounts. 
 
The Provincial Auditor, as well, floors me with his report in 
page after page he criticizes this government and points out 
with facts, and he backs them up with facts about this 
government’s incompetence and how they’ve mishandled our 
money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a little article here about . . . a little 
title which says, “Mr. Lutz delivers annual report.” He’s the 
Province Auditor. “The financial date delay worries province’s 
auditor general.” 
 
He’s concerned over a lack of government spending 
accountability, and possible interference in his own 
independence. That’s what he’s concerned about. 
 
He raises the accountability issue as we have raised the 
accountability issue in speech after speech. The member from 
Riversdale, the member from Quill Lakes, the member from 
Battlefords, every member that stood on this side of the House 
that has raised the question on the budget has in tandem said 
that this government is not accountable. 
 
They are not accountable to this House; they have not been 
accountable to this House since they got elected. They have not 
been accountable to the taxpayers, and they are not accountable 
to anybody else in this province. 
 
They have allegiances to the oil companies, they have 
allegiances to the banks and the bond dealers, and they have 
allegiances to their friends outside this province with power and 
wealth. 
 
What really worries me as an elected official, Mr. Speaker, and 
what should worry members on that side of the House — and I 
think it’s got them very worried right now — I ran for this 
office, Mr. Speaker not to get up here and make speeches about 
how bad the government is. I didn’t run for that reason. I ran so 
that I could be a member of a government that could introduce 
new programs, that would benefit people. I ran, Mr. Speaker, so 
that I could be involved in a government that could improve 
services for its people. 
 
What this government has done in its incompetence, in its 
disregard for accountability, in its disregard for the taxpayers’ 
money, what this government has done, Mr. Speaker, it has 
shattered my objective; it has shattered the objective of 
members on this House; it is shattering the members’ objectives 
on that side of the House, to be part of a government, to 
improve services, and to introduce new programs that will make 
Saskatchewan not number one in debt or not number one in 
unemployment, but number one in terms of a good province to 
live in. And that’s what they have done. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

772 
 

We are not now legislators or people who bring in new Bills to 
improve services, or bring in new Bills to provide better 
programs for our people. We are now becoming debt managers; 
we’re becoming debt managers of this province. So when the 
next election rolls around and the NDP win the government, 
rather than the member from North West being a part of a 
government that is involved in improving services and creating 
new programs, the legacy this party across the floor will be 
leaving me and others in the next NDP government is a legacy, 
not of new programs or services, but a legacy, Mr. Speaker, in 
being a debt manager, in being a tax collector, and thinking up 
new, innovative ways to collect taxes. 
 
I think that’s disgusting. I think this government should damn 
well resign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The Auditor General or . . . Mr. Lutz, who is 
the Provincial Auditor, goes on to say in his annual report that 
he is concerned about the delay in releasing the government’s 
public accounts. And I think the reason he’s very concerned, 
Mr. Speaker, is because he smells something rotten. I think he 
and his accountants have concluded, after having dealt with this 
bunch across the way, that there is indeed something very 
wrong in the administration of our finances. 
 
We have the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden who has been 
a Liberal, he’s been a Conservative, and now he’s a Liberal 
again as a Minister of Finance — the same budget that was 
brought in in 1967. This fellow here, this member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, this Minister of Finance, and this 
government opposite with their tactics in terms of lack of 
accountability, with their tactics in terms of frustrating 
democracy and centralizing power in the cabinet could teach — 
the person I refer to in my speech — a lot of tricks. They could 
have taught Adolf Hitler tricks that he never used in 1935 and 
’36 and ’37. 
 
And that’s what worries me, Mr. Speaker, because I have young 
children, my constituents have a number of young children, and 
the last thing I want is a government like this in control of our 
finances and in control of our provinces so they can make laws 
that affect my family and the families of other Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
When I was talking to these grade 6 and 7 and 8 students from 
my constituency, Mr. Speaker, what they couldn’t understand in 
their astonishment was why a government who would totally 
desecrate the dental plan; who would do away with a program 
that has been a terrific program for all of our children who had 
the good fortune to participate in the program . . . what they 
were more astonished with was why the government would try 
and save 500,000 or $600,000 in cutting that program and firing 
all their nurses — why they would do that when, in fact, the 
government spends money and gives taxpayers money to build 
Jacuzzis and whirlpools and swimming pools. What a 
government. They were just astonished. What a wonderful 
government. What a wonderful government! 
 
I have an article here. The Minister of Urban Affairs, who’s in 
charge of the Saskatchewan housing program,  

talks about this very program that these young students are 
absolutely astonished with in view of the fact their dental 
program has been taken away. But the minister defends the use 
of taxpayers’ dollars to build private swimming pools. And he 
quotes: 
 

“Swimming pools are labour intensive,” he argued during 
budget debate. People in my constituency of Regina South 
appreciate that program. It’s one of the most successful 
job creation programs in Saskatchewan and is another 
form of diversification. 

 
Diverting health money and education money, where it should 
be used, into Jacuzzis and swimming pools. What a program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not simply the case of whether or not to 
support this budget. The Conservative budget doesn’t mean all 
that much to Conservatives. After all, they’ve never lived 
within a budget since they’ve been elected. The budget debate 
is simply an exercise to this government, an exercise that 
democracy forces upon them. Conservatives have already 
decided our fate in secret meetings, in covert actions, in under 
the table deals with outside corporate interests, in decisions 
made with their Conservative cousins in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot and I will not support this budget. It’s a 
sham, a disguise, cloaking and hiding the very real intentions 
Conservatives have for Saskatchewan and its people. And when 
the debate is over, and when the vote is taken, and the people of 
this province see the member from Moosomin, the member 
from Rosthern, the member from Canora who’s sitting back 
there, the member from Kinistino, and all the members — even 
the one that’s waving back there, the member from Pelly; when 
they see all of these people stand up and vote for this disgusting 
budget, for the budget that is providing the highest tax increases 
of any budget, not only in Saskatchewan history, but . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I’d like to draw 
hon. members’ attention to rule 14(3) regarding the budget 
debate, which reads as follows: 
 

On the fifth of the said days, at thirty minutes before the 
ordinary time of daily adjournment, unless the debate be 
previously concluded, Mr. Speaker shall interrupt the 
proceedings and, after allowing twenty minutes for the 
mover of the Budget motion to exercise his right to close 
the debate, shall forthwith put every question necessary to 
dispose of the main motion. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought for 
some time what approach one could take in winding up the 
budget speech, and I think that the remarks of the member from 
Regina North West probably epitomize what this whole budget 
debate has been about, from the opposition side. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

773 
 

And I want to put it in perspective. I want to put the following 
facts because political scientists, I think, will analyse some of 
the activities of the members opposite. 
 
They wanted a budget for some six months, Mr. Speaker. They 
whined, they cried, they snivelled, they threatened court action, 
they were all the way to the Supreme Court, and oh, they 
wanted a budget! Mr. Speaker, for six months they called for 
one. 
 
They’re in the position of an opposition, with the government 
governing in some difficult times, a natural position and 
advantageous position for the opposition. And we can also keep 
in mind, Mr. Speaker, that at one time the New Democratic 
Party had a history of being a reform party. So you have all of 
these facts coming together — this urge to get in and kill in 
debate, and a long ago history of reform and some difficult 
times, like I say, natural. And what did they come forward with 
after a week’s debate? Zero. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only new idea that the New Democratic Party 
had through this whole budget debate was one member decided 
that the hockey rinks should be little longer than they normally 
are. And, Mr. Speaker, that is what the member from, one of the 
members from northern Saskatchewan suggested. The member 
from Athabasca said the skating rinks should be longer. Surely, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve better from 
an opposition party than the disdain with which they showed 
the people of this province their lack of ability to come up with 
some positive ideas, some positive suggestions, to deal with 
some difficult economic times for the people of this province. 
 
And what did they give the farmers? Absolutely nothing. Did 
we get one suggestion? The opposition critic, the NDP critic for 
agriculture, didn’t even have the courage to stand up in the 
budget debate and speak on behalf of the farmers — at least the 
NDP farmers, few though they may be, Mr. Speaker. He 
should’ve at least stood up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And I believe that the farmers will continue 
to remember, Mr. Speaker, what the NDP think of them. The 
NDP treat the farmers with disrespect, and this budget debate 
proved it in spades. One of the most difficult times for 
agriculture in the history of our great province and the NDP 
opposition critic didn’t even have the courage and the decency 
to stand up and talk about the plight of farmers and give some 
suggestions. And I find that a tragic day in the history, not only 
of this province, but in the history of the New Democratic 
Party, Mr. Speaker. And the farmers won’t forget. 
 
And what did we get on talks of agriculture? All we got was the 
leadership candidate, the member from Riversdale, talking 
about agriculture, and how he still doesn’t want any change to 
the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he talked about. 
 
Still in the 1970s. He is still fighting the 1982 election, Mr. 
Speaker. We all remember the member from Riversdale in the 
last election standing up with his cowboy hat on, saying, 
anything for the farm vote, boys. And he forgot a  

couple of things. First of all, he didn’t have anything for the 
farm votes; secondly, much to the laughter of every farmer in 
Saskatchewan, he had the hat on backwards, Mr. Speaker. And 
they still laugh about . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — They still laugh, they still laugh at the 
labour union lawyer from Saskatoon Riversdale standing up 
with his stetson on backwards saying he is going to help 
farmers. And they wonder why they’re in such serious trouble 
in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mean, they did the farmers a favour they didn’t put him on a 
tractor. He’d have hurt himself and probably anybody else 
within 50 feet. And they sure as to heck didn’t put him on a 
horse, and with good reason, Mr. Speaker. They managed his 
agricultural statements and position, I thought, rather well, 
except for the hat. They couldn’t quite get him to put the hat on 
correctly. 
 
But what did we also get? And there was a common theme right 
through the NDP debate. Other than the venom and the hatred 
and the vindictiveness that we saw — and I think it was 
epitomized by the last speaker — there was a common theme, 
and they said, we want to go back to 1982. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw North: take us back to 1982 in 
medicare. And you know what he is telling the people of this 
province? That they don’t want the new nursing homes built by 
this government, Mr. Speaker. They are telling the people of 
this province they don’t want a chiropody program brought in 
by this government primarily for our seniors; and they don’t 
want a rural therapy program brought in; and they don’t want 
the new cancer facilities; and they don’t want a new Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre being constructed in Regain; and they 
don’t want a new hospital in Saskatoon St. Paul’s; and they 
don’t want the several CAT scanners purchased by this 
government, Mr. Speaker. They want to go back to 1982. 
 
And I think it was emphasized again. Tonight the member from 
the Quill Lakes said, you can’t destroy memories. You can’t 
destroy memories, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what they’re living 
on. They’re trying to live on memories and, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
not enough for the people of our province. 
 
They want to go back to 1982 and land bank, Mr. Speaker, 
where the biggest purchaser of farm land in the history of this 
province was the government competing with the farmers and 
taking their land from them. And they want to go back, Mr. 
Speaker, and they said it over and over and over again. They 
want to go back to 18 per cent interest rates, and with the 
government turning the back on the people of this province who 
are losing their homes and farms. 
 
And they want to go back to 1982, Mr. Speaker, where they 
nationalized potash mines. For them, that was nirvana, Mr. 
Speaker, that was heaven. That was heaven: 18 per cent interest 
rates, land bank, and potash nationalization. That’s New 
Democratic Party heaven and, Mr. Speaker, the surprising 
thing, and I think the  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

774 
 

surprising thing to every objective voter, is that even the new 
members — even the new members in the New Democratic 
Party fell right into that trap of wanting to live in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the fundamental things that this 
budget is all about, is whether this province is going to look 
backwards and say that we can draw up a wall around 
Saskatchewan and everyone stay away; and we will just shrivel 
into a cocoon and die. Or whether we have the courage, not 
only as a government but as a people, to say we are going to 
make the changes necessary, Mr. Speaker, to protect our basic 
social institutions and to give our people a fair chance in a 
highly competitive, changing world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve never seen such a 
collection of unrealistic politicians in our lives. Saskatchewan 
can’t draw a wall around itself and say the world doesn’t exist. 
And Saskatchewan can’t say we refuse to compete with rapidly 
changing educational systems in virtually every other modern 
country in the world. And, Mr. Speaker, while most every other 
country in the free world is, people are wanting to take more 
responsibility for their own lives and actions, the New 
Democratic Party says that shouldn’t happen in Saskatchewan, 
that it still has to be the government that does everything for the 
people. And that’s been rejected. Mr. Speaker, in 1982; it was 
rejected again in 1986, and it will be rejected in 1990 and in 
1994 and ’98 and 2002 and 2006, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, they all want the programs of 
the 1970s. I hate to be the bearer of bad news to the New 
Democratic Party but the 1970s are over. The 1970s were over 
some time ago. And a wise political party, Mr. Speaker, says — 
and a wise government says — difficult as it may be, we must 
look ahead. And that’s what this government and this budget 
does, Mr. Speaker, is it has the courage and the fortitude to look 
ahead — not into an easy world, Mr. Speaker, not necessarily 
into a fair world, and certainly a very difficult world, but at 
least it has the courage to make the changes so that our people 
will be able to compete with the rest of the world and that our 
basic institutions are protected and viable for the 1990s and into 
the next century. 
 
We had some strange things develop. We had the member from 
the Battlefords. We saw some subliminal activities towards a 
leadership convention. I think one thing came abundantly clear 
during the debate is that they should stick with what they have, 
Mr. Speaker, because the member from The Battlefords 
twigged something to the people of this province. And I know 
the rules, Mr. Speaker, about not using a member’s name, but 
I’m going to quote exactly what the member from The 
Battlefords said — because he used the name, and I think the 
quote is quite important — when he said to the government, he 
said, you guys don’t want Romanow for a leader. What’s he 
know that we don’t, Mr. Speaker? What’s he know that we 
don’t? And what does he know that the people of this province 
should know, that they  

don’t want Romanow for a leader either, Mr. Speaker? And 
what is he keeping from the people of this province? 
 
We know lots; we know lots; we‘ve got lots. But what does he 
know, that an active member of that party doesn’t want the 
member from Riversdale to be leader of that party? And I think 
he should tell. I think he kind of, as the phrase goes, spilled his 
guts the other night about his problems in Prince Albert and 
how he had a confidential meeting . . . Or at North Battleford. 
That he really resented the fact that at this confidential meeting, 
the information got out. Not once did he deny, not once did he 
deny that he said that he threatened the chamber of commerce 
in North Battleford. Not once did he deny that he said he was 
going to be in the cabinet. And I think that we should have the 
member stand up and tell, not only his constituents, but this 
legislature and the people of the province, who offered him a 
cabinet post. Who made the deal? What was he promised for 
the support? And we’ll watch; we’ll watch very quickly, Mr. 
Speaker, who he supports in the leadership race as to how much 
his vote is worth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also saw the rhetoric running ahead of the 
thought processes of some of the members. We had a diatribe 
by the member from Athabasca complaining about the changes 
to the dental program. What he said was that this government 
doesn’t recognize the difficulties in northern Saskatchewan and 
that they needed the dental therapists. And he was condemning 
the change because we didn’t recognize northern Saskatchewan. 
The fact that we didn’t make a change to the dental program in 
northern Saskatchewan completely escaped him, Mr. Speaker 
— that we still have the dental therapists in northern 
Saskatchewan. We didn’t make the change because we 
recognized the difficulties. 
 
But you know what then he followed up and said — because I 
think it symbolizes the attitudes of members opposite — he 
said, we’re afraid of dentists coming into northern 
Saskatchewan. He’s afraid of dentists in northern 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, how backwards, how backwards 
can a party get, that they’re afraid of dentists in northern 
Saskatchewan? Now I know people that are afraid of dentists, 
but I’ve never heard of a political party afraid of dentists before, 
Mr. Speaker. And now we see it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the public of this province, I 
believe, are perhaps even more realistic than the politicians, and 
they know that governments must be realistic. And the people 
of this province . . . and notwithstanding that you don’t want 
any change in your agricultural position. I don’t think that 
there’s a segment of Saskatchewan society that is more affected 
by change, more aware of tremendous change than our farmers. 
 
And yet what we do get from the NDP? Silence from their 
agricultural critic, and no change from the so-called leading 
leadership candidate. And that, Mr. Speaker, I think epitomizes 
again the thrust of the New Democratic Party debate. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

775 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s common knowledge to every student of 
politics in Canada that a party that is afraid to change is doomed 
to defeat and destruction. And, Mr. Speaker, every single 
speech of the members opposite showed that they were afraid of 
change, afraid to tackle the future, afraid to make the necessary 
changes in education and agriculture and medicare, all for the 
good of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. At one time 
they were a reform party, and now they’re in a redundant 
political party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And it’s a sad, sad legacy when that party 
hasn’t had one new idea since potash nationalization in 1976. 
What kind of a legacy is that for our children? What kind of a 
legacy is that for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker? A 
party, a New Democratic Party, afraid of change. 
 
Well this government isn’t afraid of change, Mr. Speaker, and 
this budget is about change. And this budget, yes, has made 
some difficult changes, and the government has made some 
difficult decisions. But, Mr. Speaker, we are not like the 
members opposite; we don’t have our head in the sand. We 
have our heads up, Mr. Speaker, because we believe that the 
people of this province deserve a government that is going to 
take them aggressively into the 1990s and into the next century, 
Mr. Speaker. And this budget, this Premier, and this 
government will do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We stated, Mr. Speaker, that this budget 
will put the fiscal house of the government in order, and it has 
begun to do that aggressively. 
 
We also indicated that we would protect the Saskatchewan 
people as much as possible, and we continue our senior 
citizens’ heritage program, our mortgage protection programs, 
new education initiatives, more money for hospitals. Mr. 
Speaker, the seniors’ heritage program and the farm protection 
program so condemned, Mr. Speaker, by the member from 
Riversdale, and silently his position acceded to by the silent 
agricultural critic from the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a changing world out there. The world no 
longer will have a consistent demand for Saskatchewan’s 
natural resources. And those that want to deny that, Mr. 
Speaker, are condemned to backward thinking. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the farmers know better than the New Democratic 
Party that agriculture will be more competitive in the future, 
and we must adjust, and this government will adjust and 
change, Mr. Speaker. I support this budget and the people of 
Saskatchewan will . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
The question before the House now is the motion moved by the 
Minister of Finance, and seconded by the Deputy  

Premier, that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the amendment to the motion, 
moved by the member for Regina North East, and seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, which reads as follows: 
 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
That this Assembly condemns and rejects the budget 
because . . . 

 
Order, please. Order. 
 

That this Assembly condemns and rejects the budget 
because it is a betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan, and 
a betrayal of the caring, sharing, and co-operative 
Saskatchewan way of life, and further, because: 
 
(1) it betrays medicare in Saskatchewan by arbitrarily 
limiting insured medical services, destroying the 
children’s dental plan and the prescription drug plan, and 
attacking many other health care services. 

 
Order. Order, please. I’ve mentioned several times that when 
the Speaker is on his feet and reading a motion or making any 
other statement, there is to be absolute silence in the House, 
from all members. The member from Quill Lakes doesn’t seem 
to understand that, and I ask him once more, I ask him once 
more to please refrain from interrupting. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re looking at somebody else. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Member from Quill Lakes, are you 
challenging what I’m saying? I am giving you the last warning. 
I’m giving you the last warning. 
 

(2) it betrays the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
attacking a wide range of needed services; 
 
(3) it betrays Saskatchewan young people by attacking the 
education system and by providing totally inadequate job 
creation measures; 
 
(4) it betrays Saskatchewan senior citizens, the pioneers 
who co-operated to develop this province, by undermining 
services they need and their security; 
 
(5) it continues this government’s betrayal of Indian, 
Métis, and of northern people. 
 
(6) it betrays the working men and women of 
Saskatchewan by eroding their rights, security, and 
opportunities; 
 
(7) it betrays all the people of Saskatchewan because it 
misrepresents the size of the deficit, and fails to 
acknowledge that this deficit has been caused by the 
government’s failure to collect corporate and resource 
revenues and by patronage to the government’s friends. 

  



 
June 25, 1987 

776 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 
 
(2155) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 23 
 

Blakeney Romanow 
Prebble Tchorzewski 
Brockelbank Rolfes 
Shillington Mitchell 
Koskie  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The Clerk is 
having difficulty hearing the voice vote. 
 
Upshall Lyons 
Simard Calvert 
Solomon Lautermilch 
Kowalsky Trew 
Atkinson Van Mulligen 
Anguish Koenker 
Hagel Goodale 
 

Nays — 34 
 
Devine Schmidt 
Muller Hodgins 
Duncan Gerich 
McLeod Hepworth 
Andrew Hardy 
Berntson Klein 
Lane Meiklejohn 
Taylor Martin 
Smith Sauder 
Swan Johnson 
Muirhead McLaren 
Maxwell Hopfner 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order! I’ve asked 
the House to co-operate so that we can hear the votes clearly 
stated. 
 
Petersen Neudorf 
Swenson Gardner 
Martens Kopelchuk 
Toth Saxinger 
Gleim Britton 
 
(2202) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 34 
 
Devine Klein 
Muller Meiklejohn 
Duncan Martin 
McLeod Sauder 
Andrew Johnson 
 
 
 

Berntson McLaren 
Lane Hopfner 
Taylor Petersen 
Smith Swenson 
Swan Martens 
Muirhead Toth 
Maxwell Gleim 
Schmidt Neudorf 
Hodgins Gardner 
Gerich Kopelchuk 
Hepworth Saxinger 
Hardy Britton 
 

Nays — 23 
 
Blakeney Kowalsky 
Prebble Atkinson 
Brockelbank Anguish 
Shillington Hagel 
Koskie Lyons 
Romanow Calvert 
Tchorzewski Lautermilch 
Rolfes Trew 
Mitchell Van Mulligen 
Upshall Koenker 
Simard Goodale 
Solomon  
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Item 1 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:06 p.m. 
 
 


