













































November 4, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 November 4, 1987 

 

 

3963 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 55 — An Act to 

provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies 

for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill, which is The 

Electoral Boundaries Commission Act, is the attempt by the 

government to try and load the dice in its favour for the next 

election, and I don’t intend to take the time of the Assembly to 

describe or criticize any of the details of the Bill. Some of my 

colleagues have already dealt with various aspects of the Bill, and 

there will be people speaking after me who will expand upon our 

specific criticisms. My intervention tonight, Mr. Speaker, will be 

brief and simple. My point is simply this: the government isn’t 

fooling anybody. Everybody knows what the government is up to; 

the government is trying to steal an election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — They want to alter the legislation to set up a way 

of drawing boundaries so that they can pick off a few more seats, 

and they hope that those extra seats will somehow return them to 

power in 1990. They hope to set up a situation, Mr. Speaker, 

where they can win the government with a relatively small 

percentage of the votes. It is possible — and one of my colleagues 

will expand upon this a little later — it is possible for this 

government, on the basis of the criteria set out in this Act, to win 

the election with a relatively small minority of the total votes cast. 

 

Now everybody knows what the government is not doing with this 

Bill. The government is not trying to create a situation which is 

more fair than under the existing Act. The government is not 

repairing any defects in the present law, and the government is not 

trying to solve any real and legitimate problems. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, is prompted by improper motives. 

The legislation is prompted by a selfish concern of this 

government for its own re-election. This legislation is prompted 

by nothing more than the desire to steal the next election. It’s an 

abuse of the government’s power, and the government should be 

ashamed to bring the legislation before this Assembly. 

Saskatchewan people are entitled to better than this. They’re 

entitled to an honest government. They’re entitled to a government 

that will observe a reasonable standard of decency and honesty, 

and they are entitled to a government that will act in the best 

interests of all of the people. They do not need, the people of 

Saskatchewan do not need, a government that tries to find a 

sneaky, underhanded way  

of clinging to power, and that’s what this government is doing, 

and they should be ashamed of themselves for trying to do it, and 

they should withdraw this bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I want an opportunity to say a 

few words on this Bill No. 55, which is before the Assembly at 

this time for second reading. 

 

Very soon, Mr. Speaker, we will be to the day of November 11. 

November 11 is a special day in Canada, a special day in 

Saskatchewan. It’s the day when we remember our forefathers 

who went abroad, in many cases, to fight a war. It was something 

that was patently evident to them; it was something that was 

distasteful, but something that had to be done. And I can recall, 

Mr. Speaker, having my father tell me about that war. He fought in 

the trenches in France and Belgium in the First World War. He 

told me some of the things that happened, what the conditions 

were like. And he didn’t like it there. He volunteered, he went, and 

he fought. He didn’t like it, but it was a job that had to be done, 

and it was fairly evident that it was a job that had to be done. 

 

But what we see before us here in Bill 55, there’s a job that has to 

be done, but it’s not quite so evident. And I think the people of 

Saskatchewan should be made aware of the job that has to be done 

with regard to this regressive legislation that’s being put forward 

in Bill 55. 

 

I want to briefly review, Mr. Speaker, the history of boundary 

drawing in the province of Saskatchewan. Now I go back, Mr. 

Speaker, to the 1960s, and I had the experience of being elected in 

1964, and one of the first things that the new government of the 

day did was to do some boundary drawing. This was done in about 

1965. Now that really didn’t create much of a problem. What the 

government did — and I really respect them for this — was to 

divide up constituencies that had multi-member seats into single 

member seats - really didn’t create much of a problem, and I 

didn’t resist it. 

 

But before the 1971 election, but after the 1967 election, we saw 

something happen at that time which aroused us as members of 

the legislature, much as my father would’ve been aroused when he 

saw a system being imposed on the people of Europe which could 

eventually be imposed on the people of this country, and he went 

and he fought it. 

 

And we fought it in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. But we were 

unable to stop the government of the day because they had a big 

majority — well not a big majority, but a comfortable majority — 

and they brought in a boundary change. 

 

And I recall, as the Deputy Premier was standing in the legislature 

a few days ago to introduce this Bill in second reading and to 

speak on the principle of the Bill, I recall in the ’60s, Mr. Steuart 

— now Senator Steuart — standing in this chamber and 

discussing the redistribution of the electoral boundaries in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the only difference in the two is the size, the only  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3964 
 

 

 

difference in the two was size. The Deputy Premier is a much 

bigger man. And the trouble about bigger men is they fall harder. 

And that’s what’s going to happen to this government — it’s 

going to fall harder, and it’s going to fall in the next election. 

 

Now, Mr. Steuart, in his attempt, had the full co-operation of his 

caucus and the support staff. And among the support staff was the 

person who is now the Minister of Finance — the Minister of 

Finance who practises a deception on the electors of 

Saskatchewan such as we’ve never seen before in the history of 

this province. He was one of back-room architects of the electoral 

boundary gerrymandering before the 1971 election. 

 

What was the result of that electoral gerrymandering, Mr. 

Speaker? Well how did they go about it? Well, I’ll give you an 

example. Previously you’ve heard examples by my leader, the 

member from Elphinstone, about some of the changes that were 

made in the city of Regina and some rural constituencies. I want to 

tell you something about some of the constituencies in Saskatoon. 

 

At that time I had the good fortune and honour to represent the 

constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair, and Mayfair was an 

average-size constituency before Mr. Steuart and his back-room 

people drew the new boundaries. After they had drawn the 

boundaries, the constituency of Mayfair was one of the biggest 

constituencies in the province, except for the member for 

Elphinstone who had an even bigger one — the present Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

Coterminous with the boundary of Mayfair constituency was the 

constituency of City Park. The constituency of City Park was 

about one-third of the population of the constituency of Mayfair. 

That’s how blatant the boundary drawing was by that government 

of the day. 

 

Why? Why would a government go to that extreme? Well if we 

review history, as one of the columnists had suggested a week or 

so ago, that this government is using the same play book that that 

previous government did — that Liberal government did back in 

the ’60s; the same play book. They, the Liberal government of that 

day in 1968, had brought in a budget which had increased every 

tax in sight, and before the 1971 election they had offended every 

group that they possibly could. And Mr. Steuart at that time said, 

or afterwards said, if there is some group that we haven’t offended 

at this point, it’s just because we haven’t met them yet. And that’s 

the same play book that this government is using, Mr. Speaker. 

Had huge tax increases, they had an arrogant government, and 

they brought in boundary changes. And I said some of the 

boundary changes in Saskatoon; others have said about other 

constituencies to show that this imbalance, the great imbalance 

between constituencies that lay side by side. 

 

Now the consequence of that was that in that election campaign 

we had said, as a New Democratic Party, that we will bring in an 

independent boundaries commission. And in due course when we 

formed the government, that was one of the first things we did, 

was to bring in an independent boundary commission. 

 

In the meantime, in the election campaign the Liberal government 

lost its majority and would up on this side with a very small 

number of seats, and they have never recovered. They have never 

recovered, Mr. Speaker, never recovered their political power 

because they had given themselves a body blow, plus other 

circumstances, which were much too great for them to overcome. 

 

(1915) 

 

We formed the government, and we brought in the first 

independent boundaries commission in the history of 

Saskatchewan — the first independent boundaries commission. It 

was my pleasure to be part of that process, Mr. Speaker, and I was 

proud of that piece of legislation. I felt at that time that I had 

accomplished a solid blow for the democratic system in this 

province. And I thought to myself, no government will ever touch 

that legislation except to improve it. 

 

And what was the test of that legislation, Mr. Speaker? Well, I 

have here the Canadian Parliamentary Review, August 1987, and 

a person by the name of Harvey Pasis, an associate professor of 

the faculty of administrative studies, Athabasca University, 

Alberta, writes an article, and it’s entitled “the Courts and 

Redistribution in Canada.” And his article deals with the 

constitution, the charter of rights, as it affects constituency 

boundaries, and discusses the question of constituency boundaries 

in balance in light of the charter. And this gentleman has an index 

and it’s called the gini index, g-i-n-i index. And really what it is, is 

a statistical measure used in the social sciences to show the level 

of inequality in electoral seats. 

 

Now the province that has the best rating in Canada — the best 

rating in Canada — is the province of Saskatchewan. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is no credit to those ladies and gentlemen that sit 

across the way. That is a credit to the independent boundaries 

commission. The rating of Saskatchewan is 0.011. The next best 

one is the province of Manitoba, 0.035. And it goes on down the 

list, and the worst one is Newfoundland at 0.167. 

 

So is there anything wrong with our independent electoral 

boundaries commission? Not a thing. It gets the highest rating in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, by this person. This article is available in a 

public document for anybody that wants to read it. It’s the highest 

rating in Canada. 

 

But this government says, we’ve got to change that; throw out that 

independent electoral boundaries commission completely; bring in 

a new Act, bring in a new Act. They’re not amending this 

legislation, which is the best in Canada, which provides the 

greatest equality among the constituencies of any place in Canada 

— they’re throwing that entire Act out. They’re throwing out the 

independent commission. They’re bringing in brand-new 

legislation. And the constituent parts of that legislation were 

described quite adequately by my leader when he was speaking in 

this debate a few days ago. 

 

But I want to deal with the principle that’s involved in relation to 

Bill 55, and I’ll pick a couple of examples which should illustrate 

the point. Take the Bill. It says that the city of Swift Current, and 

the city of North Battleford and the town of North Battleford — 

there’s two  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3965 
 

 

 

constituencies, Swift Current in one, the city of North Battleford 

and the town of North Battleford in another. They’ll get one 

member each in the legislature. 

 

Now that might sound, to people who are not familiar with the 

machinations of this government, to be fair. But if it was fair, 

they’d be using the old legislation; but they have new legislation, 

and the new legislation provides that there will not be a variance 

of 15 per cent from the median in the size of the constituency 

populations, but there will be 25 per cent. Now with the 15 per 

cent we recognize that you can’t be right on because of conditions 

that exist in the constituency because of physical boundaries, and 

so forth. But that was very close, so close that it gets the highest 

rating in Canada with a 15 per cent variation from the median. 

 

But this new legislation says it can have 25 per cent, so if you’re 

25 per cent higher on one side and 25 per cent lower on the other 

side, you’ve got quite a variation. On the 15 per cent variation, 

which is in the present legislation, which is rated highest in 

Canada, a constituency . . . if the population median was 10,000, 

the lowest number of population the constituency could have is 

8,500 voters. The highest is 11,500. But under this legislation 

which this government has brought forward, that same 

constituency of 10,000 could have as low as 7,500, which is 1,000 

lower, and it could have 12,500 at the high end, which is 1,000 

higher. So what that will do, Mr. Speaker, that in itself will push 

us down this list of rating in Canada, as presented in this article 

that I referred to earlier. 

 

But another problem occurs. And I mentioned the city of Swift 

Current, and the city of North Battleford and the town of 

Battleford get one member each. The city of Swift Current, in 

relation to The Battlefords, is rather static. North Battleford and 

Battleford are growing more rapidly than Swift Current, so as a 

consequence you’re going to . . . Not only might you have the 

variances that is caused by the 25 per cent from the median, but 

you’ll have the variation caused by the difference in growth rates. 

 

Take the city of Regina and Saskatoon. The city of Saskatoon is 

larger, larger than the city of Regina; the population is greater. It is 

one of the fastest-growing cities in Canada; yet, Mr. Speaker, this 

legislation says that Saskatoon gets 11 urban constituencies and 

Regina gets 11 urban constituencies. So not only do you have the 

variation which is increased from 15 per cent from the median to 

25 per cent from the median, but you also have the variation that 

occurs because one city is already larger than the other and will 

get the same number of members. And the growth rate is 

recognized in Saskatoon to be a much faster growth rate than in 

the city of Regina. 

 

So not only do you have a variance increased by this legislation 

which this government has brought in, but you have it 

compounded. You have it compounded by the fact that it says in 

the Bill that the city of Regina will get 11 and the city of 

Saskatoon will get 11 members. So not only do you have 

inequities increased between rural and urban, you can have 

compounded inequities increased between the city of Regina and 

the city of Saskatoon, the city of Swift Current and the city of 

North Battleford. So that’s what this legislation does, Mr. Speaker, 

and the  

people of Saskatchewan should be fully aware of that. 

 

Now what about the commission? Well this . . . Some people of 

some note have commented on this legislation already, Mr. 

Speaker. And I was interested to note, for the information of the 

Deputy Premier who introduced this legislation, and whose name 

shall ever be emblazoned on this legislation as the mover, as the 

mover of this Draconian piece of legislation which takes away our 

independent boundaries commission and gives us the Tory version 

of an independent boundaries commission . . . No, Mr. Speaker, 

they don’t even say it’s independent, because the member, when 

he introduced this, I believe used the word “independent” once, 

and then he realized he had made a slip, and whenever used it 

again, to the best of my knowledge. So I picked it up. the member 

says that I should have picked it up, and I certainly did pick it up 

because I noticed the absence of the use of the word independent 

boundaries commission after. Thereafter he used it once, and I’m 

sure it was just as a slip because he must have been thinking about 

the legislation which we had brought in which was an independent 

boundary commission. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have Dr. Norman Ward, a man not of my 

political persuasion, but a man well-known, well-known, Mr. 

Speaker, in these circles regarding independent boundaries — Dr. 

Norman Ward, well-known and well respected, used by different 

governments in Ottawa for federal boundary adjustment through 

an independent commission. What does Dr. Norman Ward, now 

retired from the city of Saskatoon, have to say about this? Well I’ll 

just quote form the article of October 31, ’87, in the Star-Phoenix. 

It’s headed, “Boundary commission duties prescribed — Ward.” 

And one of the paragraphs reads as follows: 

 

If a commission is to be independent, it should be really 

independent. It shouldn’t be directed to do this and to do that. 

 

Now there are some instructions that are issued, even in 

independent boundary legislation, which guide the independent 

commissioners on making their decisions. Some are necessary, but 

this government has increased the guidance that they’re providing 

to this commission they intend to set up in this legislation, to the 

extent and to the detriment of the people of Saskatchewan. And 

Mr. Norman Ward — Dr. Norman Ward — says that he does not 

agree with that. 

 

Dr. Ward worked on federal boundary commission for 

Saskatchewan, and he says: 

 

The only direction we got was there was to be 14 seats for 

the province. We could arrange the boundaries any way we 

liked, provided we stayed within the guide-lines for 

population. 

 

And he goes on to say, and this is all I’m going to quote from Dr. 

Norman Ward: 

 

I don’t know what the government’s motives are, but I 

wouldn’t myself want to sit on a commission given that kind 

of directive.  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3966 
 

 

 

Well I think Dr. Norman Ward is being generous in saying 

that he doesn’t know what the motives of this government 

are. I certainly recognize the motives of this government, and 

the motives of this government are that they’re in a desperate 

situation, and they have to have some help in the next 

election campaign. 

 

Rather than having an independent boundaries commission, 

they’re going to impose on the people of Saskatchewan their 

version of how the boundaries should be drawn. They’re going to 

impose legislation which will force the commissioners to draw the 

boundaries in a certain manner. And dare those commissioners 

reject the opportunity to sit on that commission? They dare not. 

They dare not, because the effect of them not, agreeing not to sit 

on the commission, avoiding appointment to the commission, is 

that the government themselves will appoint the commission. 

 

If the commissioners, if the people they approach, refuse to sit on 

the commission, then the government will directly appoint the 

commission, and that’s not democratic, Mr. Speaker. That’s not 

the way it’s been done in Saskatchewan. And I think if I do one 

thing this evening, it’s to alert the people of Saskatchewan to the 

fact that this government is in a desperate situation and is 

attempting to alleviate that situation by imposing new legislation 

which will take the independence out of the independent boundary 

commission. 

 

This legislation, by varying the terms under which the boundaries 

will be established and varying the balance, the weight of the 

constituencies, one against the other, will give that government its 

advantage if it’s allowed to be carried to its conclusion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s quite clear that I shall resist this 

legislation. The people of Saskatchewan do not need this 

legislation. There was legislation on the statute books of 

Saskatchewan which is recognized by people outside of the 

province of Saskatchewan as being the kind of legislation that 

permits equality between the constituencies. This legislation the 

government intends to bring in Bill 55 will compound the 

inequalities, compound the inequalities between constituencies 

and among constituencies. 

 

(1930) 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this legislation. I would 

urge all people to resist this legislation, not only the people in this 

Chamber, but the people in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I may 

have some more to say on this, and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 77 — An Act to 

amend The Power Corporation Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

take a few moments if I could to address this Bill, Bill  

No. 77. The government calls it An Act to amend The Power 

Corporation Act, and I would have to take a little note from my 

friend from Saskatoon, it’s more than that — it’s more than An 

Act to amend The Power Corporation Act. It’s an Act to give 

preferential treatment to large corporations at the expense of home 

owners and of renters and of apartment dwellers and people that 

built this province, because that, Mr. Speaker, is what it is. 

 

And I would like to read into the record of this legislature the part 

that I am opposed to and I know that my colleagues are very upset 

with. And it reads: 

 

(3) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2), Ipsco Inc., 

Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd., Saskatoon chemicals Ltd. and 

any other industrial customer of electrical energy that the 

Lieutenant Governor in council may by regulation prescribe 

are exempt from the requirement to pay additional charges 

added to accounts pursuant to those subsections. 

 

And what upsets us, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that municipal 

government shad the option and had the ability and had the right, 

under the old Act, before this amendment, to put a surtax on 

electricity and gas bills, and this clause deletes that right. And 

what it means, in layman’s terms, is that cabinet can make the 

decision to exempt any large corporation, or any corporation that it 

deems, exempt from this tax. And that means that the consumers 

in every city in this province and every rural community in this 

province may in fact have to pick up what they lose through this 

new legislation. 

 

And I say that it’s yet another new tax implemented by the 

Premier and his cabinet colleagues on the backs of the people of 

this province, on the backs of the small-business people — not the 

large ones, of course, because those, with the record of this 

government, would be exempt. Just by their record, people would 

understand that that would happen. 

 

It imposes taxes on the renters, and it imposes taxes on the home 

owners because the municipal governments are going to have to 

go to those people to pick up yet more tax dollars than they 

already do. The tax burden is shifting from those that have, I say, 

too much, to those that have too little, and that number is growing 

rapidly. 

 

I look, Mr. Speaker, at my home community, and I know that 

through this surtax we raise almost as much through this surtax, 

and have for many years, as what we do in revenue sharing. The 

revenue-sharing grants that come from the provincial government 

to the municipal government — those amounts are almost equal. 

And I note specifically that Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. is listed in 

here and that affects my home community. And I note that 

Saskatoon Chemicals Ltd. is listed in here and that will affect that 

community. And I know that Ipsco is listed and that may affect 

this community. But the discretion is wide because cabinet has the 

ability now, if this Bill is passed, to say in any community in 

Saskatchewan that a large user of gas and of electricity are exempt 

from that surtax. 

 

And I have some questions of this Bill, and I have some  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3967 
 

 

 

questions of this government because I don’t believe, in my 

consultation with just a few municipal elected officials, that 

they’re aware of what’s happening. And I say that if they aren’t, it 

was the responsibility of this government to make sure that they 

were. I don’t believe that’s happened. 

 

And I think what’s happening here is that this government is 

trying to sneak yet another tax increase through, place another 

burden on municipal government, and in the end result, place 

more taxes on the people that live in those jurisdictions. 

 

We’ve seen the cut-backs of the transfer taxes or the transfer of 

provincial tax dollars to the municipal governments. We’ve seen 

that already. That’s been a burden. And I say that this Bill is just 

another example of trying to slide something through, slip another 

tax on to the back of the people, and I would say it’s unfair. 

 

I say as well that the Premier has got a responsibility that he hasn’t 

lived up to. He promised us lower taxes. And this Bill doesn’t 

address lower taxes, it addresses increased taxes. Why would this 

government want to shift yet more tax burden on lower- and 

middle-income people and exempt the large, multinational 

corporations from these taxes? Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand 

that, and my colleagues don’t understand that. 

 

I know, in the city of Regina, that there are about $14 million 

raised through this surtax, and I know that their revenue-sharing 

grants are about equal to that, and I know that they can’t afford to 

lose even a portion of this 14 million. And I don’t know what the 

breakdown would be in Regina of industrial users that might be 

exempted — I don’t know — because this Bill doesn’t set any 

guide-lines as to which industrial users might be exempt. It only 

says that the cabinet has the ability to exempt anybody they want. 

And I wonder if perhaps half of this might— this 14 million that’s 

raised now — might be exempt. 

 

What would that cost and what would that mean to the increase of 

the mill rate in the city of Regina? How much more would it mean 

for people, for their taxes at home? Well we don’t know because 

there are no limits and no guide-lines to this Bill. It just said that 

the Premier and his cabinet can decide how much more those 

people are taxed and I say its unfair. 

 

We saw in Prince Albert, in the agreement for sale that was made 

with Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington, that they were 

exempted from buying natural gas from the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, which meant they could buy at the cheapest rate 

going at the time. And if it happened to be Sask Power 

Corporation, they could buy from them as well, but that was all 

fine and dandy. 

 

But what it meant was there wasn’t a fair playing field and that all 

of the people of Prince Albert would share in whatever price of 

natural gas that there was at that time. But there was preferential 

treatment for one group of people — and they didn’t live in 

Saskatchewan because the shareholders of Tacoma, Washington 

don’t live in this community — but there was one set of rules for 

them and there was one for the rest of the people of Prince Albert.  

And what it meant was that the people of Prince Albert will pay 

more and that Weyerhaeuser can shop around. 

 

That wasn’t the reason that SPC (Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation) was set up because it was there to give us all a fair 

rate and it was there to give us all a fair average rate. When the 

prices were high, we would all share, and when the prices were 

low, we would all share — but not meaning that when the prices 

are high for SPC gas, that one particular group could go and shop 

around and buy somewhere else. That was set up to have a spirit 

of co-operation, to have a fair price for all, as fair as could be 

gotten. 

 

And this one has gone one step further. It’s made it so that home 

owners will pay more every time they turn their toaster on, so that 

they will pay more every time they plug their car in in the winter; 

and there’s only preferential treatment to some — those that have 

lost. And I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s an unfair Bill, and for that reason 

I couldn’t feel comfortable supporting this legislation. 

 

As I look through the list of Bills that have been presented to this 

legislature in the last few days, it makes me sad because I don’t 

see fairness form the government side, I don’t see fairness at all. I 

see a double set of standards. 

 

In the electoral boundaries Act that they’re presenting, I see one 

standard for the Tories and one for other political parties, and I see 

that’s what the end result of that Bill is going to be. And we’ve 

seen the history of that before. And in this Bill I see one set of 

standards for people who have lived in this province for years and 

years and years and supported this province through their tax 

dollars, and I see one for the rich. It tells me that this government’s 

philosophy is no different than other Tory governments, wherever 

they may be, and it saddens me. 

 

One of my colleagues said earlier this afternoon that she thought 

perhaps more of this government . . . And it might be a new type 

of a Tory government. But I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a new Tory 

government. It’s the same old Tory government from 3, 400 years 

ago, and I would suggest that it will be the same old Tory 

government that we’ll see maybe 200 years from now because I 

don’t think we’ll see one in Saskatchewan for, maybe not 200, but 

at least another 50. 

 

And I simply say, this is bad legislation for the people of the 

province and I can’t support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to this Bill 

77, An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act — might well 

be called the Weyerhaeuser municipal tax exemption Act or a 

number of other similar titles. 

 

This Bill has a number of objectionable provisions. I’m going to 

identify some so that we’ll have an opportunity to deal with them 

in committee. 

 

I want to deal first with the way that the major consumers of 

electrical and gas energy from the power corporation pay their 

bills, how the bills are set, and whether or not anybody knows 

what they pay. We had a public utilities  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3968 
 

 

 

review commission which set rates in public. That was dismantled 

by the government opposite. They provide in this Bill as a 

substitute that there shall be a schedule of rates which they will 

publish. And that’s reasonable. If we’re not going to have a public 

utilities review commission, there will be a schedule so that people 

will know what the rate is and they’ll know that they’re paying the 

same as somebody else. 

 

But there’s a further provision that they can enter into particular 

service agreements with particular customers. They can make a 

rate different than the schedule and there is no provision that that 

agreement or any part of it would ever be made public. 

Accordingly they can have rates with their favourites which are 

not subject to the public utilities review commission, because 

that’s gone; which are not subject to the schedule, because while 

the schedule is published, the particular agreements with the 

favourites are not. And I think that’s unwise because while there 

may be a case for special agreements for special cases, it strikes 

me that if the schedules of rates are going to be public property, so 

should at least the rate provisions of the special agreements with 

the special friends. 

 

I move on now to another set of changes in the Bill which 

provides that the power corporation can purchase companies 

which carry on any sort of business. Previously, the power 

corporation can purchase companies which carry on any sort of 

business. Previously, the power corporation could have a 

subsidiary company, but the company had to carry on activities 

and objectives of the same kind that the power corporation carried 

on. 

 

(1945) 

 

Now it will be entirely possible for the power corporation to buy a 

company that’s in the grocery business, in the restaurant business, 

any other kind of business, and there is no legal requirement that it 

have anything to do with the operation of a power corporation. 

That has not been necessary over the close to 40 years of operation 

of the power corporation, and another 20 or 30 years of the 

operation of its predecessor, the power commission. More than 

close to 60 years now this commission and corporation have 

operated with a general set of powers, broadly defined in the 

legislation. 

 

It has never needed an unlimited power to, in private, purchase 

companies that are carrying on any type of business form bingo 

palaces to restaurants to any other type of business activity. And 

no case has been made for it, certainly not in second reading, and 

certainly we will want the minister to make a case in committee. 

 

But the major objection that I have is to the provisions dealing 

with exemptions from tax. We are talking about payments to 

cities, towns, and villages. For many years The Power Corporation 

Act has provided that payments would be made to cities, towns, 

and villages by way of a surcharge on electrical bills, and that has 

been the arrangement for a long time. 

 

The government opposite has wanted to make special 

arrangements for some of its friends before, and it proposed in 

1985 to bring in legislation — indeed, it put it on the order paper 

— providing that the Lieutenant  

Governor in Council could exempt individual customers of the 

power corporation from municipal taxes. 

 

I remember contacting the city of Regina, and they wrote back 

saying they were very disturbed about that. I have a letter from 

Mr. Larry Schneider, addressed to the Hon. Eric Berntson, the 

member for Souris-Cannington, dated September 23, 1985, and I 

will not quote the whole letter because it’s fairly lengthy, but it 

goes on: 

 

We are extremely concerned about the generality of the 

proposed amendment. The long-term ramifications to the 

city are a major loss of revenue and also the foreboding 

threat to our municipal autonomy in that it gives the 

provincial government the direct ability to reduce municipal 

revenues by regulations which do not provide the open 

legislative review which should accompany this type of 

action. 

 

That’s a pretty fair statement by the mayor of Regina. 

 

I had — I don’t have it here — but I know that the then president 

of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), Mr. 

Herb Taylor of Moose Jaw, expressed similar concerns. I’m going 

to ask the minister whether or not he has consulted SUMA and 

whether or not he has consulted the civic governments of Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Prince Albert about this Bill. 

 

The Bill specifically provides that Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. will 

not have to pay the tax to the city of Prince Albert. Why 

Weyerhaeuser should be exempt from tax, when everybody else 

has to pay tax, is not very clear. It provides that Saskatoon 

Chemicals Ltd. in Saskatoon will not have to pay this municipal 

tax. Why Saskatoon Chemicals Ltd. should be exempt from 

municipal tax, as opposed to any other of a number of potential 

taxpayers, I don’t know. No case has been made for tax exemption 

for these operations. 

 

There’s a reference to Ipsco. As far as I know, Ipsco is not yet 

within the city of Regina, so this is not now directly appropriate, 

directly effective, but as the mayor of Regina said in 1985, the 

insidious thing about this is that it means that the government, by 

order in council, can exempt any industrial customer from this 

municipal tax without the city knowing anything about it, without 

them being able to even argue about it, without them being able to 

budget for the tax loss. Nothing to stop the government opposite 

from passing an order in council on February 1 exempting a half a 

dozen industrial customers in Regina from paying this municipal 

tax. A little tough for the city to roll with that punch. 

 

If they do it effective on May 1 when the city has already set its 

budget, nothing can be done because the city, while it is a tax 

going to the city, has no voice — has no voice. As the mayor of 

Regina says: 

 

It provides the foreboding threat to our municipal autonomy 

in that it gives the provincial government the direct ability to 

reduce municipal revenues by regulation. 

 

That ought not to be. That’s bad legislation, and I believe  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3969 
 

 

 

that the government should, in the committee stage, fully justify 

why they should be able to exempt some particular customer of 

SPC from paying municipal tax and thereby putting the burden on 

the rest of us. We shouldn’t for one moment think that if 

Weyerhaeuser pays no tax it doesn’t mean higher taxes to the 

other citizens of Prince Albert, because it assuredly does. We 

shouldn’t think for a moment that if Saskatoon chemicals doesn’t 

pay tax, and if the government decides that a half a dozen other 

friends of the government shouldn’t pay tax in Saskatoon, that the 

general citizenry won’t have to pay more; they will. And if they 

provide exemptions for people in Regina, I and my constituency 

will have to pay higher taxes. And no case has been made. That, I 

think, is bad legislation, and I will certainly oppose it. 

 

Just before I sit down, I will refer to one other principle in the Bill 

which deals with what happens when power lines and gas line are 

injured by, I’ll say, a contractor. And there is an unfortunate 

provision in the Bill which provides that the corporation is 

conclusively deemed to have accurately located a power line or a 

buried electrical cable. 

 

I don’t think there’s any place in this type of legislation for giving 

the power corporation special rights before the courts. Power 

corporation is quite able to look after itself. It’s got money. It’s got 

lawyers. And when dealing with the public and litigating with the 

public about damage if buried power and gas lines are hit, it 

should stand on the same footing as any other citizen and 

shouldn’t have special rights. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other, I think, a number of 

objectionable provisions in this Bill, particularly the one offering 

municipal tax exemptions to major industrial users. I will be 

asking questions in committee, I or my colleagues, and I will be 

opposing the Bill on second reading. 

 

(2003) 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 28 

 

Muller Sauder 

Duncan Johnson 

Andrew McLaren 

Taylor Hopfner 

Swan Petersen 

Maxwell Swenson 

Hodgins Martens 

Gerich Baker 

Hardy Gleim 

Klein Neudorf 

Meiklejohn Gardner 

Pickering Kopelchuk 

Martin Saxinger 

Toth Britton 

 

Nays — 16 

 

Blakeney Upshall 

Prebble Simard 

 

Brockelbank Solomon 

Shillington Atkinson 

Koskie Anguish 

Tchorzewski Lautermilch 

Rolfes Trew 

Mitchell Koenker 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 94 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act (No. 2) 

be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

continue the debate on the Bill introduced by the Conservative 

government earlier this week. Bill 94, An Act to amend the 

Medical Care Insurance Commission of Saskatchewan, in fact, is 

an Act to destroy the Medical Care Insurance Commission. Before 

addressing the issues raised by the Bill itself, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to make one brief comment about the circumstances 

surrounding the introduction of this Bill. 

 

Several months ago the Progressive Conservative government 

made it clear that they were setting out to erode and undermine 

medicare. They made that very clear. They also made it clear that 

they were planning on destroying the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission. Why then, Mr. Speaker, why then when they 

indicated in May of 1987 that they were going to roll the Medical 

Care Insurance Commission into the Department of Health, why 

did it take until 106 days into the session to introduce this Bill? By 

introducing a Bill such as this only after day 106, are they the ones 

that are trying to prolong this session, or are they simply trying to 

sneak through a Bill that they know is extremely controversial? 

 

I listened with considerable interest to the remarks of the minister 

when he introduced the Bill yesterday. And his speech was quite 

brief. I was surprised that it took only three and one-half minutes 

to explain an important and complex Bill. But then, this is the 

same minister that only took two and one-half minutes to explain 

the changes to the prescription drug plan, a drug plan that 

destroyed the former prescription drug plan in this province. He 

must be pretty ashamed and embarrassed by the truth if he can 

only spend three and a half minutes explaining the Bill; he must be 

ashamed and embarrassed. And as I listened to his speech, I noted 

particularly what the minister did not say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was 25 years ago this year that a New Democrat 

government introduced medicare in this province, and with that 

medicare came along the introduction of the Saskatchewan 

Medical Care Insurance Commission. And with that commission 

has come a lot of accomplishments, in the last 25 years, when it 

comes to the enhancement of health care services to our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear now. It’s pretty clear that this 

government is out to undermine and erode our health care system 

in our province; that it is now clear, based on  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3970 
 

 

 

the evidence that the government has shown in the last year, that 

health care in this province is not a priority of this government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they choose to ignore the achievements of the 

past. Instead, they choose to undermine and erode our health care 

system, and it seems to us that they are stumbling backwards, 

blinded by their ideology, rather than the real challenges that face 

us in the coming future. 

 

The minister, in the last year, has made no comments when it 

comes to a commitment that there will be no health care premiums 

in our province. He’s made no comments whatsoever. Or has he 

said that he plans on ensuring that deterrent fees in this province 

are never introduced? No, he has made no commitments when it 

comes to that. What he has done, Mr. Speaker, is introduce 

changes to our health care system that are taking us backward in 

time, and we say that the decision to roll the Medical Care 

Insurance Commission into the Department of Health is a 

backward decision; it is not a decision that will take us forward. 

 

Now it seems to us that it is clear that with this new legislation that 

the Medical Care Insurance Commission and the kind of function 

that it performed in the past will no longer be an independent 

function. As we all know, the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission was an independent commission, and it had an 

effective independence from the government. 

 

With the changes to the legislation, that function is now put into 

the hands of the Minister of Health and the Minister of Health 

alone. Mr. Speaker, we are concerned that the Minister of Health, 

along with his colleagues, will be making decisions that are of 

utmost importance to the medical profession in this province 

behind closed cabinet doors. 

 

Now this Bill before us, Mr. Speaker, eliminates entirely the 

obligation on the part of the government to establish an appeal 

procedure for persons with claims against the plan. Medicare is a 

large and complex program. It touches the lives of hundreds of 

thousands of people in this province, and it touches their lives each 

year. And there obviously are problems in the system, but those 

problems should be resolved fairly with a fair appeal process. This 

Bill eliminates that process altogether. That’s hardly an 

administrative change, as the Minister of Health has tried to 

indicate to this legislature. 

 

This Bill also sets up a system of a joint professional review 

committee, and it’s not like the former joint professional review 

committee. What we need, Mr. Speaker, is a committee that will 

represent the interests of the people of this province. And the 

doctors have a great deal of concern, and the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association has a great deal of concern with the changes 

to the article in the Bill that affects the joint professional review 

committee. 

 

As it’s now structured, the committee looks at concerns that have 

been expressed by the public and others when it comes to 

over-billing by physicians. In the past, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association did not  

seem to have any problems with the way that committee 

functioned. Unfortunately, with the changes to the legislation, a 

doctor can be fined up to $50,000 if the committee believes that 

that doctor has irregular billing procedures, or if that doctor, in the 

committee’s view, has overcharged. 

 

Now the concern that the Saskatchewan Medical Association has 

is that the appeal process is only to a Court of Queen’s Bench 

judge, and the appeal on the part of the doctor can only be based 

on a point of law. It is not based on a point of fact; it is not based 

on evidence that may not have come before the appeal committee 

or the joint professional review committee when the decision was 

rendered. And now we have a situation where the doctor 

conceivably could go to a Court of Queen’s Bench judge, and on 

the basis that the committee has not erred on a point of law, that 

perhaps the committee erred on a point of fact, the Court of 

Queen’s Bench judge would not have to hear the case. And that 

causes the Saskatchewan Medical Association a great deal of 

concern, and it causes the members of the opposition a great deal 

of concern. 

 

We also are concerned, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association was advised by the Minister of Health that 

they would have at least two weeks to review the draft legislation. 

But that didn’t happen at all. The Saskatchewan Medical 

Association was advised last Wednesday that this legislation was 

coming before the legislature. They received a copy of the Bill on 

Friday, and they met with representatives from the government on 

Sunday. And they are concerned, Mr. Speaker, that they have not 

had an opportunity to properly consult their association and 

members of their association. They are meeting this weekend, and 

they have a paper ready to present to their members, and we now 

have this Bill before the legislature. 

 

Some consultation, members opposite, some consultation! And the 

consultative process that you have used is entirely indicative of the 

kinds of changes that you’ve introduced in the past, with no 

consultation with the groups involved, and no consultation with 

the public. 

 

We also have a concern, Mr. Speaker, that the Medical Care 

Insurance Commission over the last 25 years has been able to 

build up one of the most impressive data bases in the world. We 

have 25 years of data available in this province, and researchers 

and scientists and sociologists have been able to use some of that 

research to show some very significant trends. 

 

(2015) 

 

We are concerned that with the roll-over of the Medical Care 

Insurance Commission into the Department of Health, that that 

data base and the information collection that has gone on for the 

past 25 years could be jeopardized. We see no provisions in this 

legislation to ensure that the data base will be protected and not 

eroded by the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Medical Care Insurance Commission has been an 

independent body. It has been independent from the members 

opposite. It has been independent from cabinet decisions and the 

Minister of Health. We  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3971 
 

 

 

now fear that with the roll-over of MCIC into the Department of 

Health that we could very well have a situation where political 

appointees could be put into positions in . . . and have access to the 

health records of the people of this province. And we do not think 

that’s appropriate. 

 

We do not think it’s appropriate that any member of the public — 

including elected officials and Conservative Party hacks — have 

access to anybody’s personal health record. No one, Mr. speaker. 

It is not acceptable, and there are no guarantees in this legislation 

that we will not have the Minister of Health — or whoever else 

represents the interests of the Conservative Party — looking at 

peoples’ personal health records in this province. There’s no 

guarantees in this legislation. And it’s a fear that we have with the 

Minister of Health now being responsible for the largest data base 

in the country and in the world, with the largest amount of 

information of any place else in the world. 

 

I think it’s important to know that everybody in this province who 

has seen a doctor or has some sort of medical procedure in the last 

25 years has that recorded with the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission, and it is not inconceivable that some members 

opposite might want to have access to someone’s medical records. 

They weren’t able to do that in the past because the commission 

was independent. They may, and I say “may” be able to do that in 

the future because there are no safeguards in this legislation to 

protect the public from their kind of tactics that we’ve all seen. 

 

Now we have a great deal of concern about this Bill. We are not 

happy with the way it has been implemented. It’s a major change 

to the way things operate in this province. It was introduced into 

this legislature at the dying hours of this legislative session. We’ve 

had very little opportunity to discuss it with our advisers and 

people in the medical profession. And at this stage, Mr. Speaker, 

we can do nothing other than to oppose this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words about 

the amendments to the medical care insurance commission Act. 

 

First of all, Mr. speaker, my first words have to be that the title of 

this Act is a real misnomer. It should be, as my colleague has 

indicated, it really should be the abolishment of MCIC (Medical 

Care Insurance Commission). That’s really what it should be 

because that’s what the Act is intending to do. 

 

It is too bad, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill has been brought in so late 

in the House. This is a very, very substantive Bill, and it changes 

the role that MCIC has had in this province as an independent 

commission. 

 

I think my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana has expressed it very 

well. We should really protect with some vigour the safeguards of 

MCIC. And I want to just relate to the House that when I was the 

minister of Health, MCIC functioned very independently of the 

department. And I think everybody was aware of that, and it was  

jealously protected — and so it should be — because it came with 

the original agreement of medicare in 1962. 

 

I just challenge anybody in this House who’s had a problem as of 

late, anywhere from let say this summer on, to try and get a 

problem solved through MCIC. It is in a very chaotic state at the 

present time, and you simply cannot get your problem solved 

through MCIC at this particular time. That is not the way MCIC 

has functioned over the last 25 years. It has served the province 

well; it has served the doctors well; it has served and protected our 

rights well. 

 

I think the member form Nutana makes an excellent point also 

about confidentiality of our records. If it is put into the Department 

of Health, there is a great possibility that that confidentiality 

simply will not be protected, and I think that should be a concern 

of each member of this House and each member of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not want to unduly delay the procedure in this 

House, but I do think that it is a shame that this Bill has been 

brought forward in the last few days, and that we haven’t had the 

ample opportunity to check with people outside of this Assembly 

to get their concerns put before us so that we could adequately 

debate the consequences of this Bill in this House. I am therefore 

disappointed that it has been brought forward so late. I know the 

time schedule that we are on, and I very reluctantly let the Bill go 

through at this particular time. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d be pleased to 

introduce the officials that will be with me tonight as we debate 

the Bill in committee. Seated beside me is the president of the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, Otto Cutts. 

Directly behind me is the corporate secretary of the corporation, 

Ken Brehm, and joining us tonight is the Crown solicitor from the 

Department of Justice, Larry Anderson. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if I could put a 

series of questions to you which you could then perhaps speak on. 

In the initial stages, the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation was created by order in council, and I wonder what 

the order in council didn’t permit, or why the order in council was 

necessary to deal with the problem as the minister saw it, rather 

than the legislation, the statute? In other words, why was the order 

in council necessary? Why was it necessary to change form the 

department to the Crown corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I guess if you want to know why we  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3972 
 

 

 

went OC rather legislation at the time, I suppose we were setting 

up a legal entity, so therefore there had to be an order in council to 

do that. We wanted to move to a property management 

corporation, and it was quicker to go with an OC than to wait for 

the legislature and bring in the Bill. 

 

So if that is the basis of your question, if the basis of your question 

is what was the thought behind it, why we should go with the 

property management corporation, I’d refer back to the statements 

I made in second reading and some of the debates we had in 

estimates. But if it is the first part, if I interpret your question right, 

then that would be the reason for an order in council. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — What does the Bill do, which is before us 

now; what does it permit that the OC wouldn’t permit you to do, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I guess the main reason is, as you will 

understand, for the long-term basis of the corporation it’s 

necessary to have legislation. The OC was more of an interim type 

of decision or legal status for the corporation until we could bring 

forth the Bill for debate and discussion. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, why was it necessary to put 

everything that was in the Department of supply and Services into 

the property management corporation? You made . . . you alluded 

to Manitoba as being the example of how it would be done. And I 

can understand why the province of Manitoba would be partially 

comparable to what is done in Saskatchewan, but the government 

services department continues to exist in Manitoba which, at least 

according to the most recent information I have, which is a 

substantial part of our Supply and Services which is now going 

into this Bill to become an Act. Why? 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I guess in answer to your question it would 

be that it was a decision made by the cabinet, feeling that having 

looked at Manitoba, British Columbia, Quebec, and going on the 

advice of the Auditor General of Canada — and I believe they’re 

similar in the United States, too — where they felt that all of the 

functions, as Manitoba has the borrowing function, as British 

Columbia and, I believe, Quebec have the building . . . the 

buildings, the supervision of the building and so on, that it was our 

decision to wrap it all into one. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Which brings to the fore the question which 

really arose with the consequential Bill, which is not before us at 

this moment, but a question of some functions remaining in 

Supply and Services. Was that an oversight, Mr. Minister, or is 

there an explanation why part of the systems centre is still there 

with eight or 10 people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think, for expediency, I have the reply to 

the questions asked of me today in question period, which is the 

consequential amendments from the Act, and, Mr. Chairman, with 

your permission, I will give that answer now. 

 

We will be going through Committee of the Whole on the 

consequential amendments. If it’s right that I should wait till then, 

I will wait till then, but if it’s accepted practice in the House for 

me to give the answer at this time, I would give it to the member. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The minister can ask for leave. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would ask leave to answer the questions as 

put to me in question period which pertain to the consequential 

amendments of the Act, so that in my discussion and debate with 

the member, we’ll deal with it once. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Agreed. Get on with the job. Quit stalling. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well thank you very much. I appreciate that. 

It’s very nice to see the member from Regina being co-operative 

tonight. That seems to be a very good signal. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well I thought you were never going to 

quit. It was going to take you all evening to ask for leave. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well it will take longer if you continue to 

chirp. 

 

The question was, why is The Public Works Act being retained. 

That was the question that the member asked, and my answer to 

that is that the Legislative Building and the lands within Wascana 

Centre will not be transferred to the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation. Rather, ownership will remain with the 

executive government, a department as defined under The 

government Organization Act, and legislative authority — that’s 

The Public Works Act — is required for that department to 

administer the building and the land. So basically it’s the place 

we’re in today, then, and that’s why, in answer to you, requires 

The Public Works Act. 

 

The second question you asked was, with the repeal of the Supply 

and Services Act, what happens to the employees from systems 

centre who were said to be remaining within the Department of 

Supply and Services estimates the other night in Hansard. And my 

apology if maybe I didn’t explain this as well. Really they are 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 

employees, and all the employees of the systems centre, Supply 

and Services, were transferred to property management 

corporation as of April 1, ’87. The majority of these employees 

were then transferred to SaskCOMP, and there’s about 13, is the 

number. I think there was a little discrepancy the other night in 

that. I think I quoted 11 or nine or something. Thirteen in total 

who continue to be employed by the property management 

corporation. And if I insinuated to you that they were Supply and 

Services, my apologies because there was no intent to mislead. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, that, Mr. Minister, is what the record 

showed, that they were left in Supply and Services. And I 

understand the point you’re making now that they stay in property 

management corporation; the rest went on to SaskTel or 

SaskCOMP — SaskCOMP. 

 

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3973 
 

 

 

Further, with regard to the Bill, I realize this particular Bill is a Bill 

to permit the continuation of the property management corporation 

in all its aspects. However some of those aspects have changed, 

and I want to refer to one 3(2), clause 3(2): 

 

The corporation shall consist of those persons who may be 

appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

Why is the world “may” used, and how many people are we 

talking about here? Is there . . . will that be at the discretion of the 

board or the minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials indicate to me that the word 

“may” is in there because that is just a drafting style. I think you’re 

talking about the members of the board of the property 

management corporation, and at this point in time, I happen to be 

the chairman of that, and other of my colleagues, other ministers 

who I hope are — I think you know who the members are; if you 

don’t, I’d be more than pleased to indicate to you — are the board 

of the property management corporation. 

 

Getting back to the “may,” the solicitor tells me that that’s just a 

drafting term that they have used. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — So the effect of the clause is that they 

“shall” be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council and 

that’s the way it’s set out in the draft. Okay, Mr. Minister, I’ll 

permit you to name those in case some of those have been 

changed. I realize you’re the minister in charge, but I know there 

are some other members on the board. 

 

If I can go on to the next item, the question of head office. The OC 

specified Regina and the legislation is non-specific. Why is that 

changed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The other members of the board are my seat 

mate and Minister of Finance, Mr. Lane; the Minister of Health, 

Mr. McLeod; and the Minister of Education, Mr. Hepworth. And I 

think that you realize that the latter two ministers are ministers of 

line departments which are the largest consumers of capital 

projects. 

 

As far as specifying just in Saskatchewan or not specifically 

Regina, I guess just gives flexibility to whatever may happen at 

some point in time. We have seen decentralization by our 

government, with crop insurance moving to Melville and 

agriculture credit corporation to Swift Current. I’m not saying 

we’re moving the seat of the property management office but that 

flexibility is allowed within the Act. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — By asking that question, Mr. Minister, I 

didn’t mean to give you a platform on which to talk about 

decentralization. However, it’s too late to stop you now. 

 

With regard to superannuation and other plans in clause 11, the 

employees were covered under certain plans, and this particular 

clause is a continuation of the coverage in all its aspects, not 

diminished nor enlarged? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No change. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay. The powers of the corporation in 12 

— is there any increase in the power over what existed in the 

Department of Supply and Services or in the Crown corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Basically the powers would be the same, the 

same as the OC. But as we look at the difference between the Act 

that we’re putting in now and the old Supply and Service, there is 

an extension of powers, and that is the whole thing of long-term 

financing and the lending of money to third parties for capital 

construction. That’s basically the difference. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — That power, Mr. Minister, is — you may 

give examples — as contained essentially in sub (m) — 12(1), sub 

(m) or other sections too. Perhaps you could identify those, where 

the main powers are expanded. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you have your Act there, we’ll go through 

these. I am advised that (l) is an expansion of powers that were not 

there before and that (o) is an expansion, and then (m) and 

subsection (2) and subsection (3) are standard to any Crown 

corporation. But they are new to . . . as you look back to Supply 

and Services. 

 

So in summary, (l) and (o) would be the expansion of powers, (m); 

(2) and (3) would be also an expansion but standard to Crown 

corporations. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, some time ago we had some 

discussion about the year end for the corporation, and the way it 

was set out in the order in council and where it is now set out in 

the proposed legislation, the Bill. And at the time we discussed it 

previously, you said the first report of the Crown corporation will 

be a year and five days. And I want to find out if in fact, if you 

adhere to that, or are you suggesting, upon reviewing it, it will be 

three months and five days, because the calendar year end is 

March 31? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The first report as reported to me — or 

indicated here by the officials — is from March 26 of ’96 to 

March 31 of 7, so that would be a year and five days. And then 

following that, would be like any normal Crown corporation that 

would be debated and discussed in Crown Corporations 

Committee in the year under review. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay. Then while the report may be a year 

and five days, the only time it was active during that year and five 

days was the three months and five days, from the last five days in 

December until the end of March. Prior to that time it was created 

but there was no function carried on it. 

 

I’m trying to find out, Mr. Minister, when the Department of 

Supply and Services ceased and when the Crown corporation 

started de facto. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Supply and Services is still in effect  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3974 
 

 

 

until we pass the consequential amendments in this Act. But I 

think what you’re wanting to know is when did we cease doing 

business as Supply and Services and when did we start doing 

business as SPMC. And I think the best date for that indication 

would be March 31 of ’87. And there were the five days when we 

did a few things there. That was on the capital side in ’86. But I 

guess, if I understand what you’re wanting, March 31, ’87, is 

when she really kicked into gear as SPMC. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — So in other words, the department and the 

Crown corporation existed for a period of time together. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well in actual fact, until we pass this, the 

department is still there in name, but in actual practice it would be 

from March 31 on, that things have been conducted under the 

structure of the SPMC. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s interesting but 

unnecessary from my point of view. However, that is the decision 

that the government has made, and I think that the decisions which 

the Executive Council made with regard to this corporation being 

created are ones which they bear the responsibility for, I suppose. 

And I don’t suppose they’re denying that. 

 

However, the concerns that this creates for me, and for the 

legislature is that we have some difficulty with an information gap 

that the minister acknowledges each time he responds to a 

question in question period, or in Crown corporations, or 

wherever, about a period of time where it’s difficult to know what 

was happening in Supply and Services and what was happening in 

the new Crown corporation. 

 

I said, we believe it is unnecessary because other provinces have 

their functions out in the open where they can be dealt with in the 

legislature, whereas with Crown corporations we are dealing with 

them after the fact — after the fact. So in effect the minister is 

drawing a thin veil in front of some of the operations of the 

Department of Supply and Services, in fact all of the operations of 

Supply and Services. 

 

We have the opportunity in the Department of Supply and 

Services to examine the estimates of the department. We do not 

have that opportunity with regard to Crown corporations. And we 

should at least have the opportunity to examine what other 

provinces examine in their legislature, in a department. However, 

that’s beside the . . . by the way because the minister has made his 

mind up that he’s going ahead with the legislation. However, we 

will see how the legislation operates. 

 

I do wish that the minister would speed up his response to the 

questions that I have asked about staff. I don’t accept for a 

moment that the minister doesn’t know who’s in the different 

positions in the corporation, who’s running the operation. when 

you’ve got over $140 million operation going on, and in effect we 

have to sweat the information out of the minister a bit at a time, 

that’s not the way it should be done. 

 

I recognize if the minister was to send over a list of the people that 

are running the corporation and responsible  

for it, that it’s an interim list. The minister doesn’t need to keep the 

list hidden in his inside coat pocket. It should be the subject of 

discussion in this legislature so that we know who’s who in the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. I cannot 

support the minister on this; however, I suppose the minister is 

destined to go ahead. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well as I indicated in the estimates, what 

the final decision on the staffing and the position has not been 

made yet, other than the president who is permanent, the other 

ones are all acting. And when those decisions are made, I’d be 

more than pleased to share them with the member from the 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has no reason 

for not sending over who’s acting in different positions. From time 

to time within government or Crown corporations we have people 

acting. If the president of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is 

gone, we know who the acting president is. And if somebody in a 

department is acting, we know who’s acting in the position. And I 

see no reason why we shouldn’t have the acting positions if the 

minister can’t supply us with the fixed and permanent positions. I 

see no reason for that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I thought you had received the acting ones 

following the estimates. If you haven’t you’ll have them tomorrow 

morning. I have no reason to not show you that. The only thing is 

that I want you to understand they are acting and there may be 

some changes in the structure of the corporation, as I said in 

estimates. There may be some changes in the functions that certain 

personnel do. However, if it’s your request — and I sense that it is 

— that you’d like those acting positions, we’ll have those to you 

in the morning. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The Minister of Tourism and Small Business: 

 

Amend clause 22(a) of the printed Bill by striking out “for” 

in the last line. 

 

Clause 22 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 23 agreed to. 

 

Clause 24 

 

Mr. Chairman: — There’s a House amendment to section 24 of 

the printed Bill, moved by the Minister of Tourism and Small 

Business: 

 

Amend subsection 24(2) of the printed Bill by striking out 

“for” in the first line and substituting, “notwithstanding any 

other Act or law, for.” 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I gather these 

are typographical errors, or do you have a computer that has a 

“for” fetish? could you explain the second one,  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3975 
 

 

 

the second explanation there, the for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The new word is in there to indicate or to 

make sure that the Acts do not restrict other public institutions 

from entering to the financial arrangements with the corporation. 

That’s why the “notwithstanding any other Act or law.” The “for” 

perhaps must be some typo error. 

 

Clause 24 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 25 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I have a question with regard 

to 25. Am I correct in assuming that the exclusion here, 

“subsection (1) does not apply to,” and then it goes on with (a) (i) 

(ii) and (b), has to do with the Legislative Building and the 

Wascana Centre Authority and their jurisdiction in this area, and 

this reference to the Legislative Building is retained in The Public 

Works Act. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, this pertains to the Legislative Building 

and lands in the Wascana Centre. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, just a little further. It pertains 

to the legislative buildings and/or all legislative buildings within 

Wascana Centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, just this building here. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just this building. 

 

Clause 25 agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 agreed to. 

 

Clause 27 

 

Mr. Chairman: — House amendment moved by the Minister of 

Tourism and Small Business: 

 

To add the following section after section 27 of the printed 

Bill: 

 

References: 

 

28 A reference in any Act, or in any regulation, order, 

resolution, bylaw, or other instrument made in the 

execution of a power given by statute, or in any document 

to: 

 

(a) the Deputy Minister of Government Services or the 

Deputy Minister of Supply and Services is deemed to be a 

reference to the chief executive officer of Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation;  

 

(b) the Department of Government Services or the 

department of Supply and Services is deemed to be a 

reference to the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. 

 

Renumbering section 28 of the printed Bill as section 29. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I haven’t had a chance to 

examine this very closely, but am I correct in assuming this is a 

consequential on the Bill that’s before us, in effect? Perhaps you 

could enlarge on the purpose of that section. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the best way to describe this is a very 

cautious housekeeping insertion so that if there’s any law or Act or 

whatever may be out there that refers to deputy minister of 

government services or deputy minister of Supply and Services, 

that it is spelled out within this Act. That is, in case the chief 

officer of the property management Crown, or if it should say 

Department of government services or supply and Services, it then 

is deemed to be Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 

So I guess my best way of describing, as I said, was a cautious and 

careful housekeeping amendment. 

 

Clause 27 as amended agreed to. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman. I don’t want to bridge the 

arrangements that are made by the House Leader but if we want to 

go ahead with 81 that’s okay with me. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. 

 

Clause 28 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

(2100) 

 

Bill No. 81 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I wonder if 

the minister could say a few words about the Queen’s Printer, and 

its relationship within this department. I have some knowledge of 

how the Queen’s Printer was in relation to the other functions of 

the government a number of years ago, but I don’t know at this 

point. Could the minister explain that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I understand that the function is the same as 

it has always been, publishing the gazette, Acts and publications; 

that there virtually is no change from when it was part of Supply 

and Services. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Are the functions of the Queen’s Printer the 

same? The Queen’s Printer dispersed the printing of the 

government to either Saskatchewan Government Printing or 

private printers in the past. Is that essentially the same function of 

the Queen’s Printer now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I understand that that was changed some 

time ago to be a function of the purchasing agent and not the 

Queen’s Printer. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Then perhaps the minister could explain the 

duties of the Queen’s Printer now. 

 



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3976 
 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I believe the changes made in 1981 and 

since that, the function hasn’t been changed at all, and that is 

basically the publications of the Acts and the gazettes. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to apologize to the Deputy premier. 

He will note that I had quick questions, but the minister’s answers 

were slower. Consequently it took more time than I thought it 

would take. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I’d like to thank the 

officials and thank the member from Saskatoon for his questions. 

 

Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting the repeal of The Agricultural 

Research Funding Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I have a 

number of comments to make on this Bill. I think that there are 

basically two issues when it comes to Bill 58, the Bill to repeat 

The Agricultural Research Funding Act. And those two issues 

quite simply are misrepresentation of the facts and 

mismanagement. And it’s for those two reasons that we have this 

Bill presented tonight. 

 

And I refer to the remarks made by the Acting Minister of 

Agriculture this afternoon when he commented on this legislation, 

and he said that the Saskatchewan agricultural research fund had 

the limitation of only being able to finance projects of one year 

period of time, whereas the ADF (agricultural development fund), 

the agricultural development fund, can authorize longer-term 

research projects. That just simply is not true. And he, having 

served as Minister of Agriculture before the ADF was introduced 

and when it was introduced, should know this, of all people. 

 

We can look at any of the annual reports for the agricultural 

research fund. I’m looking at the one from 1984-85 right now. 

And we can note that there was a project, for example, for 

superovulation in cows, a three-year period; the role of solar and 

pheromonal cues in the orientation ability of Thomnophis Radix 

Haydeni during fall migration. That was a three-year project. The 

economics of wheat and grain: protein ratios in growing-finishing 

hog rations was a two-year project. And I could go on and on, 

quoting. 

 

And the majority, incidentally, of the projects listen in this report 

are multiple-year projects. So it was out and out misrepresentation 

to say that projects could not be funded under this legislation, 

under this SARF (Saskatchewan agricultural research fund) 

program for more than one year, that this was a limitation on the  

project. 

 

The second piece of misrepresentation promulgated by the 

minister, in his very brief remarks this afternoon, was his assertion 

that his government has increased funding in the agricultural 

development fund by 28 per cent. Now that may be true, that 

particular fact may be true — that funding for the ADF has 

increased by 28 per cent — but what the minister clearly neglects 

to mention is that this year . . . Well first of all I’ll start, that 

funding for agricultural research has not increased by 28 per cent, 

that payments for agricultural research and development projects 

listed in the estimates booklet under vote 61 indicate that in fact 

there has been a decrease in funding for agricultural research and 

development under the ADF program that he talks about, by a 

factor of 15 per cent — down from 10 million last year to 8.5 

million this year. So it simply isn’t accurate. It’s deceptive and 

deceitful to say that there has been an increase in funding for the 

ADF of 28 per cent when we’re talking about agricultural 

research, and in fact he has cut funding for this research. 

 

And just to substantiate this point even further, we need to look at 

the Public Accounts record for the year ending March 31, ’86, to 

look at the actual performance of the agricultural development 

fund. And the minister, the acting minister, certainly must have 

known that his government, in budgeting $10 million for 

agricultural research in that first year, spent — how much? — 

one-quarter of that. Two and a half million dollars for agricultural 

research, spent on agricultural research — 7.5 million not spent of 

the $10 million. 

 

So it simply, again, is not accurate to say that there has been a 25 

per cent increase in spending for agricultural research and that 

somehow the agricultural development fund is the panacea and the 

cure-all for research funding here in Saskatchewan. And in fact 

even if we look globally at ADF funding for all of its four program 

areas, we note that it’s been underexpended by a factor of 

two-thirds, that only one-third of the $21 million in the entire 

ADF, the agricultural development fund, was actually spent in the 

first year. A lot of hype and a lot of talk about help for agricultural 

sector and the research sector, but no real help. 

 

I want to continue by pointing to other misrepresentations and 

outright, outlandish misrepresentations of the fact. The minister 

commented this afternoon that both programs operate with two 

boards, that two funds are administered. True enough. But he went 

on to give the impression and to say that the two programs exist, 

duplicating service and expense. They simply don’t duplicate 

service. 

 

The SARF program that this Bill pertains to, as is noted in the 

ADF booklet which contains information on SARF, which was 

managed by the ADF management program, notes that SARF 

grants research projects which are unique and require new and 

additional funding. And I can point to one very pertinent example 

of SARF funding for the farmers of Saskatchewan. That was the 

problem of the wheat midge when it originated back a couple of 

years ago. It was SARF that had the capacity to react to the wheat 

midge problem and to put the very first money, research money, 

into this wheat midge problem, because  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3977 
 

 

 

it happened that SARF was the only board able to act quickly 

enough to address this problem. It was a problem identified by 

producers on the SARF board as being a very important problem 

to respond to. 

 

And as a result, SARF directly funded research efforts at the 

Agriculture Canada Saskatoon research station to get 

entomologists working on the wheat midge problem, while other 

research funding agencies in the province and outside of the 

province simply sat on their hands and said, well, we don’t have a 

board meeting until six months from now, we’ll look at it then. 

SARF came through with the initial front-line funding to look at 

this problem and to give real help to Saskatchewan farmers —

hardly a duplication of services. 

 

And a further point in this regard, when the minister talks about 

the duplication of expense, very clearly he wants to dupe the 

people of Saskatchewan. And this comes to one of my very hearts 

of my concern with respect to this matter is that, in fact, this Bill to 

abolish SARF . . . I want to say that SARF costs Saskatchewan 

taxpayers nothing. 

 

In order to understand this legislation, and it’s . . . any reference to 

the terms of reference of SARF and its inception are very 

conveniently omitted by the minister and by the Bill itself. But in 

order to understand SARF, we need to know that it was 

established in 1979 by the Blakeney government with a trust fund 

or an endowment of $3.25 million — $3.25 million that were 

salted away for a rainy day to fund agricultural research down the 

road; $3.25 million that was set aside in 1979 as a legacy for 

future generations of Saskatchewan researchers working in 

Saskatchewan and for Saskatchewan farmers farming in 

Saskatchewan and as a legacy for future generations. 

 

And what this Bill does is essentially wipe out this trust fund and 

— lo and behold — roll it over to the Minister of Finance for his 

use in the Consolidated Fund for general government revenues 

and expenditures. So in other words, when the minister, Acting 

minister of Agriculture this afternoon said that SARF was a 

duplication of expense, that simply was not true. SARF cost the 

government and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan absolutely nothing 

— not a cent. In fact, it funded agricultural research and would 

fund agricultural research into the future perpetually if it weren’t 

touched by this government in desperate need for financing. 

 

(2115) 

 

And I’m told that the interest paid on this trust fund of $3.25 

million has been as high as 16 and 17 and 18 per cent. So that in 

the year 1983, for example, SARF was able to fund grants to a 

total of $672,000 at no expense to Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Yet another point I need to make about this particular piece of 

legislation is the claim that administration costs will be reduced or 

. . . administration period will be reduced. Well that again is 

misrepresentation. We simply need to know that SARF is 

administered through the ADF section of the Department of 

Agriculture. There basically is no duplication of administration in 

that regard. 

 

And furthermore, something that we need to recognize in this Bill, 

and that farm people are especially appreciative of when it comes 

to SARF, is that five of the seven board members are producers. 

And that ratio hardly pertains to any of the other agricultural 

research agencies operating in this province that I know of. SARF 

has a unique place in Saskatchewan’s research picture precisely 

because there is a high level of producer representation on its 

board and that that means that it’s responsive to Saskatchewan 

farmers and their front-line problems. 

 

In a word, I need to say that with SARF and its $3.25 million trust 

fund, Saskatchewan people received a legacy, a legacy from 

previous governments for the present, and more than that, a legacy 

that was intended to be passed on to future generations for their 

use. This was a trust that was established for Saskatchewan 

people, and this Saskatchewan government has broken this trust 

relationship very clearly and wants to use this $3.25 million to 

fund its mismanagement and its bankruptcy. At record levels of 

debt, it feels it has no option. 

 

Well I say that it does have options, that SARF has a very unique 

role to play in Saskatchewan’s agricultural and research 

communities. And I would like to know why the Premier and the 

Minister of Agriculture would want to rob the agricultural and 

research communities now, and for years in the future, by 

eliminating this SARF research plan. Very clearly its a question of 

mismanagement and no long-term solutions for agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. I should 

just take note that you, and I don’t mean to criticize you, but you 

did not give me an opportunity to introduce my officials. And I 

would like to introduce my official for the evening, is the member 

from Kelvington-Wadena, and as a matter of fact he is the 

Legislative Secretary to the Premier. And, Mr. Chairman, I don’t 

introduce this man just to make jest here tonight. I do it for a very, 

very specific reason. 

 

I want the people of Saskatchewan to know and to understand and 

I want the members opposite to know and understand that when it 

comes to agriculture, whether it’s myself carrying a Bill through 

this legislature or whether it’s the Premier carrying a Bill through 

this legislature, if he needs some advice and some assistance and 

some help, many times we don’t need the truly professional 

bureaucrats. And I recognize they have their place, but when it 

comes to agriculture, Mr. Speaker, I, or the Premier, or anybody 

else carrying a Bill through this legislature could rely on virtually 

any member on this side of the House. And members on the 

opposite side of the House do not have that luxury, Mr. Speaker, 

and I doubt that they ever will because they will never, never — or 

at least for a long, long time, Mr. Chairman — gain any seats in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, my other 

comment, my other comment with respect to this Bill — and I 

think it’s very, very significant, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite from downtown Saskatoon will  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3978 
 

 

 

stand and criticize the elimination of a redundant program that had 

a total of $3.5 million allocated to it from there which you gained 

the interest on it that was put into agriculture. The interest on $3.5 

million at 10 per cent is roughly $350,000 a year. For the benefit 

of the doubt we will say 400,000. 

 

This ADF fund, Mr. Speaker, which has replaced this fund that we 

are eliminating is $200 million over five years. That’s $40 million, 

$40 million as opposed to 3 or $400,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I caution the member opposite, you lack credibility, 

sir. You lack a great deal of credibility when you will come and 

say we shouldn’t have eliminated a fund that was spending 3 or 

$400,000 a year when it is being replaced with funds in the 

neighbourhood of $40 million a year, and you, sir, I will caution, 

you lack credibility when you do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the farmers of Saskatchewan, I think the 

people in rural Saskatchewan, will judge whether or not this has 

been a prudent move. And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman 

. . . I could bring in lists of people who have gained access to his 

ADF fund. 

 

The wild rice community up in northern Saskatchewan, for 

instance, Mr. Speaker, we have spent more money on a single 

research project there than this fund would have carried over the 

term of our government. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people 

in rural Saskatchewan, and the people in urban Saskatchewan, 

who know full well that their livelihood depends on the farmers, 

will judge this to be a prudent move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Yes, I’d like to ask the minister responsible — 

he referred to the amount being spent on wild rice in northern 

Saskatchewan. I’d like him to tell me now what that figure would 

be over a four-year term of this government if you multiply that 

out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I think 

I just mentioned that the amount of research moneys that have 

spent through the ADF fund, combined with the ERDA 

(Economic and Regional Development Agreement) fund, have 

been close to $1 million. Now if you want to divide that by four 

years, I suppose that’s about $250,000 over a four-year term. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 3 and 4 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Just before we get into the next order of 

business, I think it would be in order for me to thank my official 

here, the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — The opposition wish to make it crystal clear 

we do not wish to thank the minister’s officials. 

 

Bill No. 95 — An Act to provide for the Registration and 

Regulation of Persons Engaged in the Real Estate Trade 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the Minister introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 

introduce to my left, my deputy, Mr. Kesslar; to my right, the 

superintendent of insurance and real estate, Mac MacGillivray; 

and behind me, our director of planning and policy, Ron 

Zukowksi. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve got a few questions for the 

minister. The Bill setting up this commission, Minister, confers on 

the commission quite extensive powers with respect to the 

registration of real estate brokers, managers, and salesmen, and 

confers the power to enact by-laws which cover a wide variety of 

matters, including the training of real estate agents, the 

investigation and inspection of methods of practice of brokers and 

salesmen and others, the reinstatement of people, of salesmen and 

brokers who registration has been suspended or cancelled, 

business practices to be followed by people in the industry, 

advertising by people in the industry, the keeping of trust 

accounts, and so on and so forth. Really quite an impressive 

collection of powers, and these are powers which are going to be 

exercised by a commission which is quite separate from 

government, as I understand the legislation that you have before 

the Assembly. 

 

I recognize that of the nine persons who will constitute the 

commission, the cabinet will be appointing four of them and five 

will be elected by the industry. My question is whether this is 

legislation that will be unique to Saskatchewan . . . or at least 

where Saskatchewan will be unique in Canada, or whether there 

are other jurisdictions in Canada which have this kind of an 

arrangement? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can advise you that there are variations 

of this type of legislation in both Alberta and B.C. I would point 

out, even though those type of powers are being transferred to the 

commission, the superintendent of insurance retains the power to 

initiate investigations to initiate by-laws, to . . . People can appeal 

to the superintendent if they are not satisfied. And also any 

by-laws passed by the commission must be approved by the 

superintendent and filed and approved by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — On that point, Madam Minister, it is not . . . it 

was not clear to me on reading the Bill that the superintendent had 

any power to initiate a by-law. I’d be interested in knowing from 

you, under what section that power exists? That’s my first 

question. My second question is: will you elaborate a bit more on 

what the arrangement is, or what the legislative scheme is in 

Alberta and British Columbia? You said that they had  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3979 
 

 

 

similar schemes, and I wonder if you would tell us what the 

differences are between your scheme and this legislation and that 

in Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — With reference to your first question and 

the powers of the superintendent, it is found under section 7, 

by-laws, subsection (6): 

 

The superintendent may, where he considers it to be in the 

public interest, request the commission to: 

 

(a) amend or repeal a bylaw; 

 

(b) make a new bylaw. 

 

With regards to our two westerly provinces, Alberta’s commission 

has the power to license and set educational standards. In B.C., 

their’s was similar. However, last year B.C. amended their Act to 

allow the commission to mandate licences, to cancel licences, to 

suspend licences, and also to levy fines. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thanks, Minister. Turning to the make up of the 

commission, one part of this Bill that we found of some concern is 

that there isn’t much here respecting the representativeness — the 

representativeness of the five members of the commission who are 

elected by the registrants, that is by the brokers, the salesmen, and 

the managers. 

 

Now I know from looking at the Bill that the commission can 

make by-laws respecting the procedures for the election of 

members to the commission. And I also see that the commission 

must call an annual meeting of registrants in accordance with the 

procedure set out in the by-laws. But we are, over on this side, are 

concerned about the fact that it is just left at five members, and 

there is no attempt in the legislation to ensure that the industry 

representation on the commission is broadly based. I’m thinking 

of ensuring representation from people in the real estate industry 

from small cities or from small towns and rural areas, or for that 

matter from small companies in the industry. 

 

I wonder, Minister, if you’ll tell us whether you gave any thought, 

whether you gave any thought to provisions to ensure that the five 

members from the industry on the commission were representative 

of any of those interests, or are you content to simply let the chips 

fall where they may? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — In response to your question, the real 

estate association presently has 11 boards, regional boards across 

the province, as you’re probably aware. And they do go to great 

lengths to make sure that the smaller areas such as the Maple 

Creeks or the Piapots of the world are represented on their board. 

And we would envision that will be taken into account when they 

come up with their set of by-laws which the superintendent must 

approve. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, I take the point that the associations have 

been broadly based, and have operated, I think, very  

satisfactorily. I’m familiar with the operations of the one in 

Saskatoon, and I think it’s a very . . . It operates on a very sound 

basis. 

 

I became concerned, though, when I was told by my colleague 

from Saskatoon Centre that . . . I think she said the industry as it’s 

currently structured in Saskatchewan is dominated by three large 

companies — it may be four or it may be two, but anyway, a small 

number of large companies who employ 65 per cent of the agents 

and handle 90 per cent of the sales and . . . Now that may not be 

right, and I’d be pleased to hear what was right, but whether my 

numbers are right, I think it clear that the industry is being 

dominated by a small number of large companies. 

 

And the way that the Bill is structured, you get this mental picture 

of all of the people registered under the Act having the right to 

attend the annual meeting of the commission and voting or 

electing the five members of the commission which, at least on a 

theoretical level, would leave it open to the three companies who 

are dominating the industry occupying all five seats on the 

commission. I’m not saying they would do that, Minister, I’m not 

saying that, but the possibility is here, and I wonder whether you 

gave any consideration to — I’m asking the same question again 

— to ensuring that this board, that this commission, was 

representative of different geographical areas in the province as 

well as different sized companies in the industry. I don’t think 

you’d want to see this commission dominated by representatives 

of a few large companies. I think you would want a commission 

that was being run by a broad spectrum which was representative 

of the industry. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I believe what your colleague was 

referring to is the fact that 65 per cent of the licensees represent 90 

per cent of the market. We were very cognizant of that fact, but 

when we met with the real estate association, and as you said, how 

it works in Saskatoon, they are very cognizant of the fact that there 

is a strong need for representation from all regions of the province. 

And this one of the reasons that we chose to retain four appointees 

that would be made by government. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — One more question. If you look around at other 

industries, at other groups like the real estate agents in the real 

estate industry, what would be the closest analogy to this that you 

could think of where the industry has attained this level of 

self-government? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. It’s very difficult to hear the questions. 

I’m sure the minister is having trouble hearing the questions when 

members are chirping from their seats. So I would ask them to 

please be quiet so we can hear the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview putting his questions to the minister. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question, 

Minister, was: what other group, outside the real estate industry, 

would you think would be the closest analogy to this, where they 

have this measure of administrative control, of self-government, as 

you’re conferring upon the real estate industry? 

 

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3980 
 

 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The closest analogy would be the 

insurance industry where they have three councils which act 

something like the commission in place — the life council, the 

hail council, and the general council. But that would be the 

industry that is most similar structured to this one. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well I’m going to make one more comment, 

Minister. Not a question, but a comment. I think that you would 

share with me the view that it is very important that this 

commission act responsibly, and I’m sure you’ll be watching to 

ensure that this does happen. And I want to assure you that we’ll 

be watching to assure that it does happen. And if it doesn’t work, 

this may be a very short-lived commission. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would like to say that this particular 

industry really does conduct itself with the public interest in mind. 

It was the industry that set up the assurance fund under which 

aggrieved consumers can draw on. And I might share with the 

member that in the five years that I have been the Minister of 

Consumer Affairs, that fund has only been drawn on four times. 

 

So I think we’re dealing with an industry that is for ever upgrading 

their educational requirements, upgrading techniques in the 

industry, and an industry that is highly cognizant of the fact that 

their integrity must be held in high regard by the consuming 

public. 

 

I would like to, however, reiterate that the Superintendent of 

Insurance still retains broad powers in dealing with this industry. 

This Bill is not a self-regulating Bill such as what you would find 

with the doctors or perhaps the lawyers. This is just 

self-administration with the superintendent retaining broad 

powers. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I want to make it clear that we have a lot of 

respect of the way in which the real estate associations have been 

run and with the integrity that you find in most, if not all, of the 

real estate companies that are operating in Saskatchewan. But I 

know you would agree that this is a lot of self-government to hand 

over to any industry and it was in that context that I made my 

remarks about keeping a close watch on the situation. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The chairman would ask leave to go page by 

page except for pages where there is amendments. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Page 1 agreed to. 

 

Pages 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Clause 7 on page 6. Proposed House 

amendment, moved by the Minister of Consumer Affairs: 

 

Amend section 7 of the printed Bill by striking out “82” in 

subsection (11) and substituting “86”. 

 

Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 

 

Page 6 as amended agreed to. 

 

Pages 7 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Page 16 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 34 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 34, on page 17: 

 

Amend section 34 of the printed Bill by adding “and section 

61” after “subsection (2)” in the first line of subsection (1). 

 

Clause 34 as amended agreed to. 

 

Page 17 as amended agreed to. 

 

Pages 18 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Amendment on page 29 to section 61 of the 

printed Bill: 

 

Amend section 61 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by striking out, “other than a person who is exempt form this 

Act,” in the first two lines of subsection (1); and 

 

(b) by striking out “53” in clause (1)(a) and substituting “57”. 

 

Section 61 as amended agreed to. 

 

Page 29 as amended agreed to. 

 

Pages 30 to 39 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and her officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 

thank my officials for standing by today to help me answer the 

good questions from the opposition. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the amendments now be read a 

first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move that the 

Bill now be read a third time, and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3981 
 

 

 

Bill No. 81 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Bill NO. 58 — An Act respecting the repeal of The 

Agricultural Research Funding Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move it now be read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Bill No. 95 — An Act to provide for the Registration and 

Regulation of Persons Engaged in the Real Estate Trade 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the amendment now be read a 

first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move the Bill 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Department of Telephones 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 38 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the minister to please introduce 

his official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 

introduce to the committee Mr. Doug Smith, deputy minister of 

Telephones, and, of course, head of the communications 

secretariat. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, most of my 

questions will centre upon communications and not on the 

Department of Telephones. I do however have couple of 

questions, and it is with respect to the Department of Telephones. 

 

At a time when you found it advisable to do away with the 

Department of Co-ops and make a number of other cuts, I wonder 

why we retain this department. I wonder why we didn’t roll this in 

with one of the other giants like Provincial Secretary and then 

you’d have three employees in the department instead of only one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it is basically being maintained at the 

request of the individuals involved in the rural telephone districts. 

The hon. member may recall that  

there’s a voluntary assimilation program of the rural districts, at 

their option, being taken over by SaskTel. They did request, and a 

commitment was made by the previous administration, that they 

would continue to have a department. As soon as they request that 

it be wound up, I would certainly encourage that to happen. I think 

we’re down to about 40 of the rural districts left now, and it’s 

simply at their option, but I expect to see it happen in the not too 

distant future. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — You say you have one employee at 22,700. 

Do you mind telling, do you mind explaining that? That must be a 

secretary. I’m looking at the Estimates, Mr. Minister, ’87-88 it 

says. And it says you have one employee and you’ve budgeted for 

personal services, 22,700. I’m wondering, what is this, a 

secretary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member is not quite correct. I 

think if you look under Department of Telephones, you have the 

executive administration, which is secretarial, I gather; 

communications policy, which includes obviously the people 

involved in communications policy. Virtually all of the work deals 

with communications policy. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I don’t intend to belabour $23,000. I’m 

curious to why you have anything in executive administration. I 

understand there are really no employees in this department, just 

the communications, what used to be called communications 

secretariat. I’m just curious as to why we have anybody, why you 

have anything at all budgeted for executive administration. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you have any time frame within 

which you expect the remaining, I think you said, 20 rural 

telephone companies to be assimilated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — There are, I believe, 40, not 20, and we don’t 

have a time frame on it. Obviously it’s not a big ticket item that 

way. But I suppose if the hon. member wants me to write to the 

remaining rural districts to raise the option with them, I’m quite 

prepared to do that. 

 

I just remind the hon. member that it was a commitment to 

maintain that that was made by the previous administration as long 

as there were some of those rural districts, so they’ve been rapidly 

depleting. I think at one time there were nearly 300, when the 

program started, but that’s the commitment we’re acting under. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, ever since the advent of 

telephones before the First World War, this province has engaged 

in what we have called cross-subsidization. I understand from an 

association with the communications secretariat that when Walter 

Scott, the first premier of the province, set up the Department of 

Telephones, he did so in order that the urban areas, which were 

relatively cheap to provide telephones to, would be in a position to 

subsidize rural areas which were more expensive. We’ve had that 

cross-subsidization as a feature, particularly prominent since Sask 

Tel itself, since the corporation itself came into being. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. Minister, a fair . . . And one of the ways that was  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3982 
 

 

 

affected was that we charged more for long distance than it 

actually cost. The long distance rates were higher than one could 

justify in a statistical or accounting sense, and everyone admitted 

quite openly that that subsidized lower telephone rates and 

particularly lower rates in rural areas. 

 

Mr. Minister, you yourself took a strong stand on that, and I can 

read you the press clippings if you like. The headline in the 

Star-Phoenix, though, sums it up when it says, “SaskTel does 

flip-flop on phone rates.” Where once you stood on holy ground 

and you defended long-distance rates, the subsidized local rates, 

somewhere along the line you suddenly changed and applied for a 

reduction in long-distance rates which you yourself admitted 

might well bump up local rates, to use your phrase. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder why you — and I will add, not for your 

benefit, but for the benefit for anyone watching at this hour — that 

you applied for an increase in long-distance rates for calls 

originating outside the province. So you’re really in a sense giving 

something of a break to non-residents. 

 

I wonder why, Mr. Minister, this long-standing policy, which I 

think served this province well, enabled people to live in rural 

areas and enjoy some of the amenities of urban areas without fully 

paying for them. And to fully to pay for them would make them 

prohibitive. I wonder why you abandoned this long policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, we have not abandoned the policy of 

cross-subsidization. We maintain a very, very strong position that 

the long-distance rate should be utilized to keep local rates as 

cheap as possible. What you are in fact referring to is a reduction 

in some select long-distance rates. In that particular policy change, 

there were other long-distance rates that in fact were increased, 

and so that overall the principle is very much maintained. 

 

Secondly, the rates interprovincially between provinces are of 

course a negotiated and agreed upon rate structure through 

Telecom Canada, and we have always had the practice in 

Saskatchewan, of course, of one, maintaining the position of 

cross-subsidization, but secondly, being prepared to make 

adjustments and that to make sure that the service is maintained. 

 

In other words, that in some areas of Canada where competition is 

allowed, there may have to be some adjustments in that, otherwise 

Telecom Canada itself would lose all of the business in those parts 

of Canada where CNCP (Canadian National and Canadian 

Pacific) may be interconnecting. So we do have this added 

pressure now in Telecom Canada in some parts of Canada where 

competition is allowed on long-distance rates — date 

transmission, for example. 

 

But within that need to make some adjustments to make sure that 

we maintain the business on a national scale, we very much have 

maintained the principle of the cross-subsidization to maintain 

rates, and the proof of that is, I believe, in the last four months, I 

believe it’s Woods Gordon on a national study has now indicated 

that Saskatchewan has, in fact, the cheapest telephone rates in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Yes, and Mr. Minister, have had for a lengthy 

period of time. 

 

Mr. Minister, I take it then we agree that deregulation is not in the 

best interests of Saskatchewan telephone consumers since 

deregulation elsewhere in Canada has enabled those who are 

interested in such a policy to reduce long-distance rates and jack 

up local rates. So I take it we can agree tonight that deregulation is 

not in the best interests of the Saskatchewan telephone consumer, 

at least. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I want to be precise that deregulation 

does not apply anywhere in Canada. So the terminology has to be 

correct. What you are getting through the CRTC (Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) is what 

they call some narrow areas of limited competition. That is not 

deregulation; the rates are still set on interprovincial, and in areas 

of Ontario, B.C., Quebec the rates are still set by regulation of the 

CRTC. So we don’t have deregulation in Canada. There is in some 

areas select, limited competition, but the rates are set by regulation 

of the CRTC. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I take it then, Mr. Minister, you define 

deregulation as total deregulation. Anything else is providing a 

limited degree of competition. Accepting your definition that 

deregulation is total deregulation, would the minister care to put in 

unequivocal language his position with respect to deregulation of 

the telephone system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me . . . to clarify for the hon. member, that 

the policy of the limited competition was approved by the CRTC 

and Telecom Canada in 1979. This is not something that just came 

upon the scene. So . . . I . . . remember, and where I’m trying to 

urge the hon. member not to confuse the issue, there’s no 

deregulation in Canada. Even where there is the limited 

competition, it’s still subject to the regulatory authority of the 

CRTC. 

 

Now let’s talk about competition as opposed to your phrase of 

deregulation, which doesn’t apply in Canada. Let’s talk about 

competition. We are very much opposed to the situation in the 

United States where you basically have anybody can go in and set 

up a telephone system. and we have argued that strongly. 

 

Our position has been stated to the people of the province, and 

nationally, and we have had ongoing discussions with our 

neighbouring provinces of Albert and Manitoba. and to varying 

degrees they support Saskatchewan’s policy. 

 

Now within the question of competition, you have to look at each 

case on an ad hoc basis. For example, some would argue that 

people should not be able to buy their own phones in the province 

of Saskatchewan from other suppliers. I think it fair to say that the 

ability to buy your own phones is something that the people of 

Saskatchewan want. I think 70 per cent of them buy their phones 

from SaskTel — and buy is a SaskTel option as well as rent — 

and 30 per cent choose other phones. 

 

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3983 
 

 

 

Is there a loss to SaskTel? The indications are no, because here’s 

what happened. SaskTel can make a good return on sale of its own 

equipment and maintenance of that equipment. Secondly, by 

selecting the items for sale or for rent that the public wants, you 

cut down your inventory costs of maintaining a wide range just for 

the sake of having a standardized equipment, so there are 

inventory savings. 

 

In terms of people wanting to access their own type of office 

equipment, data terminals, it frankly would be impossible for 

SaskTel to supply every type of business need, and so the business 

community has some options. Now within their ability to buy 

some of the terminal attachment equipment on the open market, 

for want of a better phrase, we still maintain that they must hook 

into the SaskTel basic telecommunications network. 

 

There is, I believe, one major exception and that being the 

long-distance data transmission, the high volume data 

transmission which is being done — like The co-operators, for 

example, to their offices in London, Ontario. I believe they set up 

their own system. 

 

Frankly, it’s impossible to control that, so we try and look at 

maintaining the basic telephone system and network — the 

cross-subsidization principle — and still be realistic in terms of 

supplying the needs of the people of the province which in this 

day and age are becoming increasingly complex in terms of the 

demands for the type of equipment that they want. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I just 

have a very brief intervention. It concerns the commission or the 

board that you had travelling the province last year to look at the 

boundaries of the telephone exchanges. 

 

And the community of Maymont, or people in that area up there, 

made representation to the committee at that time asking that their 

boundaries be expanded. And since that time they have lobbied 

various people — I’m sure they’ve corresponded with you and 

their own MLA and others — and I’m wondering if you can tell us 

tonight, Mr. Minister, whether or not a community like Maymont 

— and there are others, but Maymont in particular — whether 

they will at least be able to phone into The Battlefords, because if 

they aren’t allowed to at least phone into The Battlefords . . . it’s a 

long distance phone call every time a senior citizen wants to make 

a doctor’s appointment, or every time the farmer wants to phone in 

for parts, or every time someone wants to phone into the service 

centre that they identify with for most of their major services, it 

means a long-distance phone call for them. 

 

And I’d appreciate if the minister could shed any light on whether 

o not there will be an expanded telephone exchange that will 

include Maymont into The Battlefords, or whether there is going 

to be some decision in the future on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well there will be a decision. What’s 

happening with the boundaries review study is that it has now 

gone to the engineers and the technical people for analysis. It’s not 

just a matter of changing boundaries. The  

equipment needed and everything else also has to be assessed, and 

I think the hon. member would recognize that. 

 

There are two difficulties arising from the boundaries review and 

that is, first of all, when you change a boundary you still dissatisfy 

people on another side of the line. So there is always the question, 

even on a new line, where do you draw it? 

 

Secondly, there is an increasing concern amongst some of the rural 

small-business community that the ability to bypass and go to the 

larger centres in effect is hurting their business. And we are 

starting to get some specific concerns raised that people would 

bypass the local community. We’re looking at ways to address 

that, but we don’t have solutions yet, but that is under review. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, when do you expect that decision 

or those decisions to be made? What’s a ballpark figure? Are you 

talking about a month, two months, six months, a year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Probably in the new year, I would think . . . I 

would suspect it would be around the range of six months, but it 

could be sooner than that. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I have some questions 

with respect to the coaxial cable and the sale thereof. Mr. Minister, 

the same principle applied here, in that it’s patently more 

expensive to provide coaxial cable service in small communities 

than it is in larger ones, it’s obviously economies of scale, too 

obvious to need any sort of documenting. 

 

The same principle, Mr. Minister, which caused you a moment 

ago to declare your true allegiance to a publicly owned telephone 

system makes every sense with respect to a coaxial cable system. 

There’s no reason why the larger communities shouldn’t subsidize 

the smaller communities if we believe in the principle of 

cross-subsidization. 

 

(2215) 

 

Mr. Minister, when you sold — or gave away, as the case may be 

— the coaxial cable, it seems to me you abandoned any ability to 

cross-subsidize small communities with larger communities, and 

make it more difficult to bring to smaller communities the 

amenities and services which are enjoyed in the cities, something I 

think all people in Saskatchewan still adhere to — the principle 

that what is available to Regina should be available in Cupar or 

Raymore or Maymont. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems to me that when you gave away the coaxial 

cable, you also gave up the ability to ensure that the same services 

are available in Maymont as are available in Regina or Saskatoon. 

And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you gave any thought to that in 

your unbridled zeal for privatization which doesn’t seem to have 

any limits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member obviously is not 

familiar with the rural television extension program which we 

initiated about 18 months ago. The result of  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3984 
 

 

 

that is that by next year, I believe 200 . . . 210 smaller 

Saskatchewan communities will have either their own 

community-owned cable television system, or they have the right 

to license someone else to do it. 

 

The upshot of it is that we have a far more extensive cable 

television system in Saskatchewan than any other province in 

Canada. The upshot of our program is that small communities now 

on an accelerated application process can apply to the CRTC and 

get a community cable television licence. We have communities 

as small as 100 people now, and I gather that we expect to see 

some with a smaller population than that, that are now applying 

through — with the assistance of the communications secretariat 

— to the CRTC, getting licensed to be able to bring in their own 

cable television system. 

 

And we’re getting a tremendously wide dissemination of cable 

television as a result of that program. They have two options: they 

can either, at their option, choose a cable system, or they can 

choose a low-power rebroadcast system. The second system 

would allow them to transmit, depending on their licence, to farms 

beyond the perimeters of the community. The cost of the second 

system are considerably higher, and we’re finding that not too 

many take it up. 

 

Having said that, we have far more cable communities now in 

Saskatchewan — rural communities, urban communities — than 

any other province in Canada. Our system is now being picked up 

by the province of Quebec, the province of Ontario, the province 

of Alberta, and I’m advised now that it’s under review by the 

province of British Columbia as well, as the most effective way to 

get cable television into smaller communities. 

 

Now do they get less of a service as a result of that? No, they do 

not. As a matter of fact, in many of the communities they have an 

enhanced service over the large cities. But it is their choice. They 

choose the channels they wish to pay for on their monthly rates as 

part of the CRTC package, and they can choose, with a 

pre-arranged fee schedule, the number of channels that they wish 

to choose, and it’s just a matter . . . They then calculate their 

monthly rate. So in many cases they will have a superior service, 

at their option, to the large urban centres. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — But the fact remains, Mr. Minister, that you 

have hived off to the private sector the low cost and therefore 

higher profit operations in the cities. You have retained for the 

public sector the higher cost . . . lower population centres. This, 

Mr. Minister, is absolutely typical of privatization: you give the 

good areas to the private people; you retain the expensive areas for 

the public sector. 

 

This is what privatization is all about in a microcosm, Mr. 

Minister, you give away the good areas. And I know you’re going 

to stand up and claim that you were losing buckets and buckets 

and buckets of money on the cable television area that you sold. I 

tell you, Mr. Minister, nobody believes that. I know you will 

parade it before the legislature one more time in the hope that 

there may be a single convert somewhere outside your own 

caucus, but  

it’s a fond hope, because nobody believes it. 

 

It is patently obvious, Mr. Minister, to anyone that gives it 30 

seconds’ thought that there are economies of scale. It’s much 

cheaper to do it in the cities than it is in the rural areas by retaining 

the cities and making it all one network. You can take some of the 

profits you make from the cities and use that to provide service to 

the rural areas. Instead, what you do is give away the profitable 

areas in the cities; the public sector maintains those expensive 

rural areas. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is, as I say, this is an example of what 

privatization is going to bring us: no real increase in service in 

some areas; and much more expensive service in other areas; and 

a degeneration of services in other areas. 

 

Mr. Minister, I don’t buy . . . You may or may not have the 

world’s best cable television service in rural areas — that’s quite 

beside my point. My point is that you gave . . . A properly 

constructed system would provide in this province, that the more 

lucrative urban areas subsidize the more expensive rural areas. 

You abandoned the opportunity to do that when you gave away 

the coaxial cable in the cities, Mr. Minister. You don’t have that 

option any more. And as I say, I’m now going to sit down and 

listen to the minister explain what a ferociously expensive and 

horrifying white elephant the coaxial cable is. Try it if you like, 

Mr. Minister, but there’s going to be darn few followers in your 

parade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I mean, darn few followers . . . I mean, 

we went through the debate in the election. 

 

But secondly, the point you well make is the fact it was a money 

loser. But where you are sadly mistaken, and where you’re wrong 

in your premise, is there was no cross-subsidization on cable 

television urban to rural. In fact each system applied and the rates 

were set — it’s a discretionary service — by the CRTC. So they 

set different rates. There was no cross-subsidization ever in the 

cable television. 

 

No, the hon. member doesn’t understand that within the same 

application, a cable company supplying to a place, say outside of 

Regina, if it was the same company, would have a different rate 

for another small community. It could have a third rate, a fourth 

rate, a fifth rate. The weakness in your premise, the falsity of your 

premise, is that there was cross-subsidization on cable television 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, there never was. 

 

There couldn’t be, because the CRTC licensed it as a discretionary 

service, not as a compulsory, uniform service applicable to 

everybody in the country, and so it never could have been a 

mandatory, compulsory service. It was always considered a 

discretionary service applicable to those communities wanting the 

service. It wasn’t a mandatory service. And they paid the rate 

depending first of all on their size, and secondly, on what types of 

programs they wished to choose. So it never was a 

cross-subsidized program. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Now, Mr. Minister, some of your  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3985 
 

 

 

colleagues are as obtuse as that, but you’re not. You understand 

full well what I’m saying. What I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is that 

really there was no cross-subsidization policy; there was a 

vacuum; you didn’t devise one. That is my criticism precisely. 

 

My suggestion to you is that SaskTel could well have devised 

such a policy had it gone to CRTC with a policy for providing 

coaxial cable, which included cross-subsidization. My guess is the 

CRTC would not have turned it down flat. They would probably 

have welcomed it. But you chose not to do that. You chose not to 

follow that path, and as a result rural areas are paying more. One 

of the results of this nonsense is that rural areas are paying more 

than they would have paid had you had a uniform system. But you 

chose not to do that, and the rural people have been the real losers. 

I don’t watch enough cable television. Quite frankly, I don’t know 

what’s on the various channels, but I haven’t had any of my 

neighbours complain there’s been any degradation in service after 

it was privatized. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I think it’s fair to say that had you had a 

cross-subsidization system, it would have been less expensive in 

rural areas, and the rural people are paying for your mania for 

privatization. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I mean the sad thing about the debate tonight 

is that the hon. member doesn’t understand. There was no 

cross-subsidization on cable television. Secondly, the various 

cable operators were making separate applications based on 

whatever communities they wished to serve. The needs of the 

communities were assessed by the cable operators, whatever they 

may be and what type of service they wanted, and it could vary 

from community to community. It’s not a situation where we’re 

dealing with a uniform type of service right throughout a whole 

country. And it was never, as I say, a cross-subsidized service. 

 

Secondly, keep in mind that it’s not regulated by the provincial 

government. It’s regulated by the CRTC as an interprovincial 

broadcast undertaking. So it’s not a regulatory capability that we 

have. To argue that, you know, that the rural people are not being 

served, I think ignores, in fairness, the fact of the cable television 

policy that this government and the people of Saskatchewan have 

implemented, which I suggest cables more of our province than 

any other province, probably anywhere else in the world, and lets 

them own the system. 

 

The community itself can own the system. If you’re saying they’re 

charging too much and they’re making a profit, that’s the 

community that’s doing that. They have that right, and they’re 

community-owned systems. It’s up to the community to choose 

whether they want to own it, whether they want to joint venture it, 

whether they want to delegate their licence to a private company. 

The choice is theirs, and if it’s a . . . They have the choice of 

making a profit to use the moneys for other services within the 

community. I can’t think of a better system, quite frankly. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, the hour is drawing nigh, 

and I don’t intend to take all night at this particular issue. Mr. 

Minister . . . And perhaps the  

question directed to the Government House Leader. There is in 

addition to the Department of Telephone estimates, SaskTel 

estimates. Is it your intention to do them now or are those 

separate? If they are, we will . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, 

I have some questions then of the Minister with respect to the 

SaskTel estimates as such. There is a $35 million SaskTel estimate 

in the statutory grants. Is that gone? Then my questions are, I 

think, then out of order. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. We’ll allow the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — You know, it’s been voted off. If you’ve got 

some, if you’d submit them to me, I’d be pleased to answer them 

for you. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well I just wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’ve 

given any consideration to doing something about the horrifying 

Saskatoon telephone book. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can give the same answer to the committee 

that I gave the other night when it was asked by a member in that, 

that we are reviewing whether we should be reprinting, whether 

we have an addendum or some type of action to respond to it, and 

I gave an explanation the other evening as to what happened, the 

same as I did in Crown corporations. It was transcribing to a new 

computer service. But to the hon. member, it was restated, there is 

a problem. We are looking at an effective response. It probably 

will mean an addendum being printed. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, as you know there are over 500 

errors in the Saskatoon phone directory, and I don’t have to tell 

you about the major inconvenience that that’s causing to 

businesses and university departments and doctors’ offices and a 

host of other organizations and individuals that are being impacted 

upon. 

 

(2230) 

 

My question to you is when we can expect that addendum, 

because this situation has really dragged on now for far too long. 

When can we expect that addendum to be printed? number one. 

And number two, with respect to the intercept system that you 

have had in place to intercept calls where the number has been 

incorrectly printed in the book and transfer them to the proper 

department or individual or agency, can you tell us how successful 

that intercept system is proving to be? 

 

So two questions: number one, when can we expect the 

addendum; and number two, can you tell us how the intercept 

system is working with respect to Saskatoon people who are being 

affected? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’re in the process of getting an estimate 

now as to the time of printing, delivery, and what not, so I hope to 

be able to have decisions finalized within a week. 

 

Secondly, the intercept is working well in most cases. We’ve had a 

couple of complaints where it’s not satisfactory. As I indicated in 

Crown corporations, we’re prepared to take different types of 

actions depending on  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3986 
 

 

 

the error and the effect of the error. In some cases we have either 

agreed with the customer as to some type of compensation in 

terms of the rate, or perhaps advertising in the daily newspaper in 

Saskatoon and some other options, again depending on the error 

and what . . . the effect it’s had on the customer. 

 

But the hon. member is correct, that the problem is much more 

serious than two months ago when we were starting to get 

numbers; although they were higher than the acceptable level of 

one error per thousand listings — still considerably below the 

industry average. We’re now up over 500, of varying degrees, and 

it’s certainly not satisfactory, and we are looking at the options. I 

hope within a week . . . in terms of getting an estimate and printing 

and all of that, time of printing; all of those we should have within 

a week. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Just one very final brief supplementary, and that 

is, Mr. Minister, could you give us your assurance that by the end 

of the month the addendum will be printed and will be out. Is that 

a realistic deadline, that people could expect that addendum to be 

available by the end of November? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would doubt that because one of the options 

that was given to me had a minimum printing time of . . . One of 

the likely options had a five-week printing time, and so that’s one 

of the things that we’re trying to narrow down. If we’re held to 

that, then I certainly can’t give you that assurance. But I had felt 

and told my officials that I thought that that was far too long, but 

whether I get back shorter printing period options, I simply can’t 

tell you. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, each year for several years I’ve 

suggested to you that the SaskTel phone book should not accept 

advertisements from escort agencies. 

 

Mr. Minister, this year I’m joined by the Regina city council 

which has formally asked that these things be deleted. I wonder, 

Mr. Minister, if you’re going to maintain this silly charade of 

saying you’ve got to accept an ad from anybody who’s not behind 

bars — which I gather is your current position — that as long as 

they haven’t been legally convicted of something, you’ve got to 

accept their ads. 

 

Mr. Minister, that’s not true. There’s no such rule. Anyone may 

refuse business that one finds distasteful, private or public. I 

suggest you, Mr. Minister, that the public does find this whole 

business offensive. Whether or not it is or should be illegal is a 

separate question. It’s certainly offensive. And I wonder, Mr. 

Minister, if you would not now be prepared to reconsider printing 

escort agencies — the ads from escort agencies, some of which are 

blatant —in the telephone book. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, you and I could get into an interesting 

debate. I think we did a couple of years back, and I’m prepared to 

hold up for the public to see what the past history was. I think the 

hon. member was involved in communication at the time of the 

rather lewd — I thought — pictures in the SaskTel directory. As a 

matter of fact, at that time I thought the SaskTel directory should 

not be shown to people under the ages of 18. But there has been  

policy adjustments over the years. 

 

The hon. member says you can refuse business. Yes, you can 

arbitrarily refuse business. And we’ve had some rather strict 

criteria developed over the years, obviously not satisfactory to 

some, and certainly not satisfactory to the government, because we 

did announce a month ago a change in the policy that there are no 

pictures allowed. The ads are much limited in size. Of course, the 

language has always been controlled as to what’s covered, and we 

frankly think that the change in the policy will very much 

discourage the escort agencies from participating. 

 

I have indicated the difficulty as to whether some being fronts for 

prostitution, some being legitimate businesses, and it’s a difficult 

thing. If we, in fact, made the decision and it turned out to be a 

legitimate business, we do run a risk of a successful court action. 

So we now have a new constraint policy which I’ll ship over to the 

hon. member. We will be communicating that policy to those 

concerned. We think it will be satisfactory and adequate. If not, 

we’re prepared to review it again. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well I would like to see the policy, Mr. 

Minister. I suggest to you that there are no legitimate escort 

agencies. They’re all engaged in an illicit sale of sex, and I suggest 

to you, Mr. Minister, that we would be a lot better off if you 

deleted escort agencies completely from the telephone book. It 

serves no useful social purpose, and the whole trade is and should 

be offensive to fair-minded people. So you’d be a lot better off if 

you just refused the ads. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We are advised, just so you know, by policy 

and other law enforcement agencies, that in fact not all are fronts 

for prostitution, so I can’t accept that. But again, the policy is a 

new one, and it’s very narrow, and I think it will meet with public 

acceptance. 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 38 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Department of Telephones 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 38 

 

Mr. Chairman: — That completes the estimates for the 

Department of Telephones. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:39 p.m. 

 


