


















































September 3, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

September 3, 1987 
  
 
 

2287 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Smith that Bill no. 36 – An Act 
respecting the Potash Resources of Saskatchewan be now 
read a second time. 
 
Hon Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, as I was discussing just 
before 5 o’clock, I was talking a little bit about the history of 
potash in Saskatchewan, the history of politics, and I was 
outlining to the Assembly some of the implications of the 
decisions that were made in 1976 and thereabouts by the 
members of the New Democratic Party, and what the effects are 
on us today. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that nationalization has taken place but I 
think more importantly right now, today, what we have to look 
at is in light of that fact of nationalization, in light of the fact 
that the American government has imposed some tariffs on our 
potash, that what we have to really look at very, very strongly is 
the management of those resources and, Mr. Speaker, that is 
precisely, precisely what this legislation is purporting to do, is 
manage our resources. 
 
I do know that members of the opposition have a great deal of 
mixed feelings on it. I do sense that they have some discussions 
and deliberations yet to take place in their caucus before they 
firm up what their position is. And, Mr. Speaker, because I 
myself have more to say on the subject, because a good number 
of our members have an awful lot more to say on the subject – 
and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, to give the members of the 
NDP party perhaps just a little more time, perhaps just a little 
more time to join with the members of the Progressive 
Conservative Party and stand up for Saskatchewan, and stand 
up for Saskatchewan people, and stand up for our resources, 
and stand up to the Americans – I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that I 
will be begging leave to adjourn the debate to give members of 
the opposition a little more time to mull this over in their mind, 
to get their acts together. And perhaps even in light of the fact, 
Mr. Speaker, that they are at present leaderless, perhaps 
someone on that side of the House will take charge of the 
situation and get that caucus together and fully behind the 
Progressive Conservative government, who is today by virtue of 
this legislation standing up for the people of Saskatchewan. 
And as such, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 36 
 

Item 1 (continued) 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am 
pleased that we will have the opportunity to continue the review 
of the Department of Social Services, a department which by 
virtually everyone’s testimony in the province of Saskatchewan 
has taken a royal beating from the Progressive Conservative 
government and particularly this year. Mr. Minister, we 
discussed a number of things when we were in estimates 
yesterday and as I remember, we concluded our discussion with 
your refusal to advise the people of Saskatchewan the simplest 
of facts. For your memory, Mr. Minister, let me remind you that 
we were talking about in the context of the budget of the 
Department of Social Services, which as a matter of fact has put 
forth in the estimates this year – and we compare apples to 
apples – a budget reduction of $16 million, some 4.4 per cent. 
 
Included in that, in those figures, Mr. Minister, obviously there 
is some $4 million, approximately, that has to be attributed to 
nothing other than the payment, severance payments for early 
retirements for people within your department. You’ve told us 
there are 123 people within the Department of Social Services; 
73 positions actually eliminated within your department; and, 
Mr. Minister, we were talking about the top level administrator 
within your department, Con Hnatiuk, who you, according to 
Hansard of June 23 in your speech in response to the budget 
said: 
 

. . . my deputy minister has been transferred to Manitoba, 
where he now is the deputy minister for the Manitoba 
government, . . . 

 
And I was asking you, Mr. Minister, just how long your deputy 
minister had been working in the employ of the Department of 
Social Services prior to your transferring him to Manitoba, to 
use your words. And I was asking you specifically, Mr. 
Minister, what the cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan is to 
arrange for this transfer – as you so cutely call it – of your 
deputy minister from the province of Saskatchewan to the 
province of Manitoba. 
 
Now I note, Mr. Minister, you have more of your officials here 
today, and let me be kind and let me assume that the reason that 
you refused to give this Assembly an answer to that question is 
because you didn’t have the information available. And let me 
begin then, Mr. Minister, this evening by asking you again: how 
many years was Con Hnatiuk in the employ in the Department 
of Social Services prior to your transferring him to the province 
of Manitoba and how much did it cost – did or will it cost – the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan to arrange for this transfer? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the individual in 
question, our records indicate was employed with the 
department July 2, 1968, and at some time during that period 
must have been on leave of absence because I recall him being 
chairperson of the Parkland Community College in Yorkton and 
Melville – and then at some time must have returned back to the 
department. So I don’t have the total length of service. With 
respect to the other questions asked, I answered those when we 
last convened – I believe it was yesterday or the day before – 
and I don’t intend to give any further  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2288 
 

answers. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, are we to assume that today we 
will have a repeat performance of your non answers to 
questions? Let me be more specific, then, Mr. Minister. Will 
you deny that it cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan $120,000 
to, as you say it, transfer the deputy minister of Social Services 
from your Department of Social Services, terminating his 
employment with your department? Will you deny that it cost 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan $120,000? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well whatever figure that Mr. Hnatiuk 
may have given you, if you want to make it public that’s your 
business. We have an agreement with Mr. Hnatiuk when he 
resigned and we’re not about to make the terms of his 
resignation totally public or the amount of money that he may 
have been paid pursuant to his contract. As I indicated earlier, 
we anticipate a net saving to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 
and it’s hard to calculate the net saving but it would run into 
several million dollars. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I find it interesting that you 
choose not to expand on that little item, which you’ve repeated, 
but choose not to be specific as to how you save money by 
paying $120,000 to a deputy minister who you chose to let go, 
Mr. Minister – who you chose; you made that decision and you 
have the right as minister to determine who your deputy 
minister will be. I think the public of Saskatchewan has a right 
to know that it cost the taxpayers in this province $120,000 for 
you to make that decision about your department – that decision 
about your department, Mr. Minister, in which you’ve let go or 
through early retirement you have suddenly coerced a number 
of people to take early retirement. And all of this, Mr. Minister, 
at a time in which . . . As we heard yesterday, you attribute your 
qualifications to serve as Minister of Social Services, and your 
deputy minister, to summarize the fact that you claim that you 
care – those are your qualifications; and at a time in which 
people of Saskatchewan are saying it’s appropriate for the 
Department of Social Services, and the number of employees to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan, to be expanding, you’re as a 
matter of fact slashing a net total of 73 positions, I find it odd – 
I find it odd, Mr. Minister, that we are spending somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of $4 million grand total, starting with 
120,000 to your deputy minister, to down-size the top level 
management of the Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . And I point out very clearly, you choose not to 
deny that figure. You may be a little more interested in talking 
about the person who held the position of executive director of 
strategic planning, Martin Spigelman. And, Mr. Minister, I ask 
you: how many years did Mr. Spigelman serve in the 
Department of Social Services; and what did it cost the 
Government of Saskatchewan, what did it cost the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, to terminate that employment relationship? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
that I would not have paid my former deputy, Mr. Con Hnatiuk, 
one red rouble had the law not required it. I didn’t do this 
willingly or with great pleasure. We paid  

him what the law required; laws that the NDP had in this 
province, and laws that the Liberals had in this province, and 
laws that continue under the Conservatives. And certainly this 
government did not as a matter of policy pay very many people 
anything to go away. When we think we need a change, we’re 
not about to spend the taxpayers’ money if we can help it. 
 
The question now arises with respect to Mr. Martin Spigelman; 
I believe the same Martin Spigelman that worked in the 
executive council of the former NDP government, the same 
Martin Spigelman that was brought in from Manitoba by the 
former NDP government. When I took over as Minister of 
Social Services, I found some very strange behaviour in that 
department. The operation of that department led me to 
question the practices of how that department was being 
managed. 
 
I will read to you a memorandum referring to one Ralph Smith 
– his name has been raised here at one time – who used to work 
for the Department of Social Services. And this all ties in – Mr. 
Spigelman and Mr. Smith, Mr. Hnatiuk – and if you want to 
bring other peoples’ names into this, I’ll accommodate you. But 
what we’re looking at here is internal patronage, patronage that 
has continued, NDP patronage that has continued for four and a 
half years while the Conservatives were the government of this 
province. And we cannot tolerate the kind of things that were 
being done in that department. 
 
(1915) 
 
First of all, Mr. Ralph Smith. Just so that you have an 
introduction as to Mr. Ralph Smith and what he did, and we get 
the right Ralph Smith here, he started with this government as a 
research officer in planning bureau, Executive Council, 
September 1973 – not really this government, the government 
of this province – in an order in council. September of 1975 to 
April of 1976, the individual was on education leave with pay at 
the University of Manitoba; then came back from May ’76 to 
August ’76 as a research officer 2, planning bureau, Executive 
Council of the NDP government; then came back as . . . May 
1977 to July ’78, research officer 3, planning bureau, Executive 
Council of the NDP government of the time. In 1978 to 1979, 
research officer 4, department of mineral resources; ’79 to 
1980, administrative co-ordinator, tourism and renewable 
resources. You might want to ask me about some of the people 
in that department I used to associate with while I was in the 
NDP, and the patronage that carried on there. This individual 
carried on as a special assistant to the deputy minister of 
mineral resources, October 1980 to June 1981; June 1981 to 
May of 1982, acting director of communications, Energy and 
Mines; resigned on May 14 to pursue interests in creative 
writing. This Ralph Smith then resurfaced and he was 
self-employed for three years; then, until November 1985, was 
self-employed as a teaching sessional lecturer at the University 
of Regina – until November of 1985, when Mr. Ralph Smith 
returned to the Government of Saskatchewan, this government, 
as a research officer 3 in the bingo inquiry, temporary, 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. November 5 to May ’87, 
Ralph Smith was an information services officer, temporary, 
strategic planning and communications  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2289 
 

division, Saskatchewan Social Services. 
 
Then, with referring to Mr. Ralph Smith and Mr. Spigelman, 
here’s how the affairs of that department were conducted: on 
October 21, a memo was sent. Now you may have noticed that 
October 21 of 1986 was the day after the last election, and the 
memo is from Mr. Martin Spigelman. The memo is . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. All members will have their 
opportunity to make their comments from their feet. I would ask 
you to allow the minister to make his comments when he has 
the floor. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — This memo is the day after the 1986 
election and it’s from Mr. Martin Spigelman, executive director, 
strategic planning and communications, to Howie Alberts, 
director of human resources branch, re Ralph Smith: 
 

Howie, I won’t be in the office Monday or Tuesday so I’m 
writing you instead. 
 
I spent some time on Friday talking to Con and Dan 
Cunningham and Michelle Moen about a permanent 
position for Ralph Smith. We want to get him into a 
permanent position as quickly as possible and hopefully 
before any post-election freezes or deletions. Our 
conclusion was to ask you to explore the options with 
PSC. We’re willing to reclassify Diane Anderson’s 
position. 

 
Now they’re prepared to move a woman in the department out 
of her position so that they can bring in this individual that they 
want hired. 
 

Can we 7.23 him? 
 

Now I’m sure you’re familiar with 7.23 and that means, can 
they park him somewhere there. 
 

Who is currently on the redeployment list? 
 

I don’t know what the redeployment list is. Somehow they were 
running some sort of a redeployment list down there at that 
department. 
 

And to what level should we reclassify that position to 
ensure Ralph gets in rather than someone else bumping 
into it. 

 
So now other people in scope, in the union, could not bump into 
this position because there was a conspiracy for Ralph Smith to 
be employed in there and protected the day after the 1986 
election. 
 

Ralph’s current salary is $34,000 per annum. I’ll speak to 
you on Wednesday. Thanks. (Signed) B. Barzan for 
Martin Spigelman. Copies to Dan Cunningham. Dan, 
remember to check with Regina North. 

 
I don’t know what checking with Regina North has to do with 
all this, but there was a conspiracy in that department to do 
somebody out of her position to smuggle this man into a 
position because the government  

might freeze positions. This is the day after the 1986 election, 
and this department at its management level is running a 
conspiracy contrary to the instructions of the government that 
nobody is to be hired at that period of time. You have to have 
faith in the people that work for the government and I cannot 
have faith in these people. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it appears that these estimates 
have reached a new height in stupidity with your response to 
that question, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — You will be just as aware as anyone else that the 
Ralph Smith that you seem to be referring to there is someone 
quite different, someone quite different from the Ralph Smith 
who formerly worked with Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Minister, before we proceed, as you read from that 
document, will you please table that document that you just 
read from. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — The document before me is not the 
original document. It has been photocopied, contains some 
obliterations on it, and I wouldn’t want to table that document 
because it is not the exact document nor is it totally accurate. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, the minister is, I believe, 
slandering someone who is entirely innocent. I wonder if the 
minister is aware that there were two Ralph Smiths. One was 
the chairman of our caucus and was research in caucus . . . 
Thank you. Clearly a political appointment. The other was a 
career public servant by the same name in Executive Council. 
And I think the minister has got the wrong person. And I 
believe, Mr. Minister, that you’re slandering someone who’s 
innocent. 
 
So far as I am aware, the Ralph Smith that you’re talking about 
– and I’m virtually certain that you’ve got the wrong person – 
the Ralph Smith that you’re talking about is a career public 
servant. I ask you, Mr. Minister, to table that, and if I’m wrong, 
all well and good; if you’re wrong, you owe somebody an 
apology. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, it doesn’t 
matter to me whether the Ralph Smith was the Ralph Smith that 
they had parked in their executive council in the premier’s 
office of the NDP or whether it was the Ralph Smith that they 
had parked in their caucus office. It was the Ralph Smith who 
got education leave from this government. Are you not 
suggesting that this Ralph Smith was really the Ralph Smith 
that was in your caucus office? . . . I don’t think you have the 
Ralph Smith. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I would ask the minister . . . I’ve asked the 
minister if I’m entitled to assume that all Grant Schmidts are 
screwballs? By deduction, am I entitled to make that 
assumption? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well the member from Regina Centre 
can assume whatever he wants to assume.  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2290 
 

Assumptions made by the NDP are of not much value, and I 
don’t really care what he wants to call me. It doesn’t matter to 
me. You have to consider where it’s coming from, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman. 
 
What I’m saying to you here is: there are two Ralph Smiths. 
This one was political enough, but the other one was even more 
NDP, and I agree with you. You’re right. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But, Mr. Minister, my point is that you’re 
treating a career public servant – and he is a career public 
servant – as someone who is a politico. And they are two 
different people, two very, very different people who have very 
little in common. 
 
Mr. Minister, you owe it to the public service to table that. And 
if you haven’t got the nerve to table it, then I think we are 
entitled to assume that we are right and that you’ve slandered a 
career public servant who was in government long before we 
came to government. And if it had been anyone other than you 
people, he may well still be in government. But if he isn’t he 
would’ve been if anyone other than you people would’ve been 
elected. You are slandering a career public servant, Mr. 
Minister, who is not a political operator at all. 
 
I ask you to table that. Have the decency. If you’ve only got one 
decent act in your entire political career, table that document so 
that we may know whether or not we’re dealing with the 
research officer in caucus, who was a political operator – no one 
would deny it – or the Ralph Smith who was in executive 
council who was not a political operator but was a career public 
servant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, why should I table the 
document? I just read it into the entire record. It will be printed 
in Hansard tomorrow. There’s no reason to table any document. 
 
But simply said here, if the information I’ve read here 
concerning Ralph Smith, if this is not the Ralph Smith who 
worked in the NDP premier’s office, this is not the Ralph Smith 
who was an order in council appointment by the NDP, and we 
all know that even the former premier and deputy premier, the 
member from Riversdale, and the former premier of 
Saskatchewan, now the member from Regina Elphinstone, 
terminated many of their own political people right in executive 
council after the election because they knew they were political 
people. And now we have a discussion over which Ralph Smith 
we’re dealing with. Is it the Ralph Smith that was in their 
caucus officer, a political operative, which he is entitled to be in 
their caucus office? 
 
Now you’re saying that the Ralph Smith that I’m referring to is 
the one that was in their caucus office because I haven’t said 
anything about your caucus office. This individual was 
employed in executive council on an order in council from 1973 
to 1982. It seems to me that the NDP was government from 
1973 to 1982. And if there’s any confusion, are they then telling 
me that I am really talking about the Ralph Smith, their other 
Ralph Smith, the one who was in caucus office? Well, that 
would even be worse. 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m not going to pursue this 
any longer; to do will just further damage the reputation of a 
public servant. But, Mr. Minister, I would ask you to at least be 
consistent with what you said the last day we did your 
estimates. The last day we did these estimates, you started out 
on this discussion of Ralph Smith by referring to a person who 
was in our caucus and then had operated in Executive Council. 
You clearly thought they were the same person. 
 
The Ralph Smith that you are talking about now – and I 
listened, Mr. Minister, to what you had to say in that memo – 
there’s nothing in that memo that suggests that he was anything 
other than doing what was requested of him by a minister of the 
Crown. 
 
You may not agree with what Elwood Cowley was asking of 
him, but there’s nothing in that memo to suggest he was doing 
anything other than what a public servant should do. He was 
doing what was asked of him. The same as I assume your 
officials – reluctantly sometimes and perhaps sometimes 
willingly – do what you ask them. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you’ve clearly confused two different people 
and you are clearly being most unfair to a career public servant. 
I just suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that before you raise the 
names of public servants in this Legislative Assembly, you take 
some time to check out the facts because you’re clearly wrong 
on this one. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to, Mr. Chairman, direct a 
question to the minister and find out: what is the nature of the 
document he’s quoting from? Is it an official government 
document, if you could just tell us that? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a briefing memo. I 
have already quoted it for the House. It is recorded in Hansard. 
What we are looking at here is: the NDP say that there are two 
Ralph Smiths – one of them is theirs; the other one they disown. 
 
How do they know so much about both of these Ralph Smiths? 
That’s the question. Why are they an expert in these two Ralph 
Smiths? And why is Ralph Smith such a sore point with the 
NDP? 
 
And, in addition, I didn’t drag the names of anyone into this 
Assembly. The NDP have asked where is Howie Alberts; the 
NDP have asked what about Con Hnatiuk; the NDP have asked 
now what about Martin Spigelman? What do they care about 
these individuals? They are their friends in a conspiracy against 
the people of Saskatchewan, not doing what they’re paid to do – 
to serve the public. 
 
(1930) 
 
Instead they’re trying to fix their friends in positions and bump 
other people out of positions and not allow other union people 
with seniority to bump out whoever this Ralph Smith is. That’s 
the kind of conspiracy there is there. That’s the kind of mess I 
am cleaning up, and I will continue to clean it up, and I don’t 
care if the NDP are upset about the loss of their friends. 
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2291 
 

If they are upset about the answer they are giving, the clean-up 
in Social Services will continue as long as necessary until that 
department serves the public and stays out of politics, and that’s 
how long it will take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I believe, just very 
briefly, the minister said that he was quoting from a briefing 
document. I listened carefully, and just a few minutes ago the 
minister didn’t say that was a briefing document. I believe he 
said it was a photocopy of a document. And I want to clarify 
whether it’s a briefing document or whether it’s some official 
government record that he’s quoting from. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I ask members on both sides of the 
House to allow the debate to continue between the members 
that have the floor. It makes it a lot easier to conduct a 
committee. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the documents 
are briefing documents obtained from my department, from my 
officials in my department. I know you would like to know 
exactly who prepared them, but I’m not going to tell you 
exactly who prepared those documents. 
 
What we have here, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is not an 
examination of the estimates of Social Services but the NDP 
trying to protect their friends. One thing you can say for them is 
they take care of their friends. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I am appalled at the Minister of 
Social Services’ ease with which he slips into slurs to draw 
aspersions on the characters of people who have been faithful 
civil servants, all with the purpose, Mr. Chairman, of creating a 
diversion because he is being asked justifiable questions in the 
estimates of the review of the expenditures of his department. 
 
I say, and I say this on record, Mr. Chairman, he has given me a 
list yesterday of 14 people, 14 upper-level people in the 
Department of Social Services who have either been dismissed 
or taken early retirement, possibly with coercion, not one of 
whom, Mr. Chairman, not one of whom I know today as a New 
Democrat. And I am asking these questions today in the 
estimates of the Department of Social Services because I 
believe that the Minister of Social Services has to be held 
accountable to the people of this province who are paying taxes 
to operate this department and others. They have a right to 
know how their money is being spent, and that is the reason 
why these questions are being asked. 
 
They are being asked, Mr. Chairman, because I have reason to 
believe that for his own political reasons the Minister of Social 
Services does not like the character, perhaps, of some people 
who have been prominent and faithful and qualified and 
credible civil servants in the province of Saskatchewan, and at a 
time, Mr. Chairman, in which he requires the Legal Aid 
Commission to remove $500,000 from its budget in order to 
impose deterrent fees on the poor of Saskatchewan to have legal 
counsel in the province of Saskatchewan. At a time in which he 
imposes that regulation, that requirement on the Legal  

Aid Commission, he has the gall to make fun of the 
expenditures, some $4 million in total in the dismantling of the 
upper level – in many cases of the Department of Social 
Services – because he has a political agenda. And I believe that 
the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know the facts, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Let me go back to my question, Mr. Minister. You obviously 
don’t seem to be any more eager about answering this question 
than to answer the questions and the specifics of your dismissal, 
your transfer, as you like to say it, of the deputy minister. Let 
me ask you the same question I asked you when you began your 
diversionary tactics and your oratorical excursions. Mr. 
Minister, how many years has Martin Spigelman been in the 
employ of the Department of Social Services? How much do 
you anticipate it will cost the taxpayers of this province to 
terminate that employment relationship at your decision, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — To the best of my knowledge, Martin 
Spigelman started with the executive council of the NDP 
government on June 24, 1980, and commenced employment 
with the Department of Social Services on July 1, 1983. Just for 
those people who might not know what the Executive Council 
is, it’s the Premier’s office. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, how many times do you have to 
ask a straightforward question to get a straightforward answer 
out of you. I asked you how long he was employed in the 
Department of Social Services. I asked you how much you 
anticipate it will cost the people of Saskatchewan to terminate 
his relationship, at your initiative, I believe. Will you answer 
that question, please. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — I anticipate it will cost nothing, but the 
matter is before the Public Service Commission and they will 
decide. Before the Public Service Commission, they have to 
decide on the evidence they have before them. There is a 
suggestion of conflict of interest which is much stronger than a 
suggestion, and the Public Service Commission will have to 
decide that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Okay, Mr. Minister, I will accept that. I’m 
happy to see that we’re finally getting around to something 
resembling straightforward answers. Can you try a 
straightforward answer on this one. The associate deputy 
minister, Dan Cunningham, what was the cost to the taxpayers 
of this province to terminate that employment relationship? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — I advised you earlier that the total 
severance pay was $197,000-and-some-odd hundreds. That I 
advised the day previously. And that’s the total severance cost 
for people who have been terminated at the department or 
resigned. 
 
In addition, you have the early retirement packages which are 
another matter which are about $900,000. The balance of that 
$4 million you keep referring to is for additional staff in young 
offenders, and we have a list of many things that it involves. It’s 
for earned increments; for new non-permanent staff, mostly in 
the regional operations in the regions of Saskatchewan; for the 
early retirements at the North Parks Centre; transfers to other  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2292 
 

departments, and those type of things. 
 
So the total severance costs are a $197,000-and-some – the 
record will show, I don’t know, it was 200-and-some additional 
dollars – but approximately $197 total severance costs. 
 
And we shouldn’t really drag these people through and decide 
how much they were paid in severance. They have to get on 
with their lives and the public has to get on with their business. 
And I have not at all at these estimates raised any of these 
individuals’ names, nor have I brought them to this committee. 
But you keep asking these questions, and I really have no 
reason to protect these individuals, but I don’t really want to 
continue slinging their name through the mud. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, may I suggest that it is your name 
that many are slinging through the mud, to use your term. And 
quite frankly, Mr. Minister, I do not accept your explanation. I 
went through, line by line, the budget of the estimates as 
presented by your Minister of Finance, who oftentimes 
calculates things within $700 million accuracy. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, I assume that there’s a bit more 
accuracy than that in the line by line estimates of your 
department. And as I went through line by line and prorated the 
number of positions in the estimates as you put them forward, 
Mr. Minister, including the additional ones granted – there is 
area in which there are some staffing additions – it still leaves 
$4 million unaccounted for. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you deny that Dan Cunningham’s 
termination of employment with the province of Saskatchewan 
has cost the taxpayers of this province $38,000? Will you deny 
that? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well no, if Dan Cunningham told you 
that’s how much it cost, I expect that he would have given you 
the right information. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well I note that you don’t deny it, Mr. Minister, 
and quite frankly your a $197,000 doesn’t wash. We’ve been 
standing here this evening and we totalled two people, we come 
to a $158,000 – just two people, Mr. Minister. And somehow 
you expect me to believe and the people of Saskatchewan to 
believe that the total cost for terminations is a $197,000? Mr. 
Minister, that is blatantly incorrect information. 
 
It may have been – it may have been what has been paid so far, 
but that’s clearly, clearly not what it is going to cost, in this 
budget year, the people of Saskatchewan to terminate people 
that you don’t like to have around you in the Department of 
Social Services. I might suggest, Mr. Minister, I might suggest 
that it may be, it may be that you have an aversion to people 
with competence. And maybe, maybe, Mr. Minister, there are 
people . . . have been people around you who you chose, who 
you chose at your decision and endorsed by the Premier of this 
province to let go at a cost of $4 million in total, in your 
department, Mr. Minister. And I think the people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know that, and I think you have a 
responsibility to be held accountable. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I ask you: what was the salary of 
the deputy minister, the former deputy minister, who you, to use 
your cute little term, transferred to the province of Manitoba? 
What was the salary of the former deputy minister of Social 
Services, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — The salary of the former minister was 
. . . former deputy minister . . . I wish ministers would make this 
. . . The former deputy minister, now in Manitoba, his salary 
was $6,763 per month. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — That would be some $80,000 a year then, Mr. 
Minister, approximately, just calculating it quickly in my head. 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me who promoted Mr. Hnatiuk into 
his deputy minister position. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it wasn’t me. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, who promoted the former deputy 
minister into his position, the former deputy minister that you 
transferred to the province of Saskatchewan, or to Manitoba? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I believe the man 
in question was an assistant deputy minister when this 
government took office and that he was promoted to deputy 
minister during the term of Gordon Dirks. That’s the best 
information I have available. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, would you please clarify with me. 
I believe he was not promoted from associate deputy minister to 
deputy minister; I believe that is not, as a matter of fact, the 
case. I do quite accept that it was Gordon Dirks, one Gordon 
Dirks, the former minister of Social Services, the PC former 
minister of Social Services, who is now working . . . who was 
retired from his ministerial position in October of 1986 and who 
is now working on a contract to the Department of Education. 
 
Would you please clarify for me, Mr. Minister, would you 
please present the facts accurately. He was promoted to the 
position of deputy minister from what again, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Of course I wasn’t in charge of things at 
the time. I’m going by the best recollection of my staff here that 
. . . And I will correct this part of it. You know more about this 
man than I ever will, so when it comes to where he came from 
and what he was doing, you have some information there that I 
don’t have. And probably you have a lot of information I don’t 
have. And as far as we know, the individual Mr. Con Hnatiuk 
was the regional director in Saskatoon when we were elected 
government and rose to assistant deputy when Walter Podiluk 
was the deputy. When Walter Podiluk went to Health, he 
became the deputy. 
 
That’s the information I have, but if you have other 
information, I’ll listen to it and we’ll try to find out for you. I 
don’t think it matters a great deal. I don’t think it matters a great 
deal. Sometimes individuals get promoted to a level that they 
cannot handle and you have to make changes. 
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2293 
 

(1945) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, isn’t it odd that the former 
deputy minister was really quite acceptable to the former PC 
minister of Social Services – and as a matter of fact, he chose to 
promote him into that position – and then all of a sudden, 
whoopsy, he’s no longer acceptable to the current Minister of 
Social Services. 
 
Let’s move along, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me how much – 
and you seem to enjoy making comparisons with our neighbour 
to the east – how much would Mr. Hnatiuk be paid as his salary 
as deputy minister with the Government of Manitoba? I’m sure 
that you do these kind of comparisons and would you please tell 
me what the deputy minister in that position in Manitoba would 
make. How does the $80,000 here compare to Manitoba? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what they 
pay him in Manitoba. I don’t really care what they pay him in 
Manitoba. As long as they keep him there, I’m satisfied. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, I will tell you, Mr. Minister, that in 
Manitoba deputy ministers are not paid at the same levels as 
they’re paid here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Will you tell me, Mr. Minister – this should be an easy one for 
you – will you tell me how much the current deputy minister of 
Social Services is being paid? What is his salary? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — The current deputy minister is paid 
$7,008. He’s worth every cent of it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — So the deputy minister, Mr. Sojonky, today is 
being paid in excess of $84,000 a year. Mr. Minister, let me ask 
you: how much will it cost to terminate the current deputy 
minister from his position? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I expect that the current 
deputy minister will honourably retire at some time and there 
will be no added costs of his retirement. He may also go on to 
do other things. We really don’t know what his future intentions 
are. As long as he does his job, he will stay. And he’s such an 
honourable man that should he feel that he should not be in that 
position, he would voluntarily leave and not hold the 
government up to ransom. So I don’t consider it would cost 
anything when he retires. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll see. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — And the members opposite say, they will 
see. They would love to get a recall of the last election but that 
won’t happen for another four and a half years and by that time 
I believe the current deputy minister, Stan Sojonky – a truly 
incorruptible man, a man of great principles – if he still wishes 
to be the deputy they should beg him to stay. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not hard to imagine your 
deputy minister outlasting you as minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hagel: — You and I both know that that’s in the cards. 
You and I both know that your Premier has placed you in the 
position you’re in to behave the way you’re behaving to provide 
the kind of leadership for Social Services that you’re providing 
for the people of Saskatchewan. You and I both know that 
you’ve been placed in that position by your Premier because 
you are carrying out his plan of action to deal cruelly with 
Saskatchewan people in need. And that has been your track 
record, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — You and I both know that your term in the 
position that you’re holding as we sit in this Assembly tonight 
will be done as soon as the dirty work has been done, because 
that is the game plan of your Premier, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I ask you: is the deputy minister 
who is currently employed in your department on contract, and 
if so what are the terms of his contract in the case that his 
employment is terminated? What I’m asking you to tell me is 
what is at least the formula, if not the exact number of dollars, 
that it will cost the people of Saskatchewan should that decision 
be made by you or by some other minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, Executive 
Council is in charge of the hiring and changing of deputy 
ministers. I have never seen the contract. I am informed and 
advised that it is a standard deputy minister’s contract, that all 
deputy ministers would have, and there is nothing unusual 
about the contract. 
 
You suggest that I am a cruel man. That of course comes from a 
partisan member of the NDP and I wouldn’t expect you to be 
complimentary. 
 
We have done many, many things. The members opposite say, 
how many letters do you get? Well, here’s a handful of letters 
here expressing thanks for the things that have been done in my 
department, and they are very specific letters. I will not table 
the letters. From time to time people appreciate what is done, 
and do write. And I realize that the members opposite try to 
wallow in negativism. 
 
Many positive things are being done. Foster care has been 
improved greatly and continues to be improved. The young 
offenders system is being improved; new facilities are being 
opened. And the list goes on and on and on of the 
improvements that are being made in the Department of Social 
Services. And so if you want to get down to specific 
improvements that you would want to see made, I would 
consider them. If you want to get down to budgetary figures of 
where more money should be budgeted, I would consider them. 
 
But if you’re going to continue with name calling and raking 
former employees through the mud, there’s no need for that. I 
of course have to give the explanation if you ask those kind of 
gutter-politics questions, but let’s get on to serving the people 
of Saskatchewan. And I can  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2294 
 

give you many, many good examples of how good service is 
being provided. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, if compliments are in order, I 
don’t hesitate to give them, and as a matter of fact the record 
will show that in this Assembly there has been an occasion in 
which, as a matter of fact, I extended a compliment to you. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, I says them as I sees them, and, Mr. 
Minister, the track record that you have brought to the position 
of the Minister of Social Services has not been a commendable 
one. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, let me go back to my question again, and ask 
you specifically: do you deny that the contract to the deputy 
minister of Social Services is one in which, if his position is 
terminated, he will be paid at least 12 months salary? Do you 
deny that that he has a contract which guarantees that if his 
position is terminated, it will cost the people of Saskatchewan at 
least $84,000. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve never seen the 
contract. It’s not my jurisdiction. I don’t know what’s in the 
contract because deputies are hired by Executive Council, by 
the Premier’s office, and it’s . . . All I know is that it’s a 
standard deputy’s contract, whatever that is. I’ve never seen a 
standard deputy’s contract. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, your department certainly 
pays that salary to the deputy minister, and your department 
certainly pays the severance requirements upon termination, and 
you know that. The people of Saskatchewan know that as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s been reported to me from a number of 
different centres and from a number of different kinds of offices 
that there is a practice going on in the province of 
Saskatchewan, when choosing employees within your 
department, that referrals for applicants for vacant positions are, 
as a matter of fact, made, are forwarded to the deputy minister’s 
office, and then from the deputy minister’s office they refer to 
your office where a decision is made within your office by 
yourself or one of your executive assistants, and that that, as a 
matter of fact, is the practice for employing to fill positions in 
the Department of Social Services in the province of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Minister, that report has come to me, as I said, from a 
number of different centres and from a number of different 
kinds of services offered to the department. Mr. Minister, will 
you confirm in this Assembly tonight whether that is the case? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we hire the best people 
we can find to fill the positions, and I don’t really know how 
the hiring practice has worked in the past. I have some 
indications. We hire the best people that we can find, and that’s 
all there is to it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, will you provide for me the names 
of appointees to fill positions in the Department of Social 
Services made since November 1, 1986, and will you also 
please advise me as to which of those were appointed through 
the Public Service Commission. 

Hon Mr. Schmidt: — We don’t have a list available of who 
was hired since November 1 because we don’t keep such a list. 
I suppose it could be compiled in due time. We don’t have any 
orders in council that I know of in our department so everyone 
would be hired according to The Public Service Act. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, when will you provide me a list of 
appointees since November 1, 1986 and whether they were 
hired through the Public Service Commission by competition? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — It will take some time. We don’t usually 
calculate our year from November 1. I don’t know what’s 
magic about November 1. We could go on a government 
business year, which would be easier, I suppose. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, what is magic in your terms about 
November 1 is that it’s approximately that time that you 
because the Minister of Social Services. What I’m asking, very 
simply, is: that since you became the Minister of Social 
Services, when – that is the issue, and I ask you again, — when, 
specifically when, will you provide me a list of the appointees 
to fill positions in the Department of Social Services across 
Saskatchewan, who filled those positions since November 1, 
1986 after you became minister, or approximately at that time? 
And will you identify for me which of those were appointed to 
those positions through competitions in the Public Service 
Commission. When will you provide me that information? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we would look at 
the entire year and see what we could find. It would take several 
weeks to track that all down and bring it forward, so we will 
have a look at that entire year you’re referring to. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, how many people have been hired 
in the Department of Social Services since November 1, 1986? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well we don’t have the exact figures of 
how many were hired. There were vacant positions, there are 
vacant positions deleted, there’s early retirements. We have 
nearly 2,000 employees, of which approximately one-third 
work at Valley View in Moose Jaw, and we had a large number 
of early retirements there. We’re still in the process of filling 
some of those, so that figure would change daily, sort of thing. 
And I haven’t kept specific track of how many have been hired. 
 
We deal in the total number of positions we have and the total 
amount of our payroll and we haven’t really kept track of 
specific hirings because there’s also cross transfers from one 
position to another within the department. So it’s not the kind of 
statistics we keep. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, then I am asking you again: will 
you provide them to me? I don’t expect that you have them here 
in front of you in the Assembly tonight. It would seem obvious 
that there have been more people leave the department than 
come in, and I don’t know what the number would be. I would 
guess probably 200, maybe  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2295 
 

300, surely not more than that. How long can it take to compile 
that list and to provide that for me? Will you give me a date by 
which you will provide that information, Mr. Minister? Will 
you make a commitment this evening? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Our estimate is that there’s been 
approximately 100 people hired in the last year. To get all the 
names of the people and all the positions and who bumped who 
and who moved up in seniority and all of these different things 
would take, I’m informed, about one and half to two weeks of 
calculations. I don’t believe that kind of expenditure on behalf 
of the taxpayers is justified, and I really see no purpose why we 
should go calculating all the list and giving you all the names. I 
believe that the people in the directory that comes out from time 
to time – lists all the public servants in Saskatchewan, and there 
in Social Services – the people would be listed there. You could 
simply add them up. We don’t have that information available, 
and I don’t think it’s a good expenditure to spend one and a half 
to two weeks just to satisfy your curiosity. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it is broadly believed around the 
province of Saskatchewan to get a job in the Department of 
Social Services that you have to hold a blue membership card in 
the PC Party because the hiring practices are such that 
recommendations are made to the deputy minister’s office, 
transferred to your office, the decisions are made, and that 
they’re political decisions. I am telling you this evening that is 
the perception in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
These calculations, if everything is on the up-and-up, would 
only prove that your hiring practices are squeaky clean. And I 
would think that, Mr. Minister, given that the people of 
Saskatchewan are firmly of the opinion that this is the hiring 
practices of your Department of Social Services, that it is 
justifiable to make those calculations to provide that 
information not only to me but to the people of Saskatchewan, 
to ensure them, if this is the case, to ensure them that hiring 
within your department is on the up-and-up. And so I ask you 
again, Mr. Minister: what date will you provide me that 
information? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well I told you earlier I wasn’t going to 
spend the taxpayers’ money to do a calculation for your 
curiosity. People are hired according to whether they can fill a 
position, whether they can do the job. And we don’t have a 
system like Con Hnatiuk and . . . I don’t know if I should read 
that for you again to remind. We don’t have a system like Con 
Hnatiuk and Dan Cunningham and Martin Spigelman, where 
they can . . . I’ll just read parts of it for you to remind you: 
 

We’re willing to reclassify Diane Anderson’s position no. 
248510. 
 
Can we not 7.23 him? 
 
Who is currently on the redeployment list and to what 
level should we reclassify that position to ensure Ralph 
gets in rather than someone else bumping into it? 

 

These days people bump into positions according to their 
seniority, and we don’t have that kind of a system or a 
deployment list. We hire whoever can do the job. And I see 
very few of these people at any time. I’d like to have more time 
to get to know my workers better through the various 
departments. And things are operating quite smoothly. I realize 
that you have a few people in the NDP who are unhappy, but it 
can’t be helped. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not too expensive for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan to pay out $120,000 to replace a 
deputy minister that was hired by Gordon Dirks, your 
Progressive Conservative Social Services minister predecessor, 
and yet it is too expensive for you to do some calculations to 
verify that the hiring practices in the Department of Social 
Services are on the up-and-up. And I can only assume from 
that, Mr. Minister, that the reason you will not provide that 
information, that you will not make it public, that you will not 
provide it to me, is because as a matter of fact the hiring 
practices in your department are not on the up-and-up. And I 
rue the day, Mr. Minister, when that practice began. One of the 
things that Tommy Douglas was . . . has often not been 
recognized for, but a great contribution that he made to the 
province of Saskatchewan, after he first came to office back in 
1944, was the introduction of the Public Service Commission to 
ensure that in the province of Saskatchewan, civil servants 
would be hired on the basis of competence and the basis of 
qualifications and not on the basis of political patronage. And, 
Mr. Minister, I find it extremely odd that you refuse, in light of 
the common perception of the hiring practices within your 
department, that you refuse to provide the information which, as 
a matter of fact, would deny that. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you please provide for me the name, title, 
salary of each of your personal staff. Would you also tell me if 
any of them has had a pay change in the last 12 months, and if 
so, what it was. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, while those . . . that 
information is being located and ascertained, the member raises 
Tommy Douglas, and I will find the exact quote from 1946. He 
gives us Tommy Douglas and what Tommy Douglas preached. 
And Tommy Douglas didn’t always practice what he preached 
nor did he always preach consistently, because I will find you 
the exact quote from 1946 where Tommy Douglas said to the 
effect: and in order to have a socialist government, the CCF had 
to hire people who were of socialist orientation in order to 
ensure that their policies would be implemented. I will find you 
the exact quote. I have it upstairs in my files, and I will find it 
for you as soon as possible. But the NDP has not changed much 
since the days of 1946 and Tommy Douglas, and a resolution 
from their June 1987 convention reads as follows, and I quote: 
 

PA44 – Whereas it is necessary to have civil servants and 
board members of provincial bodies who are dedicated to 
promoting the New Democratic program of democratic 
socialism, be it resolved that when the New Democratic 
Party is elected, a careful screening take place to ensure 
that such people are in place. 

 
That’s the NDP and how they propose to run this  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2296 
 

province. We don’t have that kind of a system. My criteria is 
simply that people do their jobs. I probably have hundreds of 
people that are not of my political persuasion working for me 
right now, and I’m very pleased with their performance because 
they are doing their jobs. And that’s all we ask of them, is to do 
an honest month’s work and receive their pay cheque – that’s 
all we ask. But we do not ask for conspiracy. We do not ask for 
conspiracies against the policies of this government. We do not 
ask for . . . When I was appointed minister, the word, the word 
– and you have the word all the time over there – the word in 
my department was: oh, this minister won’t last long; we’ll just 
co-operate for a whole and then we’ll do as we please, as we 
always did. Well it didn’t quite work that way. This minister 
has outlasted the conspirators. And so we will continue to 
provide professional, caring service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And to do that, we have made a few other 
changes. We have a new mission statement at our department. 
The mission of Saskatchewan Social Services is to promote 
independence of people in need through caring and competent 
service. 
 
In addition, we have a new motto at our department. This is 
official: the motto of our department is, caring and competent 
service for people in need. That’s exactly what we intend to do; 
that’s exactly how we intend to operate. And to do that, we 
have to have people who will carry out the policies, to provide 
the caring and competent service, and I’m very pleased with the 
people we now have. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well first of all, Mr. Minister, when it comes to 
credibility and we get the member from Melville giving his 
interpretation of the words of Tommy Douglas – I think the 
member from Melville side by side with Tommy Douglas 
would not be a very forbidding or foreboding . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Formidable. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Nor would he be formidable by comparison. I 
would suggest, Mr. Minister, that within the province of 
Saskatchewan there is a distinct difference with the credibility 
assigned to Tommy Douglas and the credibility assigned to the 
member from Melville. 
 
However, in the oratorical ramblings that you engaged in here 
again, you forgot that I asked a question and again, it’s not a 
terribly difficult question. Let me remind you. I asked simply 
for the name, the title, and salary of each one of your personal 
staff and whether any of them have had a pay change in the past 
12 months, and if so, what it was. And, Mr. Minister, if I could 
ask you to please respond to the question. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — The answer to that question is an MA 
(ministerial assistant) 4, chief of staff, Len Schell, salary of 
$3,692 – I thought I paid him more but his salary is $3,692; 
Lyle Krahn, ministerial assistant 2, $3,016. I believe he’s the 
one that’s had a raise. Yes, July 1, ’86, Mr. Krahn had a raise 
from 2,637 to his current salary of $3,016. He had been with the 
office for some time – was there before I took over as minister – 
and is showing excellent work. He’s the only one in my office 
who has received a raise, while I might say others have 
deserved raises. MA 2, Brenda Barootes is at $2,637 per  

month; Judy Lozinski is an MAC – that must mean secretary – 
she gets $1,795 per month; and a MAC, ministerial assistant 
secretary, Debbie Taylor at $2,079 per month. The only that’s 
had a raise is Lyle Krahn. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, is there a Debbie McNabb 
employed in your office who was involved in doing some 
research on day care which I believe is a Social Services 
program? What does Ms. McNabb make, please? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve already given 
her salary. She’s a ministerial assistant employed in my Labour 
women’s secretariat division. I’ve already given her salary. I 
don’t recall what it is, but it’s a public record in Hansard. She’s 
a ministerial assistant paid by Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment, and was doing that survey as a result of her duties 
concerning women’s issues, and that’s why there is an 
interrelationship between women’s issues and day care, so 
that’s why she was doing that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, have there been other people in 
the employ of your office, or paid through your office since you 
have come to office? And I refer specifically to one Brent 
Rathgeber, who I don’t believe you have referred to. Are these 
the only five people employed in your office, or are there 
others, or have there been others? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — In Social Services, Brent Rathgeber was 
with my office as a ministerial assistant 2, at a salary of $2,357 
per month. He’s returned to university and is studying law. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, could you advise me why Mr. 
Rathgeber, who was working as an executive assistant to you 
since January, until just recently, was working out of your law 
office in Melville? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Rathgeber was not working out of 
my law office in Melville. Mr. Rathgeber did constituency work 
in addition to the work he did in Regina, and worked out of my 
constituency office when he was in Melville, which wasn’t 
often enough because he was too busy here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, do any of these people that you’ve 
named have a government car or car allowance, and how much? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — They do not receive car allowances. 
They use a CVA (central vehicle agency) pool vehicle, if 
needed, and that’s the only time they have access to any kind of 
a government car. They are paid mileage for government travel, 
the same rate as all government officials. It’s about all I can say 
about it; it’s standard procedure. 
 
Just in case you have any misconceptions about . . . You raised 
something about a law office in Melville. I do own a half of a 
law office. If you’ll look in the records in the Clerk’s office it 
will show that I’m on a leave of absence without pay from that 
law office, and so I really don’t have much to do with who 
might be working at that office. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Is it, Mr. Minister, as a matter of fact, your law 
office something different from your constituency  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2297 
 

office in Melville? Are they located in the same rental space, 
the same building, perhaps? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, my constituency office 
has always been in the back of my building that is partly owned 
by a corporation and the constituency office operates in the 
back of the building. There’s some sharing of equipment and 
some economies of scale that way, but the two are not 
connected in any way. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well perhaps that would explain the confusion 
that some people have had, Mr. Minister. We’ll leave that to 
people to decide. 
 
Would you please advise, Mr. Minister, of the out-of-province 
travel in 1986-87 by yourself, your staff. Would you please 
provide me with the date, destination, number of persons in the 
trip, the purpose, and the total cost? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I apologize for the 
delay, but because I have two portfolios I’ve tried to sort out 
exactly how this worked. The information my officials have on 
the records is that out-of-province travel, January 22, 1987, 
Ottawa, federal-provincial ministers’ meeting: cost, meals and 
accommodation, $168. 
 
I’ve already given my out-of-province travel on the Department 
of Human Resources, Labour and Employment. As I recall on 
that trip I was returning from an Indian constitutional meeting 
in Halifax. I came through Ottawa and there was no additional 
air fare for this meeting, as I was combining meetings. So the 
only expenses we show is $168 in the last fiscal year for 
out-of-province travel. 
 
The records don’t show us any ministerial assistants being 
present at that time, and my assistant deputy was with me – he 
says he doesn’t recall any – but I think my ministerial assistant, 
Len Schell, was also in Halifax and either went through there, 
and it may have been charged to the other department which 
would already be in the record when I went through my 
estimates in the other department. But all that the records of the 
department show is $168 for meals and accommodation on that 
trip in the last calendar year. 
 
This year, so far, I’ve been in Halifax at one meeting and I 
don’t know the cost of it. I don’t think they have that material. 
But I also combined that with labour meetings. So that’s all we 
show. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you would truly be an 
inspiration for the member from Kindersley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, would you please advise me of 
your total in-province ministerial air travel in 1986-87, and 
again the same details as asked before: the staff who 
accompanied, date, destination, number of persons on trip, 
purpose, total cost. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the calculation is  

done on the basis of the last fiscal year, and I can only give you 
an answer that combines the staff that the former minister, 
Gordon Dirks, had, the staff that I have, the travel that Gordon 
Dirks did, and the travel that I did. And I’ll try to get that sorted 
out for you in just a second. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I just was interested in some questions, or your 
responses to some questions, a few questions back, given to the 
member for Moose Jaw North. And that concerns the question 
of the arrangement of your constituency office and of your law 
office. Just so that we understand this, Mr. Minister, your law 
office and your constituency office are in the same building. Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Yes, that’s correct; have been ever since 
1982. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Good. And, Mr. Minister, who is it that owns 
the building in which both your law office and the constituency 
office are located? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — The title will show that Century 
Properties Corporation owns the building. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, are you or any of your law 
partners principals in that corporation which owns the building 
in which your law office and the constituency office are 
located? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — The matter, Mr. Chairman, is not related 
to the estimates here, but I will answer the question. I own 50 
per cent of the shares of that corporation; have owned them 
since 1973. Brian Graff owns 50 per cent of the shares of that 
corporation; has owned them since – trying to recall – about 
two or three years or so. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m not trying to imply anything 
out of the ordinary, but it would be true to say then basically 
that you’re renting your office from yourself. And when Mr. 
Rathgeber, I believe, was working for you out of that office, of 
which funds were disbursed through your ministerial portfolio, 
was there some arrangement vis-à-vis Mr. Rathgeber’s salary 
and your constituency office or was that directly paid out of the 
moneys that came from your post as a minister of the Crown? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, finally we have a 
question that somehow relates to Social Services and the 
expenditures of my department. 
 
Mr. Rathgeber was assigned to take care of constituency 
problems, to deal with Social Services and any other kind of 
problems that relate to my portfolio that occur in that 
Yorkton-Melville region. He spent most of his time working out 
of the office here in Regina. 
 
From time to time when he was in, he would use space at my 
constituency office, and I see nothing improper with Mr. 
Rathgeber doing MA (ministerial assistant) work in my office, 
as I really don’t see why the government should try to find him 
a separate office in Melville when he is doing the work to assist 
the MLA and the cabinet minister for that particular area. So I 
really have nothing to hide,  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2298 
 

and I don’t really know why we should answer any more 
questions about this. There’s really nothing much to it. It’s 
common knowledge in Melville what he did. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, just one final question on this, Mr. 
Minister. It’s quite correct then for us to say that you are paying 
yourself rent in terms of your constituency office. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, there’s 
space used there for a constituency office. There’s a rental fee 
charged for constituency offices. I’ve gone a lot further in 
explaining the situation here than I’ve ever heard any member 
of the NDP explain how they operate and where they operate 
from. 
 
Maybe we should really look to see why Lorne Nystrom, MP 
for Yorkton-Melville, has his office in Melville City Hall, and 
how much of my taxpayers’ money is going towards Lorne 
Nystrom’s office, either federally or in Melville City Hall. And 
I would be quite prepared to look at moving my office to 
Melville City Hall, as Lorne Nystrom has, except I just don’t 
consider it appropriate that a federal or provincial politician 
should operate out of the City Hall in Melville. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, do you have that information that I 
had asked for now? Is that available? Or we can move on if it’s 
still being pulled together. 
 
Do you have it now, Mr. Minister? I can proceed to other 
questions and you can provide that later. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I can provide it now. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Okay. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — My in-province travel expenses for 
meals and accommodation are $388 – meals, accommodation 
and private vehicle mileage, that’s mileage for staff. Of course 
this covers the entire period of the Hon. Gordon Dirks being 
minister and myself, that’s $2,464. Government . . . I’ll try to 
break this down here, this next figure. Government aircraft 
travel is $5,539. Some of that, again, is staff that worked for 
Gordon Dirks, some of that is staff that works for me, and some 
of it is flights that I was on. And the total ministerial office – 
that would be myself, my staff, in-province travel expenses, 
mileage, government aircraft, charges that are charged back 
through – would be $16,380, keeping in mind that that would be 
for the entire year and would also include Gordon Dirks and his 
assistants at the time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, would you provide me, from 
1986-87, the costs that the department incurred for polling, 
advertising, aircraft charter or lease, and in each case could you 
identify for me the date, purpose, firm, and cost. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Which year did you want that 
information on? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — 1986-87, the previous fiscal year. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Now, Mr. Chairman, the best 
information I have is that there’s been no polling or  

surveying out of my department in the year in question. 
 
Contracts: the John Howard Society training package for 
alternate measures, young offender’s program, $21,000; 
Systemhouse, development of computerized Saskatchewan 
assistance plan computer system, $1,198,458; Stevenson 
Kellogg Ernst and Whinney, evaluation of SAP (Saskatchewan 
assistance plan) computer system, $12,197; and James B. 
Williams, demographic profile of life on Indian reserves, 
$19,731. Those are the consultants employed by the department 
in the year in question. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And, Mr. Minister, then there was no advertising 
costs or aircraft charter or lease costs. Is that what you’re 
saying? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the total spent on printing 
and publishing at the department was $342,913, of which 
printing of forms was $334,107; broadcast services, TV and 
radio, zero. The balance of $8,806 was for advertising 
development, $240; advertising placement, $4,919; advertising 
publications, $3,647; for a total of $8,806. 
 
I’ll try to get some idea of what the advertising was about, but it 
would be informational advertising with respect to Social 
Services. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And aircraft charter, was there any there, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, on aircraft charters we 
don’t have any information with respect . . . They don’t have 
anything available with respect to ministerial office chartering 
anything. There will be in the department northern charters for 
SAP workers and people of that sort flying around the North 
doing their duty in the Department of Social Services. We don’t 
have that information available. We expect it could be pulled 
together in about, oh, five days or so. 
 
But that’s where the bulk of the charter costs would be. I have 
no idea at this time what the amounts are. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, will you make me a commitment 
to provide that information in about a week. Is that possible? Or 
did I understand you correctly to say that? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, my staff says they 
could find that information in about a week and we’ll make it 
available to you. I’ll ask them to take note of that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. With 
respect to the government-wide efficiency productivity study 
being done by Coopers & Lybrand, Mr. Minister, did this 
agency incur any costs related to the . . . did the Department of 
Social Services, I’m sorry, incur any costs related to their study 
in 1986-87, or thus far in ‘87-88, and do you anticipate any 
costs . . . payments to Coopers & Lybrand in 1987-88? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I give the  



 
September 3, 1987 

2299 
 

same answer as I gave with respect to Human Resources, 
Labour and Employment, that these people were not hired by 
my department specifically. We have not received a bill for 
their services. I’m not sure if their services are provided to the 
government as a whole or specifically to my department. At 
present we have not received a bill, have no indication of what 
their fees would be. They simply came in and did their work 
and reported back and are not specifically part of this 
department’s estimates. So we have received no bill and we’re 
not sure if that will be allocated to each department or if it will 
be paid on a global basis. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, has your department since you 
became minister, used the services of Thorne, Stevenson and 
Kellogg to remove civil servants from their jobs, and if so, what 
was the cost of the services provided by them? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the firm in question was 
employed at an approximate sum of $12,000 – I read it out to 
you – to review the computer system which is not moving quick 
enough to suit my tastes, and we’ve made some management 
changes there. We’re trying to get the Social Services’ system 
entirely on computer so there’s a better cross-reference and 
we’re better able to keep track of any duplication or abuse that 
might be attempted on the Government of Saskatchewan. So 
that expenditure was on the computer system. 
 
Our department did not lay off any people. We did not have any 
employment counselling for people who were displaced from 
their jobs due to down-sizing. On the contrary, we had so many 
early retirements in our department that we’ve had to go out and 
start replacing people on the early retirements. We had a lot 
people who qualified and 123 people took early retirement, and 
we’ve had more back-fill in our department than in some of the 
others. 
 
You know, your suggestion that our department hired people to 
do something or other to our employees is not correct. It’s an 
assumption, might even be worse than that, but . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You mean it’s wrong again. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Yes, and my colleagues point out that it 
can best be described as an error. We had so many early 
retirements that we had to actually back-fill. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to see that you 
would find it distasteful that they would have been employed 
for the termination practices, that they employed the Minister of 
Education, in his estimates, was really quite flattered by their 
performance. I’m glad to see that there was not any of the 
red-box treatment given to the Department of Social Services’ 
employees. 
 
Mr. Minister, in 1981-82 estimates the Social Services 
administration line shows that there were 113 person-years of 
staffing for a total costs of $3,872,780. In last year’s budget 
there was a 127 employees and spending of $9,548,580. That 
seems to be a bit rich to me, Mr. Minister, even in the context of 
the spending of your government. And I ask you whether that 
strikes you as a  

bit expensive that the cost has tripled in the past five years for 
administration? And, Mr. Minister, I would welcome an 
explanation as to why that has happened. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the added costs there 
only show up in that category. We have a counterbalancing 
savings. The bulk of the expenditures the member refers to are 
expenditures for Sask. Computer Utility Corporation and 
Systemhouse computer corporation who are assisting us in 
getting Social Services onto a computer system so you can 
catch up with the technology of the modern world. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister – I’m not sure I’m 
understanding what you’re saying clearly – that the 
approximately $1,200,000 that you mentioned to me before that 
was being spent for computerization is included in this 
$9,500,000? Is that what you’re telling me? And if so, again I 
would ask if you could please advise me as to how if, as matter 
of fact, that is the case, it’s still more than double the cost of 
administration with an increase of only 14 positions – 127 as 
compared to 113. And why the costs for administration appears 
to be at least more than double in the last five years? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, part of the cost is 
converting to computers which will be a net saving of balances. 
That is the way it is set up. And now we include the staff 
training and development of the staff, which is approximately 
2,000 people in this vote, and therefore the vote would be 
higher than it once was. It’s a matter of where you put the cost 
of staff development. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Could you just advise me, Mr. Minister, then, 
how much of that cost, as a matter of fact, does go to staff 
training and development? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite, I 
understand, is going back to 1981 as a comparison, and this is 
the pre-technological era when we did scribing at the 
Department of Social Services – and this year’s budget, the 
computer costs are $3.6 million, and the staff development costs 
are $277,300. The balance would be towards administration 
salaries and things of that nature. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The Minister of 
Education shouted across the way that he’d enjoy some true or 
false questions, so let me put some to you. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the last Public Accounts, I noticed a payment 
of $31,041.96 to an agency listed as Wellman and Andrews, 
and I would ask, Mr. Minister, if you could tell me if that is the 
same Regina law firm which includes Roy Wellman, PC 
candidate in Regina Centre in the last provincial election. True 
or false, I guess, would be sufficient as an answer. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, as the members opposite 
will know that it’s a tradition of government to hire the best 
legal counsel available. And I recall that when I was a member 
of the NDP, I was very well qualified and I used to do some 
work for the Government of Saskatchewan, and that as soon as 
I joined the PC party, I was deemed not to be qualified as a 
lawyer any more and no longer did work for the Government of  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2300 
 

Saskatchewan. And we hire the best counsel we can find, and it 
turns out that, true, Roy Wellman’s office does good work; true, 
Roy Wellman’s office does legal work for the Department of 
Social Services; and true, as long as they do good work, they 
will continue. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, then I notice from Public Accounts 
as well there is a payment to a firm referred to as Chow, 
Ochrane, Walper and Associates. Would you tell me, Mr. 
Minister, if that’s the Moose Jaw law firm of the PC candidate 
in Moose Jaw in 1978, Kerry Chow. Would that be the same 
firm? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the answer would be si; 
I’m not sure who the candidate was in ’78; I’m not sure if it’s 
the same Kerry Chow. The member lives in Moose Jaw, 
probably would have a better knowledge of it than I do. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The answer to the question is, yes, Mr. Minister, 
unless there was another one that you were possibly referring 
to. 
 
How about on page 525 of the Public Accounts, there is a 
$51,665.07 payment listed as going to Hnatyshyn & Company. 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if this is the same Tory law firm in 
Saskatoon which has close ties to the PC member of parliament 
for Saskatoon West. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Justice of 
Canada is an excellent lawyer. I’m sure that anyone else with 
the name Hnatyshyn would be an excellent lawyer and should 
be entitled to practise their profession in this province. So I 
really don’t know what the question is. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The question is whether the firm has ties to the 
PC member of parliament. I think you’ve answered it. 
Obviously it’s yes. 
 
Mr. Minister, I found another interesting one, an expenditure of 
$38,995.65 going to the firm of Balfour Moss Milliken Laschuk 
& Kyle. And I ask, Mr. Minister: is this the same law firm that 
would have as partners the former PC member of parliament, 
now senator, Jim Balfour, and Mr. Kyle, the prominent PC 
bagman? Would that be the same firm, Mr. Minister? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — The answer is, it’s quite possible that 
that is the same firm and it’s quite possible that there are PC 
supporters, Liberal supporters, and NDP supporters in that firm. 
So I really don’t know who would be benefiting from this other 
than possibly that the government’s work is being done, and I 
haven’t really checked to see what colour shorts the lawyer 
that’s doing the work has. So I don’t know. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, there seems to be a lot of 
work done, to use your terms, by lawyers in blue shorts, and I 
think you’ve made that obvious. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the last instalment of Public Accounts on page 
524, I see an expenditure of $26,661.85 to Dome Advertising. 
Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what duties  

Dome performed for that money. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Excuse me, what year are you referring 
to? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The last Public Accounts, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I believe the member 
opposite is really referring to ‘85-86. We don’t have records 
with us that far back. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I believe that that’s not 
inappropriate to be asking questions in estimates from ‘85-86. I 
see the material has just arrived and let me repeat the question. 
Would you please advise what Dome Advertising did for the 
department to the expense of $26,661.85. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Dome Advertising 
is a large company and provide advertising services to many 
people in Saskatchewan and to some government departments. 
This was two years ago, and I really don’t know what 
specifically the services were for. I would expect they would 
have been for informational advertising in the department. From 
time to time we find it necessary to advise the people of 
changes in programs, improvements in programs, and we feel 
that the people should receive information in a positive nature, 
rather than in the politically partisan nature that the opposition 
spreads out there. And so we try to do a little informational 
advertising, but this is two years ago. I don’t know what it was 
about. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, we seem to be getting back to a 
pattern of answering questions that may cause us to be not 
making a great deal of progress at the end of yesterday and the 
first part of this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a number of other questions about specific 
expenditures in the ‘85-86 estimates, and I’d be happy to 
provide them to you in series here now. Will you give me your 
commitment that you will provide answers to these questions 
when next estimates come before this House? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, no, I won’t. The member 
should ask them in public accounts. If the NDP wouldn’t have 
wrangled about procedure and what a quorum should be, public 
accounts would be functioning right now. The member should 
ask those questions in public accounts and they’ll receive their 
answers. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, then let me just list them so 
as to be prepared to respond in public accounts if you’re not 
prepared to respond here. 
 
I refer you back again then page 524 of estimates, Dome 
Advertising, $26,661.85. I believe that’s the same Dome 
Advertising that did the advertising work for the PC Party in the 
last provincial election. 
 
Page 523, a payment of $12,339.67 to Bill Hicke’s Sporting 
Goods Ltd. Could you advise what that was for? To Schaan 
Healthcare Products Inc., $30,701.24. What goods or services 
did that provide, Mr. Minister? To Westfair Foods, 
$269,522.27; to Greyhound Lines of  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2301 
 

Canada, $45,495.25; to the Georgia Hotel, $28,580.43. Okay. 
 
Just a couple of other questions then, Mr. Minister. In the last 
Public Accounts, under the regional operations, the heading: 
allowances, retiring gratuities and temporary performance of 
higher duties, there was an expenditure of $127,632.05, and I 
would ask, Mr. Minister, if it is your opinion that that is a mite 
bit high and is a figure that could be reduced. Would you please 
advise me of your opinion, intentions in that matter? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if we’re dealing with 
1985-86, that was two years ago. I was not the minister of this 
department two years ago. Those are matters properly asked in 
public accounts, and I can’t really bring back a whole history of 
the Department of Social Services, stack it in the corner here, 
and go through it all in estimates. 
 
We’re dealing with the budget for the forthcoming year, and 
we’ve ranged rather widely because we have nothing to hide, 
but surely we should leave something for public accounts. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I suppose we’ll have to deal 
with it there. I don’t . . . can’t for the life of me understand why 
you’d be hesitant to deal with it in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, according to your ‘86-87 annual report, 1 per cent 
of the total funding for social assistance plan expenditures came 
from municipal governments in the amounts of $2,032,013. Mr. 
Minister, I’ve had some discussions with some representatives 
of municipalities who have expressed some concern about the 
charge to them of 1 per cent of the social assistance plan 
expenditures, and particularly in light of the cuts that have been 
made by your government to their funding in other regards. And 
I would ask you, Mr. Minister, whether you would consider 
withdrawing the burden of social assistance assessments to 
urban municipalities and make that recommendation within 
your caucus. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, nobody likes to 
pay money but surely asking the municipalities to pay 1 per 
cent of what . . . something that used to be 100 per cent of the 
municipalities’ responsibility is not asking for too much. 
 
Municipalities benefit considerably from our department. We 
have now got Saskatchewan employment development 
programs, either in the work and training model or the work 
training model. Prince Albert is benefiting from this; Saskatoon 
is benefiting at the Meewasin Valley; other communities are 
benefiting – Hudson Bay; and the list goes on and on. 
 
We haven’t had any requests from the city of Regina to 
participate in any of these type of projects, and I will be 
approaching them to see why the city of Regina is not interested 
in having social services recipients working on community 
projects in the city of Regina. But 1 per cent is not an 
unreasonable sum, and the Government of Canada and the 
Government of Saskatchewan pay 99 per cent of the welfare 
costs, and we don’t intend at this time,  

the budgets being what they are, to change that 1 per cent. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, what was the date of the last 
monthly report published by the Department of Social Services? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we’ve moved 
about eight months ago, I believe to quarterly reports rather 
than monthly reports, and I’m advised that the next quarterly 
report will be available soon; they are released to the public, are 
found in libraries, and are quite available, but the next one will 
be released soon. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, would you please advise me then 
why it was decided to change the practice to no longer produce 
the monthly reports from the department. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it costs a lot more money 
to produce; four reports a year are cheaper than 12, and we felt 
there was no need to put out all of that paper, that a quarterly 
report would be adequate. The world is not changing that 
quickly – although it’s changing quickly – that a quarterly 
report is adequate, and we’ll follow that procedure. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 
Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of Women back in 
1980 did a survey which showed that something like one in 10 
women was beaten by her spouse or her partner. 
 
In Saskatchewan today, approximately one-half of the women 
and children who seek shelter at transitions homes are turned 
away. And in the last two years that figure was approximately 
4,134 women and children who were turned away from seeking 
shelter in transitions homes because there was a shortage of 
space. 
 
But in spite of those statistics, Mr. Minister, there has been a cut 
in funding to transition homes. There was a 14.5 per cent cut to 
the Regina transition home; the La Ronge transition home 
funding is down or short some 35 per cent over the six month 
funding of the previous year. 
 
In rural areas such as Swift Current and Weyburn-Estevan, 
there has been a desperate demand for transition homes 
demonstrated, and yet the PC government has not provided 
funding for transition homes in those rural areas. There have 
been a number of other services with respect to women fleeing 
violent situations, often life threatening situations – a number of 
other services that help in cases like that that have been cut. 
 
The Mobile Crisis Unit in Prince Albert was hit with a 28 per 
cent cut-back. In Regina the Mobile Crisis Services was slashed 
by 14 per cent, and the Saskatoon Crisis Intervention Service 
was cut by almost 10 per cent. The  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2302 
 

Regina women’s family workers program was cut by a 
whopping 38 per cent. Family Service Bureaus have received 
small decreases – family service bureau which provide support 
service information, referral and counsel in Regina, Saskatoon 
and Moose Jaw. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I am wondering whether your department 
will reconsider its decision not to fund, not to set up transition 
homes in the rural areas that I have mentioned tonight, Swift 
Current and Weyburn-Estevan. Will you reconsider the decision 
not to set up transition homes in those areas? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in this area we 
should really start, right now to separate the politics, the 
partisan NDP politics from the reality, and we should really get 
down to seeing what can be done to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, our government has made no decision not to build 
transition houses in Estevan and Swift Current. I consider those 
a priority. As soon as funding is available, we will proceed in 
that regard. 
 
With respect to the Regina Transition House, new members of 
the NDP tried to spread a conception across the province that 
there was a massive cut to funding in transition houses and it’s 
clearly not the case. Transition houses have the same amount of 
money they had last year. Yorkton has extra money for two 
additional beds. 
 
Regina Transition House, when we consulted with these people 
. . . The NDP say we should consult, so we did. We consulted, 
and you remember the political discussions that they had in 
public. But when we consulted with the Regina Transition 
House as to ways that they could run more efficiently, possibly 
on a smaller budget – as many, many people in this province are 
having to do right now – you know, they said they wouldn’t; 
couldn’t and they wouldn’t. 
 
We then said to the Regina Transition House, in order to 
balance the expenditures per bed and the costs, would they 
consider, if they kept their present funding, would they consider 
providing an additional four beds. Now the member opposite 
alleges that people are being turned away. So we asked the 
Regina Transition House to consider four additional beds. 
Instead of considering the four beds they decided they would 
rather . . . And I don’t blame all of the people there, but the 
individual we were dealing with, though I believe she is no 
longer there, the assistant director or somebody to that effect, 
was more inclined to march on the legislature and fly balloons 
than to provide four additional beds in Regina. 
 
(2100) 
 
I believe at the time the decisions there were politically 
motivated rather than motivated for what would be best for the 
women of Regina. And because they would not consider the 
additional four beds, Regina does not have the additional four 
beds. 
 
When the member from Regina Lakeview alleges – and I say 
alleges – that half the people going to transition houses are 
being turned away, it seems very inconsistent  

that the Regina Transition House would not consider four 
additional beds. 
 
The situation with respect to transition houses is that I do not 
accept that one-half of the people that should stay there are 
being turned away. I do not accept that as a fact. I have a 
difficulty in dealing with third party agencies in getting a 
complete picture of how they do actually operate. But I am in 
the process and will be in the process of examining closely the 
operations of the transition houses to see why anyone is being 
turned away, if in fact they are – under the circumstances this 
might be happening – to see whether people are being turned 
away, or whether people are being counselled and then going to 
a family situation or an alternative accommodation. Certainly it 
seems highly unlikely that transition houses would turn people 
away. 
 
It seems to me that the more logical thing to do would be to 
take in people and then come and ask me to see the 
overcrowding if there is any. But they have not asked me to 
come and see the overcrowding. Instead, we have allegations 
from the member from Lakeview that half the people are being 
turned away. I would like to know if that is the case, why is it 
the case, and what should be done about it? That’s all I hear 
from the member from Lakeview, is, is pour money on the 
situation. That’s what I hear, but I don’t hear any practical 
solutions. I agree that it would be desirable to have a transition 
house in Estevan; it would be desirable to have a transition 
house in Swift Current, and I’m working in that direction. 
 
With respect to crisis units, it’s a very difficult situation. Being 
in government is a responsible position. You have to make 
difficult and responsible decisions. Being in opposition means 
that you can have one position one day and another position 
another day; in opposition you are not accountable for your 
statements; you’re not accountable for your actions. In 
government you have to be responsible; in government you 
have to make decisions; you have to make choices – choices 
that are not always easy. This government increased the health 
care budget by $36 million. This government has maintained 
social services; this government has maintained education, and 
in order to do that we have to make some difficult choices. 
 
With respect to crisis centres, this is where you phone for 
counselling. We made the decision that we would not fund 
crisis centres while the Department of Social Services’ offices 
were open to assist people. We believe that people in crisis 
should be phoning our social workers at the Department of 
Social Services who will deal with the problem or refer them to 
the appropriate agency that could assist. In most cases these are 
government health agencies, government funding 
non-governmental organizations, and government funded 
providers of counselling and contract services. 
 
So we believe that the first place that a person should phone in a 
crisis situation is the Department of Social Services and the 
social workers. So therefore it is not necessary to run the crisis 
centres 24 hours per day. And we have funded them for 
emergency services when the Department of Social Services 
would not ordinarily be open. 
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2303 
 

There has been some complaining about this, but it is a choice 
that we had to make. There were many, many difficult choices 
we had to make, Mr. Deputy Chairman, when we put together 
the budget in this province. And you will recall that some of the 
choices in these estimates are considerably higher taxes. Some 
of the choices are reductions in expenditure. Some of the 
choices are difficult choices, to maintain health care, to 
maintain medicare, to maintain social services, to maintain 
education. The lives of the people of Saskatchewan continue to 
be protected by the Government of Saskatchewan by their own 
tax money, and the government – people on this side of the 
House – have to make responsible decisions, and these are some 
of the decisions we made and why we made those decisions. 
 
So I will not accept wild allegations. I do acknowledge and 
know from personal experience that wife battering, that child 
abuse, is too common in Canada, in Saskatchewan, and this 
government has taken measures to try to prevent those things. 
This government has a policy of prosecuting everyone who has 
been alleged to have beaten their spouse. This government has a 
policy of vigorously prosecuting everyone who has abused 
children. And we have continued with those kind of programs 
to prevent child abuse, to prevent abuse of spouses, and I will 
be implementing other measures in the next few months. I 
consider this a priority, but I cannot promise to stamp out the 
problem, but I can promise to try, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I’m very pleased to see that the 
minister is considering funding transition houses in Weyburn 
and Swift Current, and I hope that that will be forthcoming very 
soon because there’s no question that the demand has been 
demonstrated in that area. 
 
With respect to his allegations concerning personnel at the 
Regina transition home, he said that they were more interested 
in marching against the cuts that we heard about this spring, 
that were dribbled out to the people of Saskatchewan on a 
piecemeal basis, day by day. He said that they were more 
interested in demonstrating. Obviously that was a sore point 
with him, Mr. Chairman, and I should also point out that the 
Regina transition home, or individuals that we have spoken to, 
feel that that’s the reason why they’ve been cut 14.5 per cent. 
They feel the real reason they’ve been cut is because they 
voiced their concerns publicly. And as we have spoken in this 
legislature on a number of times, that’s the politics that this 
government engages in – politics of fear, Mr. Chairman, 
whereby people who speak out against the government, because 
they don’t agree with what the government is doing, get their 
funding cut off. 
 
And let me just refer to a letter, Mr. Chairman, that was taken to 
the minister, the member from Melville. He would have a copy 
of this, dated May 1, 1987, and signed by Evanna Simpson, 
board president, who says, we cannot help but feeling – that’s 
the board president of the Regina transition home, I believe, 
who says: 
 

We cannot help feeling that we are being punished for 
being vocal and visible in our opposition to the cuts 
originally proposed a month  

ago. Because you have backed off from your original 
intent to cut all transition house budgets, it would appear 
that you have realized the negative effects such a move 
would have for service delivery. The fact that you have 
gone ahead with a substantial funding cut to Regina 
Transition House smacks of unfairness and petty revenge, 
an act unworthy of a minister of government. 

 
The freedom to publicly criticize those in power without 
fear of reprisal prevents the misuse of power and is the 
hallmark of true democracy. At transition house our 
business is freedom from fear and abuse of power (that’s 
their business at a transition house) so you can hardly 
expect us to remain silent when services and principles we 
believe in passionately and have worked hard to establish 
and uphold are cut down. 

 
Clearly this individual feels that the 14.5 per cent cut at the 
Regina transition home was an act of vengeance – an act of 
revenge because they’d spoken out publicly against this 
government’s cuts. 
 
With respect to the beds, cost per bed, there’s information here 
that demonstrates that the Yorkton transition home actually has 
a higher cost per bed, Mr. Minister. There was no cut to the 
Yorkton transition home, and the government attempts to justify 
it on the basis of the fact that the cost per bed is greater. 
 
The point is also made by the Regina transition home that their 
location in the University of Regina, their location in Regina, 
the same city as the University of Regina school of social work, 
the police college, the RCMP training centre, the provincial 
capital, and many media outlets, calls upon the expertise of 
their staff and requires them to do things beyond what you 
would do in a transition home in a rural area, for example. And 
therefore they feel that they need more staff available to meet 
those needs as well. That point was made to the minister, but he 
obviously ignored it. 
 
As to how many women are being turned away, I would suggest 
that if the minister doesn’t believe in our figures, then he should 
do his own studies and figure out exactly how many women and 
children are being turned away, because our information tells us 
something like 50 per cent of the people who show up at 
transition homes are being turned away. 
 
It’s really very ridiculous to say, well take them in, take them in 
anyway, because oftentimes there’s no room for them. 
Sometimes they are overcrowded as it is anyway. But if there’s 
no room for them, what do they do with them? They may put 
them in a hotel or turn them away. But the fact of the matter is, 
this has been happening at a rate that I feel is unacceptable in 
this province because protecting women who are fleeing violent 
life-threatening situations has to be a priority of this 
government. 
 
Now as I understand, some time back, Mr. Minister, the former 
women’s secretariat was to co-ordinate and chair a newly 
formed intergovernmental committee on family  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2304 
 

violence. I would like to know if that report is completed, and if 
it is, when we can receive a copy of it. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the member from 
Regina Lakeview has just indicated, possibly through a slip of 
the tongue, that she has not given us the clear and full picture 
with respect to women in need and the services available to 
them. And I will point out her slip of the tongue. 
 
She knew the truth, Mr. Deputy Chairman, but she wouldn’t tell 
us all of the truth. She would only tell us half of the truth. And 
first of all, since this government has taken office, services to 
women in need have increased by 82 per cent in budgetary 
expenditures. So certainly this government has put that area as a 
priority, has increased the budget in that area by 82 per cent. 
Yes, I agree, the problem persists, but the problem is not always 
the government’s fault. The government does as much as it can. 
 
The NDP terminology would be: I was appalled, I was shocked. 
That’s the kind of rhetoric they use. But I found it interesting 
because I don’t get appalled and shocked. I have seen all 
elements of the world, and I know there are some difficult 
situations. 
 
I won’t use the NDP rhetoric, but I was interested to read that 
an alderman in Regina, alderman Hamilton – could possibly be 
that this alderman has connections to the NDP – but I found it 
interesting that there was a slight increase in crime against 
women last year and this is not a good thing. Now this would 
depend on whether more crime was reported, more crime was 
detected, or there actually was more crime. But the statistics 
show that there was an increase in crime against women. 
 
Somehow this alderperson in Regina said, in the paper – in 
Regina’s paper – it was the Government of Saskatchewan’s 
fault that there was an increase in crime against women. 
Somehow the NDP and their supporters relate every problem in 
society to the PC Government of Saskatchewan. We somehow 
are supposed to be responsible for everything that every person 
does. 
 
(2115) 
 
We try to prevent crimes against women; we try to prevent 
abuse against children; we try to prevent crimes against men. 
We try to prevent these things, but surely not all of the sins of 
society are the fault of this government. But they don’t take into 
account that we have increased the funding for services to 
women who are victims of violence by 82 per cent since we’ve 
taken office. They also do not take into account that you have to 
draw a line between politics and helping people. 
 
The member opposite would suggest that one-half of the people 
that come to a transition house are turned away, and I 
questioned that figure. Then she says: oh yes, but they may go 
to hotels. 
 
Now let me tell you what other services are available to people 
in need in this province. The Department of Social Services – 
that’s the department I’m responsible for – very often, very 
often puts up women in need, who’ve  

had to leave their husbands, in hotels. We very often do this 
where necessary. 
 
If the member opposite is saying that we should build more 
transition houses because it’s not adequate to temporarily use 
hotels, then we have some degree of difference of opinion. But 
we cannot build for a capacity that we don’t know. We don’t 
know on any given weekend how many men may drink 
excessively and abuse their wives. On some weekends it could 
be more than others. We can’t have buildings designed for the 
worst weekend of the year. 
 
People come to us and they say: I can no longer live with my 
husband because either he beats me, or he drinks too much, or 
uses drugs. There are many, many reasons why women have to 
leave their husbands – legitimate reasons. And in those cases 
we have never denied a woman access to funds from the 
Government of Saskatchewan through Social Services. We 
have never denied a woman rent, food, clothing, the needs of 
the children; we have never denied that. We do it every day and 
we continue to do it. And to say that half the people are turned 
away and have nowhere to go and then admit that, yes, they can 
go to hotels – not to admit yet that, yes, the government does 
rent apartments for people in need, that is only telling half the 
truth. 
 
And the real last question here is: did the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan pay for those balloons that were supposed to fly 
to Melville and that I was supposed to see? Wouldn’t it have 
been simpler if they would have phoned me or sent me a letter. 
I read in the paper they were sending up balloons so that I 
would see them; I didn’t see any of these balloons in Melville. 
The question is, did the taxpayers of Saskatchewan pay for 
those balloons when the money should be spent helping 
women? 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, the minister didn’t answer my 
question. And I just have information for the minister, I would 
ask him not to put words in my mouth. I did not say women 
didn’t have anywhere to go, and you know that, sir. I said that 
they’re being turned away from transition homes. And if you’re 
suggesting to the people of this province and to those women 
and children who are being turned away from transition homes 
that hotels are adequate, then that shows your ignorance about 
the situation, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Those women need protection. They need 
protection from violent situations, and hotels hardly meet that 
requirement, Mr. Minister. But a man of your standing who is 
so ignorant on the issue of transition homes would make a 
statement to that effect. 
 
Your government, sir, your government announced remedies 
for women fleeing violent situations with a great deal of fanfare 
a few years ago – with a great deal of fanfare. Now we expect 
you to come through after all that publicity, we expect you to 
come through. 
 
Now you didn’t answer my question, and my question was that 
there was a study launched; where is that report? Is it 
completed, and can we have a copy? 
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2305 
 

Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, did you see the reaction 
of the member from Regina Lakeview when she was caught 
telling only half of the truth? That really answers the question 
and tells you everything that you need to know about her 
attitudes and why she is standing up here asking questions. It’s 
not out of concern, but it’s out of political motivation, to further 
her own political ends for who knows what, maybe even the 
leadership race. That is really what motivates the member from 
Lakeview is her personal aspirations, bankrolled by her 
$109,000 family income. And then she comes here and tries to 
sound so caring. Now you’ve really seen what motivates her. 
She got caught telling half of the truth, and when the other half 
came out, you saw the reaction. 
 
The answer to the question, the real question, is that the study is 
nearing completion and will be available when it is completed, 
and I expect to take more action in the future and to do 
everything possible to stamp out the abuse of spouses, 
particularly women and children. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I always have to chuckle when 
you bring my family income into the topic. You seem to do it 
very, very often. The PC’s attempted that during the last 
election too, but it didn’t work. Besides, I understand you, as an 
individual, earn more than my husband and I combined. The . . . 
Paying 40 or 50,000 income tax you must. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you still didn’t answer my question as to 
whether or not we could receive a copy of that report and when 
the report will be completed. I didn’t hear that in your response, 
and I’ll ask you once again, or are you going to still attempt to 
hedge and run around in circles and not answer questions as 
you’re supposed to do in this House? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, sorry, Mr. 
Chairman, we’ve been switching and I’d like to address you by 
your proper title. 
 
Mr. Chairman, when I receive the report, I will give it 
consideration and I will decide at the time then whether the 
public would be served by having the NDP given access to that 
report. I believe it’s an internal document. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Is that report, Mr. Minister . . . The taxpayer, I 
assume, is paying for the preparation of that report. I would 
think that the taxpayer would be entitled to see what the results 
of it are, especially on an issue of wife battering. Now, Mr. 
Minister, how close is that report to completion? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the report is nearing 
completion, I’m advised. It’s an internal government study. The 
best way to reveal to the public what is in the internal 
government’s study is to announce implementation of new 
programs and changes, and we will do those in due course when 
we are ready to implement them. 
 
Ms. Simard: Mr. Minister, a major public awareness campaign 
was promised by the PC government. Could you tell me what 
this campaign involved, and when did it take place? 

Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the questions asked here 
relate to Human Resources, Labour and Employment. The 
member from Lakeview and I had a long discussion on that 
department, and I don’t have the officials from that department 
with me today. Had she asked the question when the officials 
were here, we could have possibly been able to provide more 
information. 
 
We have, as a priority, the prevention of abuse of women and 
children, and I suppose, in the rarest of cases, the abuses of 
husbands, but we wouldn’t want to limit the prevention of 
abuse. And we will do everything possible to assist people in 
need; we will do everything possible to prevent the situation 
from happening. But the government will not take responsibility 
for all the sins committed in this province, and that’s what the 
opposition would want us to do. 
 
Ms. Simard: — That’s ridiculous, Mr. Minister. That’s just 
ridiculous. The PC government promised a major media 
campaign – awareness campaign. You made that promise. It 
was a Social Service promise. Obviously you never followed 
through on your promise or you’d have that information for me 
today. 
 
Now Mr. Minister, in 1984 the government promised $800,000 
for new programs against family violence. Could you please 
outline for me which new programs were developed and how 
the 800,000 was distributed to each of these new programs. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, did I hear correctly? Was 
the question about 1984 and what was started in 1984? 
 
Ms. Simard: — I said, Mr. Minister, in 1984, $800,000 for new 
programs was promised. Now I would like you to advise today 
what new programs were developed over the last few years to 
spend the $800,000 that the PC government promised. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the initiatives are 
scattered across many government departments. I’ll try to give 
you an overview of what’s been done. Justice has increased the 
prosecution of wife batterers; health has a treatment program 
for batterers of women and children; Social Services funds a 
range of services to battered women. And as I indicated earlier, 
in the last five years funding in that area has increased by 82 per 
cent. There was a public awareness campaign. I don’t doubt that 
we’ll have to proceed with another one and another one after 
that. And we will have to carry on with more programs and new 
programs in order to try to prevent this situation from 
continuing. But the programs I’ve referred to have cost in 
excess of $800,000. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Is it possible, Mr. Minister, for us to get a 
breakdown as to exactly how much was spent on each of these 
programs from your department? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, those 
programs are spread across government departments: Health, 
Social Services, Justice. And I’m not saying it’s impossible, I’m 
saying it’s impractical, and we won’t be attempting to calculate 
all that out and break it down for  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2306 
 

them. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, there are a number of people that 
are of the opinion you haven’t spent the $800,000. Therefore, if 
you wish to allay their fears, I would suggest that you are 
forthcoming with that information and that you provide us with 
the information as exactly how much you have spent. 
 
The minister is aware of the La Ronge situation which I referred 
to in the House the other day, the fact that because the funding 
was put in for a 12-month period is 35 per cent less of what it 
was if you multiplied the six month period by two. The minister 
is aware of that situation and, as a result, I understand it’s 
creating problems at the La Ronge transition home inasmuch as 
they cannot staff it on a 24-hour basis as they would wish to. 
 
So I’m asking the minister today whether he would commit 
himself to increasing funding to the La Ronge shelter to its 
required operating level so that security may be provided to the 
women and children fleeing violent situations in that part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to La 
Ronge, in addition to the money received from the Government 
of Saskatchewan, they also receive money from Indian Affairs. 
So all of their funding wouldn’t be shown in the Saskatchewan 
budget, but you would also have to look at the budget of the 
Dominion of Canada. 
 
(2130) 
 
Our figures show that they have an increase this year of 
$14,000. They were never designed, or did not apply to be a 
transition house, but a safe shelter. And when you combine all 
of these factors and the number of beds they have there, we feel 
that there is adequate funding at La Ronge for the services 
required at this time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — The $14,000 increase, I assume, is the one 
you're referring to that the provincial government gave. But the 
minister is aware that the $94,500 that La Ronge was receiving 
in ’86-87 was only for a six-month period. The $14,000 
increase in ’87-88 was intended by the government to apply to a 
12-month period. 
 
As a result, there is a 35 per cent reduction – or whatever – drop 
in the cost for the total year. If you take 94,500 times two, it’s 
much higher that 108,900. So the $14,000 increase was for the 
additional six months, when the first six months operated at 
94,500. 
 
Now you mentioned funding from Indian Affairs. Could you 
tell me how much, and what it’s intended to be used for, and 
whether it’s supposed to be used for the La Ronge shelter? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the safe shelter in La 
Ronge that we’re discussing here just started up last year. The 
extra money last year was for start-up costs to get it going. The 
Department of Social Services had a difficult time in getting the 
safe shelter operating and running at La Ronge. There was 
considerable disorganization at the board there, and they were 
not as organized as other  

places are. And we had to struggle quite a lot to try to get the 
board organized well enough to get the shelter going. The 
reason that the figures may vary from last year to this year is 
that there is always extra money in a start-up year. 
 
We do not know at this time what the federal amount is. They 
are negotiating with the federal government. Because of the 
disorganization of the board last year, they are having some 
difficulties in their federal negotiations, I understand. 
 
This is the best information I have available. Had they been 
better organized in La Ronge, things would run smoother. But 
they are certainly not lacking for money there. Mostly, I would 
think, they need to improve their management and their 
organization. I believe that good services can be provided with 
the money that is being provided. And the federal figures we 
don’t have the details on. 
 
Ms. Simard — Mr. Minister, Social Services has implemented 
a safe house program in Melfort on a pilot project basis, and I 
am wondering whether a review of this program has been 
undertaken? I would like to know what the total budget of the 
safe house program is? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the review there has been 
shared with the organization in Melfort. They have asked – and 
I compliment them for combining the safe shelter program with 
the crisis line, and they have combined the funding there. The 
total is $107,000 per year at the Melfort safe shelter. In a long 
term stay, people would go on to Prince Albert. In excess . . . 
usually the people there seek safety there for one to five days. 
The project has gone quite well, and we are quite pleased with it 
so far. 
 
There were concerns expressed by the people at the shelter 
about the security and safety of the people seeking shelter. The 
study was done and indicated that there were no major 
problems with security and safety for the people seeking 
shelter. For the most part, Melfort is a smaller city, quite a 
peaceful city, and it’s not a dangerous place. There are instances 
where women need to seek assistance and safety, and they are 
receiving that at the Melfort safe shelter. And we feel that the 
$107,000 which has combined their crisis money and their safe 
shelter money, which I believe before that was 106,000 total, is 
an adequate sum at this time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Could the minister give us a breakdown of the 
expenditures at the safe house program to, for example, 
payments to host families and transportation costs when 
transferring women? And also could he give us an indication as 
to the impact of the program on the host family? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the best information 
we’ve got is that the impact of the program has been quite 
positive for the safe home operators. There has not been a high 
turnover in safe home operators. We don’t have the exact 
figures on the transportation costs, and my officials believe that 
they could have them available by tomorrow and they’ll try to 
locate those costs. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, in the final report of the  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2307 
 

federal-provincial territorial working group on wife battering, 
the Department of Social Services stated that it has established 
six family crisis centres in rural Saskatchewan in order to 
respond to the needs of battered women in rural areas. Could 
you please tell me where those six family crisis centres are 
located, when they were established, and what their operating 
budgets are? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 
quoting from an internal government document that may 
contain an error as far as we can ascertain. There are four, plus 
two others, that provide this type of services in Regina and 
Saskatoon. It’s quite possible that whoever prepared the 
document included the Regina and Saskatoon ones in the rural 
classification. 
 
What we have here is the West Central Crisis Centre in 
Kindersley, annual expenditure of $36,430; the North East 
Crisis Intervention Centre, Inc., crisis centre and safe home in 
Melfort which we’ve advised previously is $107,660 – that’s a 
combined centre; the South West Crisis Services Inc., Swift 
Current, $36,420; the society for the improvement of good 
neighbours inc., crisis counselling service, Yorkton, $36,900; 
the Saskatoon Family Service Bureau, battered women’s 
support group, $25,000; the Family Service Bureau of Regina, 
battered women’s support group, 25,000, for a total expenditure 
of $267,410. They employ 36 people. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the Yorkton Crisis Centre 
recently closed down because of a refusal of funding from this 
government. Now I understand they took something like 14,000 
calls for assistance in the past year, which is a lot of calls, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now I know you said earlier in your remarks that you’re trying 
to encourage people to telephone the Department of Social 
Services instead when women, for example, are in a crisis 
situation and are in life-threatening situations. They are instead 
supposed to phone the Department of Social Services rather 
than the Yorkton Crisis Centre, for example. Can you please tell 
me whether or not the Department of Social Services in that 
area has a line that is open on a 24-hour basis, and what the 
number is if you’ve got it, and whether it is in that particular 
area or where is the line situated? 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the Yorkton Crisis 
Centre was started with federal government money. It was not, 
as far as I know, indicated to be permanent money. Quite often 
the federal government will give out money, and this was done 
a few years ago and put it out as seed money to start a particular 
service. This service has never been funded by the Department 
of Social Services. This year, when their federal funding 
expired, they came to the Department of Social Services and 
requested that the Department of Social Services take up the 
funding for the Yorkton Crisis Centre. 
 
In the Department of Social Services we have to weigh the 
priorities and the needs. And I live in the Yorkton-Melville 
area; I’m familiar with the services in that area, and right in the 
city of Yorkton there are substantial services that now exist, and 
the Government of Saskatchewan already provides direct 
services. I wrote the Yorkton Crisis Centre and advised them 
that we would have to make our  

expenditures for direct services. 
 
I also had information from them on the number of phone calls. 
It could have been 14,000; I don’t recall the figure being that 
high. You would have to consider whether the phone calls were 
crisis or whether they were information. And I recall going 
through the statistics provided to me by the Yorkton Crisis 
Centre and the overwhelming majority of the referrals there 
were either to government-funded hospitals, the Yorkton 
Psychiatric Centre, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, to 
government-funded services through non-governmental 
organizations such as SIGN (Society for the Involvement of 
Good Neighbours) and the friendship centre. 
 
So that the majority of what the crisis centre was doing was 
referring people to existing government-funded facilities. In 
addition, some of the referrals were to priests and pastors and to 
men and women of the cloth, who have traditionally helped in 
family crisis. And so, therefore, the priorities of the 
government, and at the time the request came through, at the 
time of the budget year, the priorities of this government have 
to be to provide services where they do not exist. 
 
(2145) 
 
And as indicated earlier, the services are going to be needed and 
are needed in Estevan, are needed in Swift Current. Yorkton has 
considerable services of this nature, and I indicated to them 
earlier today, when the media phoned me, that there were some 
services that should be continued by the community and funded 
by the community if the community feels that those services are 
necessary. And this is a case where the federal government was 
generous and is now trying to terminate the funding, get out of 
the funding, and the provincial government cannot pick up 
every federal program that the federal government, in the days 
of Pierre Trudeau, funded, and it is now being passed over to 
the provincial government. We try our best, but we find in the 
Yorkton area there are considerable services provided. 
 
There is a common trend that you will see with the NDP when 
we discuss social services. I have yet to ever hear them mention 
anything about the assistance of religious leaders, the assistance 
of the church. They do not seem to have a place in their policy 
for the church, for the counselling of pastors, of priests, of 
parish workers. They do not seem to have a place in their policy 
for that kind of traditional help that church people have given to 
each other for years and years. 
 
So while I do not say the churches should take up all of the 
burdens of society, I do say that we should not try to replace 
churches with government. So I would say that there should be 
a balance between what people can do for each other with what 
people, through their churches, can do for their brothers and 
sisters, as required by the Bible, and what the government will 
provide on a secular basis. And you never find anywhere in the 
NDP policy that there should be a co-operation between 
churches and the government in helping people. 
 
We believe very strongly in that kind of a philosophy, and I 
have explored in many, many ways how there can be  
  



 
September 3, 1987 

2308 
 

more co-operation between the churches and the government to 
help people. And that is just something that the NDP should 
seriously consider because their roots, going back many, many 
years, were based on devout, religious people, and gradually the 
NDP has drifted to become a secular, socialist, political party. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, that’s absolutely hilarious. You 
can always tell when the member from Melville knows that 
what his government has done is wrong because he goes on this 
long, ad hominem argument about the NDP and how terrible 
they are. You always know an oratorical excursion and all sorts 
of rhetoric about the evil NDP. He knows that the Yorkton 
Crisis Centre with its 14,000 calls was serving a very important 
function in the society of Yorkton. He knows that. 
 
He knows that they should have continued to fund them, but 
instead he would have us believe that it’s the NDP who are 
going by the way and he has to get himself involved in this long 
explanation. So you can always tell when he knows that what 
his government has done and what decisions he’s made is 
wrong; when he knows in his heart that he’s wrong, because he 
will have to go on with these long, political explanations. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, there’s another area that I wish to address 
tonight, and that’s the question of child counsellors. As we 
know, in our transition houses there are many children that go 
there with their mothers, and many of these children have been 
beaten themselves and have been part of this violent situation. 
Many of them are emotionally affected by the violence in the 
home – very seriously affected. There have been studies that 
indicate that child counsellors are essential to transition homes, 
and I believe that the government has even recognized the need 
for child counsellors. 
 
We also know the fact that children who are beaten often 
become batterers themselves later on, and that there’s this 
vicious cycle of violence. We have to somehow work at 
interrupting that cycle. It has been suggested that child 
counsellors in transition homes would be helpful in that regard. 
 
So what I would like to know from the minister is whether he 
would reconsider his decision not to fund child counsellor 
positions at provincial transition houses, and whether he would 
seriously look at funding child counsellor positions. 
 
Hon Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will seriously 
look at more child counselling, but I have to look at the means 
of delivery. I am more inclined to look at the means of delivery 
through the Department of Social Services and the professional 
social workers that we have in the department. We have better 
control over the quality than if we pay money to a third-party 
agency. 
 
So therefore what I am considering now is more child 
counselling, but the means of delivery would be through the 
Department of Social Services and the social workers that we 
now have on staff. And that gives us a better quality control on 
the type of counselling and the degree of counselling, and we 
feel that that is a better way to expend the taxpayers' money on 
the protection of  

children. Because we already have a lot of expertise and we 
have responsibility for the protection of children, we have put 
an extra million dollars into child care and foster care. 
 
The NDP talks about everything negative they can think of. I 
should really tell you about some positive things. In the foster 
care area we have tried to increase the rate. I have indicated it is 
not enough. I believe foster parents should receive additional 
money; when it can be found it will be there. We are increasing 
training for foster parents. We have instituted through the 
Foster Parents Association an insurance plan for foster parents. 
And on the whole we have increased child protection in many, 
many ways. 
 
But this whole area gets back to some of the things earlier 
discussed about – and I indicated to this when we were talking 
– how the former deputy of Social Services, a man who has 
been much discussed here, operated the department. One of the 
things that this province does still not have – and I have just 
about completed the agreement – is a native child-care 
agreement where the federal government would pay their share. 
We would use our jurisdiction, and the bands would take care 
of custody/child protection amongst their own reservations, 
amongst their own people. 
 
It is an unfortunate fact that approximately 70 per cent of the 
children in custody in Saskatchewan are of Indian and Metis 
origin. So we have to spend more money. We feel that the 
federal government should be involved; we have just about 
concluded a child care agreement. This is something that was 
not considered in the past years by the officials in my 
department. So we should really talk about the improvements in 
child care, the improvements in foster care, and those kinds of 
situations. 
 
We now have 2,078 children in custody that are my 
responsibility as the Minister of Social Services, being the 
official parent on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. We 
would like to reduce that number, but it is a constant problem in 
balancing the protection of the children and keeping the family 
together. Sometimes we are criticized at the Department of 
Social Services for having children in too many foster homes – 
that they’re in one foster home and then in another foster home 
and that they’re, in effect, bounced around. 
 
That is a problem, but the problem arises because you have a 
situation where we try to send the children back to their family 
as soon as we think it is safe. And then it turns out that the 
family conditions deteriorate and we have to apprehend the 
children again. So you have a constant problem. You are not 
dealing here with an absolute science, you’re dealing with the 
lives of people, and my 2,000 workers try their best to help 
these people in every way possible. 
 
So we should look at the positive side of all this and not 
continue to emphasis the negative, as the NDP constantly do. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:56 p.m. 
 
 


