













































September 10, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 10, 1987 

 

 

2407 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Child Hunger in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I direct my 

question to the Minister of Human Resources, and it deals, Mr. 

Minister, with a disturbing problem that’s been growing more 

serious in recent times. I refer, of course, to the problem of 

child hunger. It’s a problem, Mr. Minister, that has grown 

beyond being an urban Saskatchewan problem and has entered 

into the rural life as well. In these tough times on the farm, 

more and more young family farmers are having difficulty 

feeding and clothing their children. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, as minister responsible for both 

Social Services and Human Resources: just how serious do you 

see the problem of child hunger in Saskatchewan being? And 

what new initiatives do you have in mind to deal with this very 

serious and growing problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I was in rural 

Saskatchewan yesterday evening, and while things are tough on 

farms, the farmers of Saskatchewan are still feeding their 

children. And no one should suggest that they’re not. 

 

Secondly, there is a concern with children going hungry; it is a 

concern that our department looks into as much as possible. I do 

not accept at all that child hunger is a financial problem, but it 

is a social problem. And we are taking measures to have our 

social workers look into these social problems and try to 

ascertain why the money for food is not getting to the children. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 

may not believe that child hunger is a serious problem in 

Saskatchewan, but I assure you it is. Last year in Saskatchewan 

food banks distributed nearly 1,000 tons of food, and over half 

of that to be consumed by children, Mr. Minister. When 

community schools have breakfast and lunch programs that 

result in line-ups of over an hour, and we have in the 

bread-basket of the world children going to bed hungry, I say 

that’s a disgrace, and I say we have a problem. 

 

And I ask you again, Mr. Minister, I ask you again: does your 

government have any specific initiatives in mind to deal with 

this very serious problem for the children of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to meet with 

the school boards, where the problem exists, to ascertain the 

nature of the problem. I’m prepared to study the situation to see 

what is the cause of the problem. I’m prepared to have social 

workers go to the schools and interview teachers. But I’d prefer 

to work out the process  

with the school boards before we take any action out of the 

ordinary course of what our social workers now do. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I ask 

if you have urged your cabinet colleagues to expand the 

community schools program, in rural Saskatchewan as well as 

urban, and also to provide funding for lunch programs in those 

community schools. That’s an immediate way of dealing with a 

very critical problem. And, Mr. Minister, I ask: have you 

proposed the idea to your caucus and your government to 

address this real problem for Saskatchewan children? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, traditionally in 

Saskatchewan parents have fed their children, and we believe 

that that tradition should continue. We take measures so that 

every parent in Saskatchewan has money to buy food, and we 

are prepared to look at the problem as it exists and, as I’ve 

indicated earlier, it is a social problem; that even in the 

hungriest of years, the hungry ‘30s, the people of Saskatchewan 

fed their children. And so there’s no excuse for one not feeding 

one’s children. It is against the law of Canada to neglect 

children, under the Criminal Code, and it is against the laws of 

the province. 

 

So we will take all measures that we can to make sure that 

parents are using money to feed their children. And if parents 

do not have enough money, then they should apply to us, and 

they qualify if they do not have enough money. But other than 

initiating food stamps or something of that nature, or paying the 

money directly to children, or having children issued with food 

rather than their parents with cash, there is a limited amount of 

control that the government has over families – and I think it 

should be a limited amount of control. The responsibility is for 

parents to feed their children. We will help them if they need 

help. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I am not interested in empty 

rhetoric. I am interested in seeing the real problem addressed 

with a real solution. And I ask you, Mr. Minister . . . You are 

aware that municipal councils, you are aware that school boards 

and community agencies and social agencies have expressed 

their concern about child food shortages and child hunger, and 

they’re prepared to work together. You admit in this House that 

you have no solutions in mind, and I ask you: will you show us 

some real leadership, at least with the sponsorship of a 

conference to bring these groups together to talk about the 

concerns and find real solutions to the problem of child hunger 

in Saskatchewan? Will you at least provide that kind of a 

solution and initiative to help the Saskatchewan groups solve 

their problem with Saskatchewan children? Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, recently I had  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2408 

 

correspondence from the mayor of Regina indicating that he felt 

there was a problem in the city. I replied to the mayor that I was 

prepared to meet with the school boards and with the city, the 

mayor of Regina, and try to get to the bottom of the problem 

and look as possible solutions. But simply to immediately 

initiate the school lunch program, where would we do that? 

Would we do that in certain parts of Regina, in all of Regain, or 

in all of Saskatchewan? This would have to be examined as an 

overall policy. I am prepared to meet with the school boards 

and with the mayor and council, as I’ve indicated, and try to 

ascertain how broad the problem is and what solutions can be 

found. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Final supplementary. 

Mr. Minister, this is not a Regina problem; it is a Saskatchewan 

problem. I ask if you will provide the forum for interested 

groups who care about child hunger to come together and work 

to find solutions? Will you provide the resources to do that at 

least, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

suggesting that we provide resources, which I think in the 

terminology of the members opposite is that we provide money 

so that people can be paid to come, or paid their expenses to 

come together and work on this problem. I am prepared to, as 

I’ve indicated to the mayor of Regina, meet with the school 

boards and the city to see what can be done about the situation 

in Regina. Outside of Regina there hasn’t been a very visible 

problem. 

 

Closing of Yorkton Crisis Centre 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want also to address 

my question to the Minister of Human Resources. As the 

minister may well be aware, that the Yorkton Crisis Centre is 

closing its doors next week because the government has refused 

to give a grant, an operating grant of $60,000. The Yorkton 

Crisis Centre case-load went up by 300 per cent last year – 

1,200 people in stress were able to go to the crisis centre. 

 

Sixty thousand dollars it takes to maintain that crisis service to 

the people in need, many of who are families in stress under 

economic circumstances. And I say to you, if you have 

priorities where you can give George Hill $200,000 or Paul 

Schoenhals $100,000, can you give to the crisis centre in 

Yorkton, which provides for over 1,200 people support, can you 

find $60,000 to keep it open? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, first of all the crisis centre 

in Yorkton has provided a useful function in the community. 

There are many, many functions in many communities that can 

be provided in many, many ways with respect to many 

problems. So the first criteria, or the fact that it is a useful 

function, is not the main criteria that a government can 

consider. The government has to consider the need for this 

useful function. 

 

Now in the case of the Yorkton Crisis Centre, there has  

been a misconception that somehow this was a provincial 

government funded, sponsored, and operated crisis centre. It 

was not, and it never was. It was started under special money 

from the federal government several years ago. 

 

The special money from the federal government has now run 

out, and they have now come to the province and said, will you 

take over the costs of operating this crisis centre? We have to 

weigh the needs in other parts of the province and the existing 

facilities that there now are in Yorkton. I didn’t do a specific 

calculation, but I did a quick calculation when I looked at the 

1,400 referrals, and there were not 14,000 as suggested by the 

member from Lakeview a few days ago in this Assembly – 

1,400 referrals. 

 

When you look at those 1,400 referrals, more than half of them 

– and I don’t have a specific figure, but my quick calculation 

was that approximately 60 per cent were to government-funded 

helping institutions in Yorkton already, which included the 

Yorkton Psychiatric Centre, the hospital, and Shelwin House; 

the contracts that go to non-governmental organizations like 

SIGN (Society for the Involvement of Good Neighbours), and 

the Yorkton Friendship Centre – and so most of those calls by 

the people phoning directly to the agency that would help them, 

could have had their problem solved. 

 

In addition, there are traditionally the R.C.M.P. where they 

refer people to. There is the church groups that have 

traditionally helped their people. So when you consider that the 

bulk of the calls were simply referrals to existing 

government-funded facilities, we had to weigh the need in 

Yorkton as compared to the need for that expenditure in other 

parts of the province. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

you’re correct that the program was initiated and initially 

funded by the federal government for over three years. That, it 

seems to me, has given you enough lead time to be able to have 

evaluated it. Many of the programs that we had in 

Saskatchewan were initiated by the federal government and 

subsequently funded by the provincial government and taken 

over by the provincial government if worthwhile. I ask you: 

where is your forward planning? Are you, in fact, saying that 

the Yorkton Crisis Centre does not serve an important enough 

function of 1,200 people in crisis that you can’t find $60,000 to 

keep it operating? Is that what you’re saying? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, this is something that the 

province is now supposed to inherit from the federal 

government. Three years ago before a federal election, the 

federal government spent money on various projects. This was 

one of the projects they spent money on. Is the province to take 

over every federal project that the federal government, whatever 

their policies are, may abandon or may decide to start? We have 

to weigh a need and the duplication that there now exists, and 

that has to be taken into account. And we cannot have all of the 

services in one place and no services in another place. 

 

The regional office of Social Services is in Yorkton,  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2409 

 

Saskatchewan. There are a large number of social workers 

available right in Yorkton. In addition to the other functions, it 

is a regional city. There are other parts of Saskatchewan that do 

not have any of those, or very few of those facilities. 

 

And we have to weigh health care in other places; we have to 

weigh counselling and various other things in other parts of 

Saskatchewan, and we cannot have duplication. We cannot have 

the federal government of any given day deciding how the 

province of Saskatchewan is going to service its people. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Further supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, are you aware that the Yorkton Crisis Centre provides 

a 24 hour a day service to people in crisis? Are you aware of 

that? And I ask you, if you are not, can you indicate whether 

other government agencies, churches, or other organizations 

which are available to help people in crisis, do they provide 24 

hour service? Or does your department? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, social workers in the 

Department of Social Services are available on an emergency 

basis. In addition, the Yorkton Psychiatric Centre operates 24 

hours a day, seven days a week – when you are talking about 

emotional problems and suicide. The RCMP are available 24 

hours a day. And I do not believe that any church leader or any 

person of the cloth in Yorkton would turn away someone in 

need who phoned them at 2 o’clock in the morning and said, I 

need help in this regard; what should I do? 

 

So these facilities are available, in Yorkton as much as they are 

in other larger cities, and so therefore we have to weigh the 

need in a certain region compared to other regions. And this is a 

referral service – 1,400 calls, 60 per cent of which are already 

made to government-funded services already available in the 

city of Yorkton. So we have to consider the duplication here. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I want to agree with you that the 

community groups, the churches, and other groups are 

providing help to people in stress. But I say to you here, Mr. 

Minister, how can you be so callous to close down a crisis 

centre helping over 1,200 people, and at the same time your 

government spends for political promotion $20 million a year or 

more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, our commitment to 

Yorkton and eastern Saskatchewan cannot be questioned. In 

addition to all the existing facilities, the Whitespruce youth 

Drug and Alcohol Treatment Centre is now being put into 

place, will be in operation soon, will cost approximately $1 

million to operate when it’s in full operation. That area, that 

part of Saskatchewan will have more government facilities than 

almost any other area when it comes to people in need. In 

addition, the women’s shelter received extra beds this year so 

that we have not disregarded Yorkton. Yorkton is well served 

and we . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order, 

please. I’d like to ask the hon. member to my left to please 

refrain from interrupting the minister. If you have a few words 

you’d like to wrap up with, I’ll give that permission now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It should not be forgotten that in eastern Saskatchewan a lot of 

that based out of the city of Yorkton, that there are services of 

all kinds available to all of the people in that area, and in 

addition, the new service of the drug rehabilitation centre for 

youth – the first of its kind in Canada – and that should not be 

forgotten. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Question to the Minister of Social Services. 

Can he explain to this House how the Whitespruce Drug and 

Alcohol Treatment Centre for young people would have 

anything to do with women who are abused and children that 

are abused? Can you explain how that centre can possibly help 

those people, Mr. Minister? And those people were helped by 

the Yorkton Crisis Centre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Yorkton Crisis 

Centre, I said, formed a useful function, but it has to be weighed 

whether it’s the best way to solve problems. And in our view 

the best way for problems to be solved is by professional 

people, either at the psychiatric centre, either at the RCMP, 

either the clerical people – all of those things are done by 

professional people. Shelwin House serves women in Yorkton 

and area, and so it is not anywhere near accurate to say that the 

services are not there now. And they are done by professional 

people rather than referrals. And I don’t think people who are 

doing referrals should be getting into the area where the 

professionals already exist. 

 

Collapse of Principal Group 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question should be 

to the Minister of Consumer Affairs but in her absence to the 

Minister of Finance. I have a letter from the Principal Group 

auditors dated May 1986. It warns that the real estate held by 

First Investors Corporation and Associated Investors 

Corporation was worth millions of dollars less than the 

companies had claimed in their 1985 financial statements. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m assuming you know that The Investments 

Contract Act is a Saskatchewan law and that it requires that 

these statements be filed with the Department of Consumer 

Affairs. Officials in that department received this written 

warning in May of 1986. Why did you, your government, and 

your officials fail to heed that warning? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the debate has been going on 

for some time, and the hon. member has been advised on 

numerous occasions that the province takes advice from the 

headquartered province of the various trust companies as to 

their status and as to their viability  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2410 

 

and their operations. And that’s the normal course. That, I’m 

advised, is what’s happened in this case, and so I suggest to the 

hon. member that the advice that was available to the 

department was such that allowed them to continue. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, the law of this province requires 

the Department of Consumer Affairs to know those audited 

statements and to act on them. I have a new question. I have a 

document, the information circular that’s been sent to the 

Saskatchewan investors who lost money in the collapse of First 

Investors and Associated Investors. This is a plan of 

arrangement by Coopers & Lybrand, the court appointed 

managers for winding down those two companies. It’s a lengthy 

and a very complex document. But on September 23 and 

September 24, the investors are going to be asked to vote on the 

options in this plan. 

 

Will the Alberta lawyer, whom this government is funding, 

review this information circular and provide clearly written 

legal opinion to the Saskatchewan investors so that they can 

know what their options are and explain this plan? There are 

many Saskatchewan investors who’ve lost their life savings and 

they can’t afford a lawyer to help them with this document. 

Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly ask 

Saskatchewan counsel in the province of Alberta as to whether 

it’s proper to give advice. The advice may well vary from 

investor to investor, so whether general advice would be 

applicable or helpful to each individual investor is questionable. 

But I certainly am prepared to ask counsel in Alberta whether, 

on his review of that document, if there are any general 

guide-lines or general advice that can be given, and I will report 

back to the Assembly. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will you get from 

that Alberta lawyer and from Alberta all the list, the entire list 

of the Saskatchewan investors? Obviously they have it in 

Alberta. You still haven’t provided it here to this House or told 

us that you have that information. Be sure that all the investors 

get that information. Will you get that mailing list and be sure 

that they get those guide-lines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, I’ve indicated on numerous 

occasions that if we get the list, and when we get the list, and if 

that list is a public document, we will be more than pleased to 

give it to the hon. member and to the Assembly. I’m not 

advised as yet that we have such document. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I direct a question to the Minister of 

Finance, and it concerns First Investors. It concerns the same 

subject as the previous question, and I ask the minister this: do 

you deny that the financial statements for 1985, filed in the first 

part of 1986, in respect of First Investors, show that that 

company was insolvent? Do you deny that those financial 

statements further have a large qualification by the auditors, 

indicating that if ordinary accounting procedures were used, the 

insolvency would be a great deal more? Do you deny that 

following the  

receipt of this, you licensed this company to sell to further 

Saskatchewan citizens for 1987; and do you not admit that 

that’s shocking incompetence on the part of your government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think that the government’s position has 

been well stated before on numerous occasions, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is that the department complied with its mandate, and 

that it was acting under the proper advice and in the normal 

course of its activities. And that is exactly what has been stated 

on numerous occasions, and the hon. member is aware of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, are you aware of any case in the past where financial 

statements of an investment contract firm showed that it was 

insolvent and that a licence was issued subsequent to that, no 

matter what advice was received subsequent to that, no matter 

what advice was received from what province? Are you telling 

us that your government will issue licences to companies which 

are insolvent, to sell investment contracts where you know 

people are investing their life savings, on the basis of advice 

from any province in this Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t think it would be wise to take the 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s allegations at face value with 

regard to statements of insolvency, Mr. Speaker. It’s not normal 

for any company to send out a notice that that particular 

company is insolvent. That’s not standard practice, so I don’t 

think we should take his statement at face value. 

 

And I indicate, Mr. Speaker, that again the practice has been, 

and it has been across Canada, that the companies take their 

advice in the case, primarily of the provincially administered 

companies, they take their advice from the headquartered 

province as to the status and activity of the company. And 

that’s, as the Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs has 

indicated, that was what happened in this particular case. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 16 – An Act to amend The Time Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

move second reading on The Time Act amendment. There are 

two parts to this amendment, neither of which will affect most 

of Saskatchewan which, as we all know, is on constant central 

standard time. 

 

Firstly, I ask the members of this Assembly to recall that this 

spring Alberta and virtually all of North America move to 

daylight saving time three weeks ahead of what might be 

described as their normal schedule to do so. The border city of 

Lloydminster and the surrounding communities and school 

divisions follow the same time system as Alberta and, therefore, 

change to daylight  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2411 

 

saving time, unlike the balance of Saskatchewan. 

 

As a result, it is necessary to amend The Time Act to permit 

Lloydminster and area to move to daylight saving time three 

weeks earlier than usual, to stay in sync with the balance of 

North America. By this I mean switching along with Alberta to 

daylight saving time on the first Sunday in April rather than the 

last, as is presently prescribed under the Act. 

 

This amendment will insure that school attendance times and 

other important everyday routines continue to operate and on 

the same time in the Lloydminster area. As I mentioned, Mr. 

Speaker, there is a second feature to this Bill. The Bill will 

ratify and approve the use of central standard time in 

north-western Saskatchewan – and by north-western 

Saskatchewan I mean that part of the province in the northern 

administration district, west of the third meridian. 

 

This area of the North, Mr. Speaker, uses central standard time 

year round and is contrary to The Time Act. The Act presently 

states that this region should follow Alberta time; that is, it 

should use mountain standard time during the winter and central 

standard time in summer. And this change simply puts into 

effect the time that has been used informally by everyone in that 

region for many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are not major changes; they simply bring the 

statute in line with what has been happening in western and 

north-western Saskatchewan for years. I’m pleased to say that 

we have the support of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), the city of Lloydminster, the 

surrounding school divisions, for these necessary amendments. 

 

As these are really only housekeeping changes, I will urge all 

members to support the Bill, and I now move second reading of 

Bill No. 16, An Act to amend The Time Act. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My comments 

will also be brief. I would just simply indicate that we agree 

with the Bill. We view it as simply housekeeping to bring into 

line an existing practice in the province and, therefore, this side 

of the House will be supporting the Bill. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 22 – An Act to Amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, today I am moving second 

reading of a Bill to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 

As we all know and realize, Saskatchewan faces a severe 

economic challenge brought on primarily by the international 

commodity pricing situation. In spite of the economic 

difficulties facing Saskatchewan, our government remains 

committed to retaining the concept of revenue sharing with the 

province’s municipalities. 

 

Although our revenues have dramatically decreased, Mr.  

Speaker, I am pleased that this Bill provides that the total 

dollars available for revenue sharing in the 1987-88 fiscal year 

will decrease by only 1 per cent compared to last year. The 

current fiscal situation necessitates that this reduction in the 

revenue sharing pool for 1987-88. The urban and rural revenue 

sharing pools together will amount to $114.5 million of 

operating assistance to the province’s municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we remain committed to working in partnership 

with the province’s municipalities. And I move, Mr. Speaker, 

second reading of Bill No. 22, An Act to amend The Municipal 

Revenue Sharing Act. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This side of 

the House will oppose the Bill that’s before us very strongly. 

 

We oppose it because the net effect of the Bill is to transfer the 

taxation burden from the provincial government to 

municipalities. We oppose it because it shifts taxation away 

from potentially more progressive bases of taxation or of 

revenue to a more regressive base of taxation or revenue. The 

shift, as the minister indicated, may be a small one, that is to 

say, 1 per cent. 

 

But the principle involved in this is a very great one indeed, and 

I think on this particular issue, perhaps more so than some 

others, the government’s weird and whacko right wing agenda 

is coming out. These people really believe that it’s in the 

interests of the taxpayers of the province, that it’s in the 

interests of the province overall, to transfer taxation dollars 

from those who can best afford it to those who can least afford 

it. And it’s on those grounds – on those grounds, Mr. Speaker – 

that we will oppose this Bill, and oppose it most strongly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — The concept of revenue sharing, of 

urban revenue sharing, is based on two principles. And I would 

quote from the government’s own Local Government Finance 

Commission report. And I quote: 

 

The property tax and other local sources of revenue are not 

sufficiently large to finance locally delivered services 

unless they are supplemented by revenues from a broader 

tax base of the provincial government. 

 

And secondly the Local Government Finance Commission 

report states, and I quote: 

 

Urban revenue sharing is in place to ensure that there is an 

opportunity for comparable communities to have 

comparable services, and to ensure that the services can be 

provided at comparable rates of taxation. 

 

In putting forward the Bill that you have today, you are 

betraying those principles. You are betraying the essence of 

revenue sharing for urban municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

When your government’s Local Government Finance 

Commission recommends that the amount of money in the 

revenue sharing pool be increased by $17 million so that 

equalization of services  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2412 

 

and tax levels can move forward, what does your government 

do? 

 

We have the answer today. It introduces a Bill to cut this 

funding by 1 per cent. Again this action is a betrayal of the 

principles of urban revenue sharing and, I would submit, a 

betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question is: what is the net effect of this action 

by the government? By reducing the amount of money to urban 

governments, the government is in effect forcing increases of 

property taxes in Saskatchewan. 

 

Just recently, Mr. Minister, I undertook a survey of municipal 

governments in Saskatchewan. The results, I would submit, are 

shocking. Over 42 per cent of all municipalities have been 

forced to increase their mill rate. As a result of this action and 

other government cut-backs, over 90 per cent of the cities have 

had to increase their mill rates. The average mill rate increase 

across the province has been 3.5 per cent, with communities of 

a size between 500 and 1,000 in population having increases of 

more than 5 per cent. 

 

So in an attempt to reduce the deficit that your government’s 

incompetence has created, you have decided to shift the cost of 

municipal services, increasingly, from the province to 

municipalities. And let me make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that the 

money to pay for these services is still being raised and is still 

costing the taxpayers of this province money out of their 

pocket. However, the province has decided that instead of 

raising the money through its greatly varied array of taxation 

potential and methods, it would rather see municipalities raise 

this same amount of money through a regressive property tax 

system. 

 

And instead of making the Peter Pocklingtons of the world pay 

their fair share of the taxes for streets and roads and ambulance 

and public health services, those that can afford it, instead of 

them being made to pay their share, this government has 

decided to make property owners in Saskatchewan pay more. 

 

What the government in a sense is doing is saying that it wants 

property taxes to increase in Saskatchewan so that it can pay 

down its deficit – and I use the word “its” deficit because it is 

the government’s incompetence that has created the deficit that 

plagues this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me give you some facts about Saskatchewan 

property taxes. In 1968 Saskatchewan relied more heavily on 

property taxes than any other province in Canada. Between 

1974 and 1981 the NDP lowered this to the point that 

Saskatchewan’s reliance was lower than that of any other 

Canadian province. In 1980 property taxes represented 2.7 per 

cent of the gross domestic provincial product. By 1985 this had 

risen to 3.5 per cent of the gross domestic provincial product, 

and this is an increase, Mr. Speaker, a rise of 30 per cent. 

 

By figures of the government’s very own Local Government 

Finance Commission report, net Saskatchewan property taxes 

are now the third highest in Canada – the third highest in 

Canada. This, Mr. Speaker, at a time that the Minister of 

Finance, the Minister of  

Finance boosts in his budget that personal income taxes are 

among the lowest in Canada. 

 

So what we see here is a real contradiction: property taxes being 

among the highest in Canada; personal income taxes, if we are 

to believe the Minister of Finance – and that is another question 

entirely, Mr. Speaker – if we are to believe the Minister of 

Finance, personal income taxes being among the lowest in 

Canada. Yet here we see the contradiction, and here we see the 

ideology that’s implicit in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yet knowing all these facts, the government has decided to shift 

the tax burden even more through the use of regressive property 

taxes. And I want to explain, Mr. Speaker, that property taxes 

are regressive. The relationship between ability to pay of those 

who own property and pay taxes directly or those who rent and 

must pay taxes indirectly through their rent – the relationship 

between ability to pay and the taxes that must actually be paid 

is a spurious relationship. That is to say that there is very little 

relationship between the two, unlike supposedly more 

progressive forms of taxation where there is supposedly some 

relationship between how much money you make, therefore 

how much you can afford, therefore your ability to pay, and 

what you actually end up paying. In property taxes, that 

relationship is simply not there. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I might illustrate that with a brief 

example. And for example, let’s take the Minister of Urban 

Affairs himself. And we know that the Minister of Urban 

Affairs lives at 3043 Carnegie Place in Regina. And we know 

from information which can be obtained publicly through real 

estate or from the city directly that the minister’s taxes are 

$2,320.16 this year. 

 

On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I contacted an elderly widow 

in my constituency, and she lives on Quebec Street. Her taxes, 

because her house is far more modest than the house and the 

property that the minister owns and pays taxes on — her house 

is far more modest, but her taxes are $712.81 this year. 

 

Now the minister will say, well there you go; the proof’s in the 

pudding; I’m paying more taxes than she is, so therefore it’s a 

fair system. But when we contrast that with ability to pay, Mr. 

Speaker, when we contrast the taxes paid with ability to pay, a 

different scenario presents itself. And if we take the minister 

and the amount of money that he makes each year, and I take 

Estimates; it’s public information . . . the minister’s salary as a 

cabinet minister and as a member of the Legislative Assembly, 

take those public facts – and I don’t include any other income 

the minister may enjoy from sources outside of the government 

– but it seems to me that a reasonable estimate of the minister’s 

income – and taking into account the number of sitting days and 

the like – a reasonable estimate of the minister’s income is 

likely to be around $68,000 this year, $68,000. And again, Mr. 

Minister, I exclude from that, because I don’t know, and neither 

is it my business to know, what other income the minister might 

derive from sources outside the legislature. 

 

This widow, this elderly widow that I talked about earlier  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2413 

 

on Quebec Street in Regina, her income is $719 per month. And 

that’s prorating things like the senior citizen’s heritage grant for 

which she gets the maximum because her situation is not a 

wealthy one; in fact, it’s close to a penurious one. But her 

income is $719 per month. 

 

When we start to compare the amount of taxes paid by the 

minister for his property and relate that to his income, and take 

the amount of taxes paid by the widow and relate that to her 

income, we get a situation where the minister is paying 3.4 per 

cent – 3.4 per cent – of his income on property taxes. But it’s a 

different picture for this widow. Her taxes, her taxes are 5.9 per 

cent of her income. 

 

(1445) 

 

So this illustrates, Mr. Speaker, the fact that property taxes are 

regressive, that poor people, those of limited incomes, pay far 

more in property taxes than those who have access to higher 

incomes. When we talk about property taxes being regressive, 

we mean to say that people of limited incomes, of limited 

means, must pay relatively more in property taxes than those of 

higher incomes. 

 

And again I want to emphasize the figures I talked about are 

those that are an estimate – and I think a reasonable one – of the 

income that the minister derives by virtue of being a member of 

the Assembly and by virtue of being a minister of the Crown, 

and again excludes other sources of income, which might be 

considerable, and again provide a very different picture, and 

provide an even clearer contrast of the regressive nature of 

property taxation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I guess the question is: how can the 

government defend this action and can defend this Bill to the 

unemployed and the single parents and the poor and the elderly 

of this province? And how can they defend this action when 

they’re forcing people of limited incomes to pay increasingly – 

pay increasingly – for regressive property taxation? 

 

I’d like to shift the focus at this time, Mr. Speaker, to what 

effect this Bill will have on local governments as opposed to the 

impact that it will have on property taxpayers, or taxpayers of 

the province per se. I want to at the outset, Mr. Speaker, 

commend urban municipalities, in fact all local governments, 

for their abilities to work in a very difficult situation. 

 

In my travels around the province, and in my discussions with 

various councils, I have an impression of men and women who 

are creative, sensitive, intelligent, in dealing with a very 

difficult situation, in trying to grapple with the eternal see-saw 

of trying to provide effective services, yet to keep property 

taxes to a minimum. 

 

But in the last five years the government has turned its back on 

a very strong relationship between municipalities and 

government in so far as revenue sharing is concerned. It has in 

the last five years ignored the funding formula that was there to 

give some stability to the revenue sharing pool, and the extent 

to which it was to be increased every year. As opposed to taking 

indices that were developed so that the pool could increase 

outside of the dictates of government, the 

government decided to do away with that and arbitrarily – 

arbitrarily – increase the revenue sharing pool every year, and 

now this year arbitrarily deciding to decrease the revenue 

sharing pool. 

 

You know, and on balance . . . if on balance you look at that – 

and the government might argue, yes, but the increases we gave 

would have been about the same as the increases that might 

have been arrived if those indices had been in place and those 

had been used to calculate how much the revenue-sharing pool 

should be increased by – even if those were the same, Mr. 

Speaker, I would argue that municipalities want, far more than 

anything else, far more than anything else, they want to know 

that the revenue sharing pool and the size of that pool will not 

be affected by the dictates and the vagaries of the government 

of the day, but will be dictated by true economic indices; and let 

those economic indices indicate what the revenue sharing pool 

will be, as opposed to the vagaries and the assurances and, I 

would think, the capriciousness of government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, municipal governments of this province ask that 

there be stability in the revenue sharing pool so that they have a 

clearer idea of what their funding might be in future years, as 

opposed to relying on the capriciousness of government. And I 

ask, Mr. Speaker, is it too much to ask from a government that 

purports to represent the interests of people, that it undertake to 

do so? 

 

Obviously it is too much to ask because there has been no 

consideration and very little consultation with municipal 

governments. The minister on every occasion says he consults. 

But in saying that, I don’t get any strong appreciation that he 

listens to anything of consequence that municipal governments 

might have to say. And I think this is more of a case that when 

the minister says he consults, that the minister speaks, listens to 

himself, tell municipalities that this is going to be the case, and 

says that’s consultation. Well that’s not consultation, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s more like the rule of Louis XIV, using the 

divine right of kings. 

 

And consultation implies to me a two-way street: that in 

addition to telling municipalities that this is the way it’s going 

to be, that you also ask them sincerely and begin to respond to 

the concerns that they put forward. 

 

And the question is: how fair is it, Mr. Speaker, to elected 

municipal politicians who are trying to manage competently, as 

opposed to the incompetence shown by this government; this 

government that has given no consistency at all to work with, 

and yet those municipal leaders struggle on. 

 

We’re in the midst of a crisis in Saskatchewan, and I think the 

minister is right on that point. He tries to give the impression 

that this is a crisis that to a complete extent has been forced 

upon us by forces from outside the province. I would say that 

it’s a crisis that has been created by the mismanagement and 

incompetence of his government. 

 

And now, in an attempt to get out of the mess that it has 

created, the government has decided to rob the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. But they don’t have the guts to do it directly in 

this case. They don’t have the guts to do it  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2414 

 

directly, so instead they connive to steal the money from 

municipal governments and from property taxpayers, knowing 

full well that these municipal governments will be forced in 

impose more taxes on their residents. 

 

And the minister might say, well it’s his hope, and it’s not a lot 

of money. It’s not a lot of money, and therefore municipalities 

shouldn’t have to increase taxes. I want to tell the minister that 

if that’s his impression, that the minister really doesn’t know 

very much about municipal government in Saskatchewan, that 

he has no appreciation for the kinds of things that municipalities 

have been doing in the last four or five years. That is to say that 

municipalities have progressively been trimming fat from their 

budgets, whatever fat there might have been, and that 

municipalities are lean, and are running the most cost-effective 

operation possible. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, this contrasts very favourably, very 

favourably with the government opposite, which, when we look 

at its patronage appointments, seems to be adding fat upon fat. 

The municipalities of Saskatchewan have been doing an 

incredibly good job in the last number of years trying to reduce 

expenditures, to keep taxes low, yet trying to maintain a 

reasonable level of services. 

 

This Bill makes it harder for municipalities to do that. This Bill 

encourages municipalities to raise property taxes as a means of 

balancing the books. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that 

municipalities are required by law to balance the books, to 

balance the budget. They, unlike the provincial government, 

cannot come in in deficit finance. They cannot at the outset of 

the year say that our expenditures are of a certain level, our 

revenues are significantly less, so therefore we’re going to incur 

a deficit. Municipalities can’t do that. 

 

Every year – every year – they have to take into account the real 

costs of providing services to their citizens. Every year they 

have to take into account the real revenues that they realize 

from sources other than property taxes. And the difference in 

those has to be made up in property tax increases, or through 

property taxation, period. And that’s the situation for 

municipalities, unlike the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, even though the amount involved is a small 

one, even though some municipalities might shrug and say that 

a 1 per cent cut in revenue sharing is perhaps not a great deal, 

although it has various effects because of another formula that 

came into place – even though some municipalities might say 

that, we will oppose this Bill very strongly because we perceive 

the government to be moving in a wrong-headed direction in 

pursuit of its own narrow, right-wing agenda, an agenda, again, 

that would take taxes from those . . . or to take tax revenues 

from those who are most able to afford it, and to shift it to those 

who are least able to afford it. 

 

And to us, Mr. Speaker, that is an ideological commitment on 

the part of the government, and we oppose that. We oppose 

that, not only because we are philosophically opposed to that, 

but also, given any rule of fairness, given any rule of fairness by 

any honest, decent, caring government, that is simply not the 

way to go. 

 

And it’s for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, we will oppose this. I 

would advise you, Mr. Speaker, that I have more to say on this 

matter, and at this point beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 23 – An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

for me today to rise on second reading of Bill No. 23, An Act to 

amend The Rural Municipality Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act is necessary to enable the tied vote 

provision in The Rural Municipality Act to be changed. It’s 

interesting to note that over the last many, many years, that if 

there was a tied vote with rural municipal councils, that they 

had to put the names in a hat and draw the name out of the hat 

to see who was going to be their elected representative. I don’t 

believe that’s very democratic, nor do I believe it should be that 

way. 

 

An. Hon. Member: — You’ve got a 50-50 chance of getting 

the right guy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, well the member from Quill Lakes 

said it’s a 50-50 chance. Well I believe, Mr. Speaker, that you, 

as a person running for elected office, should have at least that 

opportunity to have another election to decide who should in 

fact represent that district or that council as a reeve. 

 

It was interesting to note . . . A few moments ago I heard the 

member from Victoria talking about councils and about mill 

rates and about how the lack of consultation with municipalities 

has not been there in the last few years. I believe that in this part 

of the Act that we’re talking about consultation has been there. 

We’ve met with the municipal council; it’s brought up at all the 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

conventions; it’s been a request by the councils for many, many 

years to make these changes. 

 

He also mentioned within the mill rate structure that there has 

been many changes made; in fact, he was talking about the 

increase in mill rates that has occurred because of increase in 

the tax structure, or the increase in costs and a lessening of 

revenue sharing. 

 

I just thought I would just point out, Mr. Speaker, that over the 

last few years that the consultation, especially in the last two 

years that I can speak as Minister of Rural Development, and 

that is part of this urban Municipal Revenue Sharing Act that 

we’re talking about, that in fact there has been a lot of 

consultation going on, and in fact most R.M.’s (rural 

municipalities) are . . . they’re very much aware of what we 

have been doing with rural municipal sharing. 

 

(1500) 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t relate directly to whether we 

should change, and how they should vote, but it’s very  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2415 

 

important because it fits in with all the rural municipal councils, 

and how they act, and how they treat their representatives out 

there. 

 

I just thought I’d mention also that over the last few years, in 

fact last year, I have met with about 140 R.M. councils, talking 

about this part of the Act, talking about revenue sharing, and 

talking about how councils should operate, and how they should 

. . . how we can make it better for them to run their 

municipality. 

 

There was an interesting thing that I found out as I travelled 

around the province in the last few months and talked to many 

different R.M. councils, that this is one of the areas of concern; 

whether there should be changes made because a vote is coming 

up this fall. The other area that I . . . thing I noted was that in 

the rural municipalities only three increased their mill rates; 14 

lowered their mill rates . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, please. I 

believe the hon. member realizes that his remarks are becoming 

somewhat wide-ranging and difficult to see how they have any 

direct bearing on the Act he is discussing, so I ask him to please 

confine his remarks to that Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Anyway, Mr. Speaker, thank you. I just 

want to mention that in event of a tied vote the returning officer 

draws the name out of a hat; that will be changed. This Act will 

in fact change that. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I . . . The proposed 

amendment will ensure that the procedure is to void a tied 

election and conduct a new election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to emphasize that it will be necessary 

for this amendment to proceed to prevent the possibility of a 

judge declaring one of the original tied candidates to be elected, 

as well as having a different candidate being declared elected by 

winning the new election. 

 

With these comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 

Bill 23, An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

speak specifically to the amendments of the Bill. I thought the 

minister, either he doesn’t get a chance to talk often or he 

thought he was in the throne speech when he got up to deliver 

his speech. 

 

All I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that it does in fact provide an 

amendment where, in the case in a municipal election two 

people running for the same office are tied with the number of 

votes, that rather than as previously the names were put in a hat 

and one name pulled out, that this provides that the election, if 

in the case of a tie, be voided and that a new election be 

provided. It also indicates that those who ran and came in as tie 

will automatically become candidates in the new election to be 

held unless they specifically withdraw. Well we have no 

problem with the amendments and accordingly we will be 

supporting the proposed amendments. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred  

to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill 27 – An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve just indicated – as a courtesy to me, 

I have a meeting – that we’re just going to change positions 

here. We’ve indicated to the member from Regina North West. 

 

This Bill introduces policy measures announced in the budget. 

It also contains a number of technical amendments that have 

been requested by the federal government as part of our 

responsibilities under the Canada-Saskatchewan Tax Collection 

Agreement. The policy measures contained in this Bill are 

designed to make Saskatchewan’s tax system fairer while 

permitting the generation of revenues that are required to 

finance necessary government priorities. 

 

The continued reliance on the flat tax and the lowering of the 

basic provincial tax rate permits the province the ability to 

maintain relatively low marginal tax rates and improve the 

overall equity of the tax system. We are especially proud of our 

new personal tax reduction that protects low and middle income 

families. This Bill introduces the following personal income tax 

changes. First, basic provincial income tax which is determined 

as a percentage of basic federal tax will be accessed at 50 per 

cent of 1987 rather than 51 per cent currently slated in the Act. 

 

Provincial income tax was first introduced, the flat tax was first 

introduced in 1985 to partially offset the implementation of the 

flat tax on net income. With the continuation of the flat tax in 

1987, our government has chosen to extend the lower rate. The 

Bill also provides for the continuation of the flat tax on net 

income for 1987 at a rate of 1.5 per cent of net income. Our 

government introduced the flat tax because it is a fair and 

efficient tax, and we have chosen to continue it for these 

reasons. 

 

A decision respecting the continuation of the flat tax and the 

basic provincial rate for 1988 and subsequent tax years will be 

made as a part of a broader review of the impact of the federal 

tax reform proposals on provincial residents and one the 

province’s taxing authority. Fairness in the tax system requires 

not only that taxpayers share the tax burden but also that they 

share it according to their ability to pay. 

 

This Bill introduces a new Saskatchewan tax reduction 

designed to assist low and middle income individuals. The 

reduction provides relief from provincial taxes on the basis of 

the tax filer’s income and family situation. The new 

Saskatchewan tax reduction provides a basic sales tax reduction 

of $200. The reduction is available to lower income tax filers 

and is intended to offset the impact of the increase in the 

education and health tax announced in the budget. 

 

Our government has continuously recognized the important role 

in our province of home-makers. We are pleased once more to 

recognize their contribution by providing a new $300 reduction 

which is available to tax filers supporting dependant spouses. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2416 

 

Our government also recognizes the hardship faced by many 

single parent families. To assist such families, Saskatchewan 

has now made available the same $300 reduction to tax filers 

who are single parents, the only jurisdiction in Canada to make 

such provisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The new reduction also permits a tax filer to claim a reduction 

of $200 per child for dependant children. This is in recognition 

of the costs associated with raising children today. I would also 

like to point out that a single parent who claims a child under 

the $300 reduction for the equivalent to a married exemption, is 

also entitled to claim a reduction of $200 for that child. 

 

Many senior citizens have lower incomes or fixed incomes and 

require some protection against increases in personal income 

tax rates. The Saskatchewan tax reduction recognizes this need 

by providing a new $200 reduction for senior citizens. 

 

The aggregate value of the components of the reduction is 

reduced as the tax filer’s net income rises above $10,000. This 

provision recognizes the need for maximum protection and 

assistance for low income tax filers, and provides diminishing 

assistance as the tax filer’s ability to pay increases. 

 

In total, Mr. Speaker, over 330,000 people will benefit from the 

reduction, at a cost of some $51 million annually. For example, 

a family of four with a net income of $20,000 will receive $400 

in tax relief. A single mother with two children with a net 

income of $15,000 will receive $650 in tax relief, and a married 

couple with a net income of $17,000 will receive $350 in tax 

relief. 

 

Members opposite have urged that we increase corporate tax 

rates. Currently, provincial corporate tax rates are the highest in 

the country. To increase corporate tax rates could have 

discouraged businesses from establishing in the province at a 

time when our economy demands continued diversification. In 

effect, to increase our corporate rates at this time would likely 

result in a net decline of economic activity in the province, with 

the result that less, not more, tax revenues would be generated. 

 

Our government also views the current state of the world 

commodity markets as an important reminder of the need to 

reduce a reliance on a commodity-based economy. 

Diversification will not only further insulate Saskatchewan 

against global economic uncertainties, it will provide new 

economic opportunities, new jobs, and an improved quality of 

life. 

 

Diversification can only be achieved if Saskatchewan’s 

corporate tax rates are competitive and if a climate exists which 

encourages business development. Our government has created 

that climate and will continue to encourage business 

development through programs like those offered through the 

economic diversification and investment fund. 

 

Finally, this Bill introduces a number of technical amendments 

at the request of the federal government  

under the terms of the Canada/Saskatchewan Tax Collection 

Agreement. These amendments will allow our Act to remain 

consistent with the federal law so that the taxpayer compliance 

is made as simple as possible. And I would be pleased to 

answer members’ questions concerning these amendments 

during Committee of the Whole. I therefore move that An Act 

to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

participate in the second reading of Bill 27, although the 

opposition will obviously not be supporting this Bill for a few 

reasons. One, that it is implicitly unfair. I couldn’t believe my 

ears when the minister was getting up on his feet saying that 

this flat tax will mean, and I quote, “a tax system fairer” for 

people in this province. 

 

Another quote that he indicated was that the flat tax, the one 

and a half per cent flat tax on income, will be a fair and efficient 

tax system for the people of Saskatchewan. And I sure would 

like to ask him a question as to who it is fairer for? It’s 

obviously not fair for those people who have to pay it that are of 

middle or low income or of modest income that require those 

dollars for other purposes, for their family. 

 

But we will oppose it, not only on the basis of it being unfair, 

Mr. Speaker, but we believe it’s the wrong choice for attacking 

the deficit. It’s the wrong choice for attacking the fastest 

growing deficit in North America that this government has put 

together and has been the author of. It’s a wrong-headed 

approach, in our view, because it attacks people, as opposed to 

the problem. And the problem, of course, is the management 

and the individuals and, collectively, the cabinet in this 

government that has sunk us very deep into debt. 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, the flat tax, Bill 27, doesn’t resolve 

the credibility of the government; it doesn’t resolve the 

incompetent management of the government, and finally, it 

really double-crosses the people of Saskatchewan in terms of 

their commitment to reduce taxes to the people of 

Saskatchewan, as opposed to what this Bill does – it increases 

taxes. And that, Mr. Speaker, very clearly, is a double-cross to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The flat tax is going to bring in about $150 million, and that’s 

equal to about 12 basis points, and I’ll get to that in a moment. 

But the problem we’ve got, Mr. Speaker, is that the government 

opposite is putting forward tax bills. They have put forward 

major tax increases to the people of Saskatchewan, totalling 

$1,000 in provincial tax increases per family of four this year 

alone. That is an awful burden for people who are working on 

no increases in salaries, modest increases in salaries, that have 

. . . We have the highest cost of living in the entire country. 

 

As of July, the cost of living in this province is at 6 per cent. 

The inflation index is at 6 per cent, yet settlements in the rural 

areas . . . Farmers and other workers are receiving either a 

negative increase, that is a decrease in salary, or hardly any 

increase. Certainly, I think, this tax grab on the Conservative 

government’s part will add further injury to the families that are 

being affected. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2417 

 

Mr. Speaker, the deficit is now at $3.4 billion, as more and 

more people are beginning to realize. It’s the fastest growing 

deficit in all of North America. It totals about $14,500 per 

family of four. It’s about $3,400 per person living or being born 

today in this province. That’s the debt they are carrying. That’s 

not the interest that we’re paying, but the debt. 

 

(1515) 

 

And this tax bill, Mr. Speaker, is the provincial Conservative 

government’s approach to getting that deficit under control, and 

I think it’s highly unfair. I think what they should be doing is 

looking at other tax avenues. For example, a fairer tax system 

would be one which, rather than cutting taxes to oil companies, 

should be looking at oil companies’ profits and taxing those at a 

higher rate than which they are being taxed. And they are not 

doing that because the oil companies are friends of theirs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I indicated that we won’t be supporting it because 

it doesn’t deal with the mismanagement of this province by this 

government. They are continuing to ignore the problems that 

they are the authors of, that they have been involved in creating 

through mismanagement, and instead they are bumping up the 

taxes to as many people in this province as possible. 

 

They have failed to come to grips with their mismanagement 

tactics, and we can list them off, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure you 

know them and you’ve heard them before, but I will, for the 

record: the Pioneer Trust debacle in 1985; the Principal Trust 

affair now in ’87; they’ve provided funds to Peter Pocklington 

to the tune of $21 million; the $250 million boondoggle at 

Weyerhaeuser; the Manalta Coal sell-off of our assets; the 10 

cents on the dollar give-away of our highways equipment to 

American construction companies – people have not forgotten 

that, and as our highways deteriorate we’re seeing a very 

serious effect of the give-away of that highway equipment; the 

$1.5 billion foregone in oil royalties to those poor, struggling 

oil corporations like Exxon and Texaco and Shell. 

 

And I could go and on, but it also, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t deal 

with the severe crippling problem of this government, and that 

is the massive amount of patronage that they have been doling 

out to their friends. I’ve never seen more Conservatives salivate 

at this deep and delicious pork-barrel as we are seeing now. 

And it’s not a matter of just seeing them, Mr. Speaker; they’re 

in effect being appointed, and as my colleague from Regina 

Victoria said, I believe, “fat upon fat” is where they’re being 

appointed. And that really is a concern for people in this 

province. 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, this tax Bill does not deal 

with that approach to resolving the deficit. The minister, Mr. 

Speaker, has also indicated that the tax Bill is going to be fairly 

precise in saving some dollars, but more importantly for them, 

in raising a fair chunk of dollars — $150 million alone from 

taxpayers in this province. And I don’t know whether this Bill 

is going to materialize in the forecast that he has provided to us, 

but the government opposite, Mr. Speaker, has some very 

severe problems. 

 

In the last five years they have provided budget deficit forecasts 

which have been so far out of whack that anything this 

government says with regard to fiscal responsibility or financial 

credibility has to be laughed at. It’s just unbelievable, Mr. 

Speaker, and I have some examples. 

 

For example, in ‘82-83 fiscal year, the deficit forecast is $219 

million; in effect it ended up being $227 million. From ’83 to 

’84, forecast figure was $316 million; in fact, it was $331 

million. Mr. Speaker, ‘84-85, $267 million forecast as a deficit 

but, in fact, it was $379 million; ‘85-86, $291 million forecast, 

but, in effect, $584 million – almost 100 per cent out of whack 

in their estimates. And of course that was put to shame by the 

recent forecast, ‘86-87, $389 million. And that was out by over 

200 per cent; it was $1.2 billion. And that is an example of the 

credibility of this government in terms of raising funds for taxes 

and figuring out where their expenditures are going. That’s their 

approach to attacking the deficit which, in our view, is totally 

incomprehensible, incredible, and incompetent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have other examples of mismanagement in 

cut-backs. They have made commitments and promises in their 

literature in the public view: forums, on television, radio, 

newspapers. You’ve heard and seen them all and, as a matter of 

fact, I believe that even you were part of that as a candidate in 

the last couple of elections. And of course, rather than carrying 

out these promises this government, Mr. Speaker, this 

government, rather than fulfilling the promises of tax decreases, 

they have increased taxes. And I’ll get into the details on those 

in a minute. 

 

But they have indicated in election campaigns that they are 

going to improve services, that they are going to provide 

increased funding for various programs for people, not to worry 

about our health care programs. And we have seen in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, all of the double-crosses, all the 

double-crossing moves of this Conservative government, 

because they’ve done exactly the opposite of what they’ve 

promised. And I’ll go into some of those examples in a 

moment. 

 

But with respect to tax increases, they promised to decrease 

personal income tax by 10 per cent. And of course we see the 

flat tax being increased, which is not a 10 per cent decrease in 

our view or any one’s view, Mr. Speaker. The flat tax increase 

to date has been a 12 basis point increase. So the minister gets 

up and say, oh, we’re going to reduce the basis points, that is 51 

per cent of the federal taxes payable — Saskatchewan taxpayers 

will pay – they’re going to reduce that to 50 per cent. That’s 

what he said just moments earlier. But in effect they’ve added 

the flat tax on, and rather than a 51 per cent down to 50 per 

cent, we see an increase from 50 per cent up to 62 per cent. That 

is a decrease? We’ll have a little talk about that under another 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think in the dictionary the word “decrease” or to eliminate 

or to cut down or to phase out have a far opposite meaning, a 

far different meaning than what this government is putting 

forward to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2418 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Minister of Finance can’t count. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — The Minister of Finance has had a very large 

problem in counting. He’s achieving the reputation, Mr. 

Speaker, as being the “tax man” in this province, and I think 

that that is something that will have a very negative implication 

on him as a member of this Conservative government and for 

sure on the Conservative government when the next election 

rolls around. 

 

The tax increases that have been . . . decreases that were 

promised, of course you’ve seen the PC used care sales tax put 

on. We’ve seen other tax increases – the elimination of the 

property improvement grant for farms and homes and small 

businesses and renters as well. We’ve seen the increase in the 

flat tax with this Bill by 50 per cent – from 1 per cent on net 

income to 1.5 per cent, and that’s a very significant increase, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen the sales tax increase from five to 

seven, and of course the gas tax and all of the other taxes. 

 

But I think that that’s a very serious problem for this 

government, Mr. Speaker, and very, very doubtful in terms of 

attacking a deficit when you’ve got all of this credibility 

problem, when you’ve got this ball and chain of inconsistency 

around your ankles. And you’ve got this reputation of making a 

commitment as a government, and people of this province 

knowing full well that your commitment and your statement is 

exactly the opposite of what you’re saying. 

 

And I wanted to share with the minister with a little scenario 

that I encountered over the last 10 days. I was in the 

constituency of Qu’Appelle-Lumsden and I was visiting with 

some people and these teenagers were doing a little singing. 

And the tune sounded very familiar, Mr. Speaker. As a matter 

of fact, it was the tune which many of you will recall, if you 

think back to the mid and late ‘60s. 

 

And I said to these young people, I said, well what do you call 

that song? And they said, well we call that song “The Gary 

Lane Song.” I said, you mean named after the Minister of 

Finance? And they said, well yes. It’s actually called . . . it was 

taken from a Beatles song in the ‘60s called The Tax Man, 

written by George Harrison. 

 

And the words to that song, which they paraphrased a bit, are 

right here, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read this into the record, 

because I think it’s pertinent to what’s happening with respect 

to this Bill and the massive tax grab of the Conservative Party. 

And here it goes, and I quote: 

 

Let me tell you how it will be: 

One for you, 19 for me. 

‘Cause I’m the tax man. 

 

Should 7 per cent appear too small, 

Be thankful I don’t take it all. 

Because I’m the tax man. 

 

If you drive a car, I will tax the street. 

If you try to sit, I will tax your seat. 

If you need some food, I will tax what you eat. 

If you try to walk, I will tax your feet. 

Cause I’m the tax man. 

But don’t ask me what I want it for, 

If you don’t want to pay some more. 

Here is my advice for those who die: 

Declare the pennies on your eyes. 

I’m the tax man and you’re working for no one but me. 

 

And that’s what we’re faced with in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — We have the young people in his 

constituency and we have people around this province calling 

the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Revenue, the 

member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the tax man, and they know 

this tax man to be somebody who is not a friend of theirs. 

 

He has both of his elbows into their pockets, taking the money 

that they’re worked hard to feed their families and to buy the 

things that are necessary. And now he has the gall, as the 

Minister of Finance, and this government has the gall, to come 

into this House and raise the flat tax and other taxes, 

holus-bolus, without consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan, and in clear contradiction of what they have 

made in terms of their commitments as a party during the 

election, prior to the election, and after the election – really an 

incredible story. 

 

I’d like to just take a couple of minutes now, Mr. Speaker, to go 

over some of the things that some of the members from the 

government have indicated in the past. Sometimes members get 

carried away and make statements that may not be based on a 

lot of reasonable, solid ground, but I want to assure the 

members of this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that 

what I have said regarding the Conservative promises and 

commitments to reduce taxes is absolutely true. 

 

But, in effect, with these Bills they have brought upon the 

largest tax grab in this province’s history and they have hurt, in 

my view, thousands of families in this province from achieving 

what they have to achieve as families. 

 

And I have here, Mr. Speaker, some photocopies, which are 

fairly accurate, of candidates who were running for the 

Conservative Party and many of them were elected. And I’ll 

just go over a few of them. I see the member from Melville 

here. He says in his Progressive Conservative pamphlet that: 

“PC policies for good government.” We will reduce “provincial 

income tax by 10 per cent” – the flat tax. The flat tax, Mr. 

Speaker, is a 24 per cent increase in personal income tax. 

 

Now maybe this was . . . people might suspect that perhaps 

what I have just read is inaccurate, so what I did, Mr. Speaker, 

is I checked a few more candidates to see whether they were 

consistently right or whether I was invariably wrong, and what I 

found, Mr. Speaker, is that the member from Melville, who 

promised a 10 per cent reduction in personal income tax, who is 

now a member of a government that is introducing a 24 per cent 

increase in personal income tax, that maybe he was . . . there 

was a misprint in the newspaper or a misprint in his pamphlet. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2419 

 

So I checked the member from Kelsey-Tisdale who is here 

today, and he says in his pamphlet, and it says right here, I’ve 

got a copy for the cameras: we will “bring about a 10 per cent 

across the board cut in personal income taxes” – a 10 per cent 

cut in personal income taxes. Well maybe that shouldn’t be 

believable either, but we have seen a 24 per cent increase in this 

one Bill alone in personal income taxes. 

 

So I checked a few more members. The member from Maple 

Creek: “The Conservative alternative,” she says; number one in 

her promises, “a 10 per cent across the board cut in personal 

income taxes.” I don’t know what that means, it must mean a 24 

per cent increase in personal income taxes. Does it mean 

whatever they say, they are going to carry out the opposite? 

What does it mean, Mr. Speaker? It’s a clear double-cross, Mr. 

Speaker, a clear betrayal of their word. When I was in 

university, we used to get lessons from our professors, Mr. 

Speaker, and one lesson that I learned very clearly was that a 

man’s word is his bond. What we see here are man and woman 

after man and woman in the Conservative Party making a 

commitment in writing and breaking their word, not just 

breaking it, but slapping people in the face with a 24 per cent 

personal income tax increase, not a 10 per cent decrease. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — That destroys, in my view, all the lessons that 

young people learn about keeping your word. What kind of 

society are we going to have, Mr. Speaker, if grown adults who 

are running for public office make a commitment in writing, 

verbally and in writing, to do one thing, and they do the 

opposite when they get elected? That is an opportunity for 

adults to provide leadership to young people? I’m disgusted 

with that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure many people around the 

province are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Well, the member for Melfort: “A 

Progressive Conservative government will,” Mr. Speaker, 

“Provide a 10 per cent reduction in provincial income tax.” And 

he goes on. And of course the member from Regina North does 

the same thing, who is now the member for Regina South. We 

have another member here, he’s no longer with us, but he used 

to be the MLA for Regina North East, Mr. Sutor: “Provide a 10 

per cent reduction in provincial income tax.” Where is he 

today? 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s got travel plans. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I understand he’s got travel plans. Well I can 

understand full well why he should. At least he had some 

credibility, Mr. Speaker, because when he knew that he 

couldn’t fulfil his word he left the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — He wanted nothing to do with this 

government either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I have another one here. It says – it’s a newspaper ad  

with a picture of a PC candidate who is now the MLA from 

Swift Current – it says: “Pat Smith, PC candidate,” on this 

photocopy. And let me read the quote: 

 

Is big government taxation taking more than a bite out of 

your pocketbook? 

 

A Progressive Conservative government is dedicated to 

phasing out provincial sales tax and reducing personal 

income tax by 10 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can they sit in the government benches and 

have this information be reminded to them, and not stand up 

and speak in this debate and defend themselves? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I challenge the members of the 

government, whether they’re in cabinet or whether they’re in 

the back benches, to stand up and either admit to the people of 

this province that your word has no bonds, that your word is not 

good, or to get up and say these photocopies are not accurate. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have the originals in our files, so I’d like 

them to get up and make some comments about that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I have another one from the former member 

of Regina South, who is Mr. Paul Rousseau. And he says in his 

leaflet, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll be “reducing personal income 

tax by 10 per cent” – reducing personal income tax by 10 per 

cent. Well that’s really incredible, Mr. Speaker. Where is he 

today? He is one of the patronage appointments in England. He 

is now recipient of a major hand-out by this government. 

Because I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that he, too, could not stand in 

this House another term and have this stuff brought to him and 

have proof provided to the people of this province that his 

statement and his word was not a bond – that it was broken the 

day he was elected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I have a few more, Mr. Speaker. I have one 

from the member from Yorkton. And he says, right here he 

says: 

 

Vote PC. This measure will be the first phase of a new 

P.C. government’s commitment to the complete 

elimination of the sales tax in its first term of office in its 

commitment to ease the burden of inflation for 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Ease the burden of inflation. Right now we are paying $3,000 

per family of four in interest payments on the budget deficit 

alone. That’s easing the burden, Mr. Speaker? That’s all that 

money that’s not available now to provide improved services 

and new programs that will benefit people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another one here, and this is the member 

from Saltcoats. I know he was anxious to hear what kind of 

position he should be, vis-à-vis his written name. And I’d like 

to inform and remind the member that right here, with his 

picture on it, and his name, and it  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2420 

 

looks like him although the picture here has a cowboy hat on, 

and he says: 

 

It’s time for change. A PC government will reduce 

provincial income tax – a 10 per cent reduction in 

provincial income tax. 

 

Whoops! This is the member from Saltcoats. He’s still here and 

I’m sure the members in his constituency are saying: Mr. 

Member from Saltcoats, Mr. Johnson, you’ve said this; why are 

we getting a 24 per cent increase in our personal income tax 

rate? Why? 

 

Will the member stand up and explain that? Will the member 

stand up and explain that to his constituents? How is he going 

to feel when come the next election and he goes to the voters 

and say . . . and they say to him, or he says to them: I want your 

support because, you know, my word is my bond. And they’re 

going to say to the member: not any more; your word is in 

writing; you’ve broken your word; you can no longer be trusted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — You’ve double-crossed us – you and your 

colleagues have double-crossed us, and now you’re going to get 

yours. They’re not going to tell you to your face how they’re 

going to vote. They’re going to do it very silently, and they’re 

going to do it very subtly and very subliminally, and they’re 

going to do it at the ballot box. And I know personally from that 

experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few others here and won’t take up much 

more time. But I want to raise one more with regard to the flat 

tax. And this of course is the member from Shellbrook-Torch 

River who is sitting there anxiously awaiting to see how many 

promises he broke and what kind of bonds that he no longer has 

with his constituents because he has broken his word. 

 

And I have here, Mr. Speaker, a photocopy, and it says: 

 

Dear Constituents: 

 

The NDP is up to its usual election tricks of spreading lies 

about the PC Party policy. One would think that a party 

that has been in power as long as the NDP would be able 

to run on its record, even if it has no policy for 

Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

One of the negative NDP election ads says that the PC’s 

will “cut” this and “slash” that. 

 

The PCs certainly won’t make any cuts in spending on 

Medicare. We will increase Medicare funding. 

 

And he goes on, Mr. Speaker, and he gets into the personal 

income as well: but we will cut and slash the cost of living. 

That’s what he commits to his constituents. 

 

Now maybe he doesn’t understand what cut and slash and 

decrease means, so I have again, Mr. Speaker, brought with me 

my dictionary. And I know that this is going to be very painful 

for the members opposite, but I  

want to just maybe read some definitions of what reduction is. 

For example, they promised to reduce the flat tax or the 

personal income tax by 10 per cent. We have a 24 per cent 

increase. 

 

And now in their literature they say, reduce, or reduction, and in 

the definition of the Oxford paperback dictionary which I have 

here, “reduction” says, “reducing or being reduced,” the amount 

by which something is reduced, especially in price. 

 

Now maybe they’ve got their own dictionary, Mr. Speaker, that 

has opposite meanings, but this meaning means that if they’re 

going to reduce something that that figure is going to decline. 

It’s going to go down. But in effect, Mr. Speaker, it’s gone up. 

They haven’t cut 10 per cent, it’s gone up to 24 per cent. They 

indicate that they were going to remove things. They were 

going to remove the 5 per cent sales tax and other burdens. And 

I have a definition of “remove.” And remove says, to “take off 

or away from the place occupied . . .” Now, “to get rid of,” 

that’s the other meaning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now getting rid of the sales tax, and maybe it’s not on the right 

topic, Mr. Speaker, but as an example, if they’re going to get rid 

of it, why would they go from 5 per cent to 7 per cent and 

increase it by 40 per cent? That’s a strange dictionary that they 

have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they indicated that they were going to phase out a 

lot of things. And I’ve got a definition of that; it just happens to 

be there. And of course “phase out” the sales tax – that was 

their commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. We’re talking about The 

Income Tax Act, not the sales tax. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I appreciate your getting me back on the 

beam, Mr. Speaker. But I have here a definition of 

“commitment”. This government and these candidates opposite 

talked about commitments, that their word was their bond: you 

vote for me and my party, and I will commit to you that I’m 

going to reduce the personal income tax rate by 10 per cent. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the dictionary of the same title defines 

“commitment” as: 

 

“. . . the state of being involved in an obligation, an 

obligation or a pledge,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

If that’s an obligation to the people of Saskatchewan, a pledge 

to the people of Saskatchewan, they have clearly broken it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Some of the ads, Mr. Speaker, said that: we 

will promise to reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent. So I 

looked up the word “promise” because obviously I thought 

when you promise something that if the person or somebody 

reciprocated that you have to carry out the promise. But maybe 

this didn’t fit well with them, and they’ve neglected or forgot 

about the meaning. So, Mr. Speaker, in the dictionary it says, 

“promise:” 

 

a declaration that one will give or do, or not to do a certain 

thing; an indication of something that may  



 

September 10, 1987 

2421 

 

be expected to come or occur. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would invite the members opposite, when 

they get up and speak on this Bill, to bring forward their 

dictionaries and read the meanings to us of all of these 

commitments that they’ve made, because whatever they have 

promised to do, whatever they have committed to do, whatever 

they have indicated or stated in writing or verbally to do, they 

have done the opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that this government is 

on its last ropes, and I could go on. I’ve got a number of other 

things . .  
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Solomon: — But they have made promises, Mr. Speaker. 

They have broken every promise that they made. They’ve 

promised fiscal responsibility. They have delivered fiscal 

irresponsibility. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Solomon: — They preach restraint to the people of this 

province, yet they practise unrestrained spending and patronage, 

Mr. Speaker. They promised the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, good government, and what they’ve delivered is a 

shambles. You’re a laughing stock. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Solomon: — They are the laughing stock government of 

this country right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — They promised, Mr. Speaker, improved 

services. And what we’ve received is we’ve received cut-backs 

second to none in the province of Canada. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, they have promised lower taxes, as I’ve 

just indicated, as they have indicated through their own written 

word. And they have delivered not tax decreases, Mr. Speaker, 

but they have delivered massive tax increases unprecedented in 

the history of this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — And in the final analysis, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan will judge who has been 

double-crossed. They will judge who has double-crossed who. 

And when that decision is decided by the people of 

Saskatchewan, when they come to that conclusion, I can assure 

you that the members opposite will not be returning as a 

government after the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak on this Bill which 

increases the flat tax to one and a half per cent – the unfair flat 

tax that was levied on the people of Saskatchewan by the PC 

government. This tax is a very unfair tax, Mr. Speaker, because 

it basically is a tax on the middle class and lower income 

people. And it’s unfair for  

that reason. 

 

The PC government attempted to sell this tax on the basis that it 

was a tax on the rich, but that was a misrepresentation of what 

the tax actually did, and actually represented to the people of 

Saskatchewan – a gross misrepresentation, Mr. Speaker, 

because wealthy investors are still able to deduct many of their 

investments before they pay the flat tax. But a family with an 

ordinary income cannot deduct its individual benefits, the 

individual deductions, before paying the flat tax, and I say 

that’s unfair, Mr. Speaker, very unfair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — As a result what has happened is that middle 

income people in Saskatchewan are paying an unprecedented 

rate of taxes under the PC regime of government and they’re 

very, very heavy taxes, Mr. Speaker, unprecedented in this 

province. And they’re doing this, Mr. Speaker, in spite of all the 

promises that they made during the election – and the member 

from Regina North West went into many of those promises, and 

I might add that the Premier was also a part of those promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And I have an ad today that talks about his 

commitment to reduce taxes in this province, and the fact that 

the PC government repeatedly said in the ’82 election it would 

reduce income tax by 10 per cent – reduce income tax by 10 per 

cent. But what has it done, Mr. Speaker? It’s increased income 

tax, and it’s levied an unfair flat tax on the people of 

Saskatchewan. Another individual who referred to the 10 per 

cent reduction on income tax was the former member of Regina 

Lakeview. And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Regina Lakeview remembered that when I was campaigning in 

the election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And they remembered the broken PC promises 

and the fact this government reneged on its promises to reduce 

income tax, and got elected in 1982 on such promises. They 

remembered that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1545) 

 

There were a number of other measures that this government 

attempted to introduce which showed its propensity to break 

one promise after the other. The used car sales tax – let’s just 

think about the used car sales tax, this unfair, used car sales tax 

that was levied on the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I know that the member would 

like to give a speech on many different issues which may or 

may not be related to this topic. The issue she just brought up is 

not directly related, and therefore I would ask her to refrain 

from it. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — The point of order being this, Mr. 

Speaker. I listened to the member very carefully, and what I 

heard the member saying is that this is not an  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2422 

 

isolated case of tax increases and broken promises. But there is 

a whole array of broken promises on tax cuts – in fact, tax 

increases. The member is making an argument on that basis. I 

think a member is allowed to bring supporting evidence to the 

issue that is before this House at this time. And in my view, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what the member was doing, was supporting the 

case, saying it’s not a single issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have listened to the point of order carefully 

and I noted the member’s argument. The members may attempt 

in their own way to try to bring in supporting evidence to 

support what they believe is their case; however, if we allowed 

that to happen, there would be almost a limitless amount of 

evidence that could conceivably be brought in. And therefore, 

no doubt much of that would not be on topic, and I rule that a 

wide ranging discussion on taxation is not on the topic. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with you. There is a 

limitless amount of evidence that could be brought in on the tax 

increases of this government of one form or another. We can 

look at numerous tax increases, and not just tax increases, Mr. 

Speaker, but a transfer of the tax burden from the government 

to municipalities. That’s another type of tax increase, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We can look at the cut-back in programs like the property 

improvement grant. We can look at the gas tax, the increase in 

gas tax. We can look at the increase in sales tax. And the 

evidence is just limitless, and I agree with you whole-heartedly, 

Mr. Speaker. I will accept your ruling; however, I think it is 

very relevant because it’s a pattern that this government has 

displayed, a pattern of taxing people in every niche and corner 

that it’s possible to tax people. If there’s a way of taxing people, 

they’ve found it; they’ll do it – they’ll do it. You can’t believe 

them, Mr. Speaker. They come in with big promises about 

eliminating gas tax, eliminating sales taxes, reducing income 

tax by 10 per cent. You can’t believe them, Mr. Speaker. They 

have absolutely no credibility on the issue of income tax – 

absolutely no credibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — They double-crossed the people, Mr. Speaker. 

They double-crossed the people. And why are they doing this? 

Why are they double-crossing the people? They’re 

double-crossing it because they’re now asking the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan to pay for their mismanagement and 

their incompetence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Their mismanagement and their incompetence 

which is evidenced by a $3.4 billion deficit in this province 

today, Mr. Speaker. And they should be ashamed of that. We’re 

being asked now, the people of Saskatchewan are being asked, 

to pay for their give-aways, their huge give-aways to 

corporations like Pocklington and Weyerhaeuser. We’re being 

asked to pay for their incompetence on the fire sale prices that 

they sold our highways equipment at. We’re being asked to pay 

for the $1.5 billion give-away to large out of province  

oil corporations, and for the numerous patronage appointments 

that this government has engaged in. Now the ordinary taxpayer 

of Saskatchewan is being asked to pay for that, Mr. Speaker, 

not to mention the $17 million advertising budget of this 

government. 

 

This government started off with a surplus, Mr. Speaker, 

according to their own accounting. They started off with 

something like – I think it was, if my memory is accurate – 

something like a $150 million surplus. And in something like 

five or six years they’ve had . . . in five years, I believe, they’ve 

introduced six deficit budgets, notwithstanding the fact that they 

started out with a surplus. And that, Mr. Speaker, is evidence of 

their incompetence and their mismanagement. 

 

And not only have we had higher tax increases, but we’ve had 

cuts in services – cuts in services, a reduction in services, Mr. 

Speaker, a substantial reduction in services, and a transfer of the 

tax burden to municipalities. 

 

Another thing that’s happened this summer which is very 

shocking is the fact that the consumer price index jumped by 

2.5 per cent in Saskatoon, and 2.3, I believe, in Regina from 

June to July – a 2.5 per cent jump, when the national rate was 

something like 0.7 per cent. And that tells you something about 

what’s happening in this province, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 

question that the introduction of this increase in the flat tax is a 

tax on the people of this province for the mismanagement by 

this government. 

 

So that leaves us with several conclusions that can be drawn 

about the PC government. There is absolutely no question that 

they are prepared to introduce unfair taxes, such as the unfair 

flat tax that taxes middle income people and lower income 

people and doesn’t deal with the fact that many wealthy 

investors are getting away with paying very little tax. It doesn’t 

really deal with that problem, Mr. Speaker. And this 

government is prepared to go ahead and nevertheless, in spite of 

the fact that this tax is unfair, to increase it yet again this year. 

 

And it’s prepared to say anything, Mr. Speaker. It’s prepared to 

make any promises it wants in order to get elected, prepared to 

say anything, but it’s not prepared to deliver on its promises. Oh 

no, it’s not prepared to deliver. It’s perfectly satisfied with itself 

when it introduces taxes such as this and double-crosses the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

As well, this government’s prepared to wallow in patronage 

appointments and airplane flights to Edmonton or Calgary, for 

example, all at the expense of the taxpayers of this province. 

And it’s the taxpayers that are paying for these patronage 

appointments, for these airplane flights, for these huge 

give-aways to friends of the PC Party. It’s the taxpayers that are 

paying for it. 

 

And for them to take a province, a have province with $150 

million surplus in the treasury, and make it into a have-not 

province, Mr. Speaker, is evidence of the fact that the PC 

government is totally incompetent and has totally mismanaged 

the resources and the funds of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2423 

 

This is a great province. We’ve got plentiful resources. We’ve 

got people who are very resourceful. We have people who are 

hard-working; people who know how to balance budgets and 

want to make things meet; people who want to see this province 

reach its full potential and be the great province that it can be. 

 

But what’s happening? We’ve got a government over there 

that’s totally incompetent, has mismanaged the provincial 

treasury to the tune of a $3.4 billion deficit and who’s prepared 

to put the responsibility for that deficit on the taxpayers of this 

province. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, I believe that history is 

going to show that this government was the worst government 

that Saskatchewan has ever had. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are not going to tolerate this 

unfairness any longer, and they’re not going to tolerate the 

mismanagement of this government any longer. And we will 

see the results of that when this government screws up the 

courage to call the by-election in Saskatoon. And when they can 

screw up the courage to do that, we’ll see how the people of 

Saskatchewan feel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I paused for a moment 

before I stood, in anticipation, hoping that perhaps there was a 

government member here that would like to defend this 

particular tax Bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where are they? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — And we’re looking for them. They’re sitting 

here, and they’re sitting silent, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 

quite indicative of just how embarrassed they are about this 

thing that they don’t want to stand up and speak about it. 

 

I want to spend a few minutes today talking about how it affects 

the average wage-earner, Mr. Speaker. And I notice that of the 

members opposite, there are people there who I believe did earn 

a wage at one time, or were wage-earners rather than 

entrepreneurs. The member from Regina Wascana, I may be 

mistaken, but I believe was a wage-earner. I think he would 

know about that. The member from Saskatoon Mayfair was 

certainly a wage-earner. I’m certain that he has dished out an 

extra two or three or $400 as a result of this flat tax. I believe 

the member from Rosthern, as well, has felt the effects of this 

flat tax in the same way that I have, perhaps to the tune of two 

or three, $400 a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this idea of the flat tax was introduced, we 

heard them use the word “reform.” There was going to be tax 

reform. Now if you’re going to reform something, that means 

you’re going to substitute, pull taxes somewhere and charge 

them on somewhere else. It’s not just a matter of adding taxes, 

it’s a matter of reducing taxes somewhere. But to the PC 

government, just like to their cohorts in Ottawa, tax reform 

simply means another way to gouge the public. 

 

Now I want to talk about, very briefly, about how the average 

middle-income family earning a wage is hit. I’m talking about 

wage-earners in the range of 20,000 to 40,000 gross. All you 

have to do is go and ask somebody who is in that category, ask 

somebody who has been in Saskatchewan, who’s had his – 

particularly if they’re with the civil service – ask them, those 

people who had their wages frozen, and ask them what’s 

happened to their take-home pay over the last two or three 

years. Ask them if any of them have take-home pay that’s 

greater than it was a year ago, or two years ago, unless of 

course they have an increment or perhaps have changed jobs. 

But in most cases, in most cases and even with increments, they 

will tell you that they are taking home $50 less, $100 less, in 

some cases 150 to $200 less a month. And a lot of that is due to 

the tax grab by this government and by the federal government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan people have been used to 

paying for services and, as a general rule of thumb, I think do 

not mind paying taxes for services received. I think, as a general 

rule of thumb, people have generally felt that if there’s a service 

to be paid for, they’re prepared to pay it. As a matter of fact, 

there are parents right now who are thinking of asking their 

local school boards to raise the mill rate so they can bus 

students within cities because they like that service to be 

provided, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what they don’t like is: they don’t like to have to pay 

increased taxes when the services are going down. That’s the 

shocking thing. They don’t like it. They don’t like it when they 

see that their taxes are going up and the services in education 

are going down. The services in post-secondary education are 

going down. The services in health are going down. The dental 

plan is being cancelled. And instead they’re seeing pay-offs, 

political pay-offs. And while this is happening, they’re asked to 

pay higher property taxes because that’s happening at the same 

time. And they’re thinking well, look, I have to do this because 

the government is mismanaged, and what I have to do is I have 

to sacrifice something that I’ve been working for for my family. 

That’s the first effect, Mr. Speaker, that’s the first effect on the 

wage-earner, that they feel they have to sacrifice on behalf of 

their family. 

 

The second effect of this particular tax increase, Mr. Speaker, is 

that it’s a betrayal – a betrayal of promises. Now my colleague 

from Regina North West has indicated several of these, and I 

want to repeat them because I think it’s important. I will, 

instead of repeating the ones that he mentioned, I’ll add a 

couple more, because this was a program, a part of the platform 

of the PC Party in 1982. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I have here pictured before me a handsome individual, a 

former member from Saskatoon. It says here: “Schoenhals for 

Saskatoon Sutherland.” And right in the middle of his campaign 

platform it says: “reduce the provincial income tax by 10 per 

cent.” That’s one of his big promises. And what have we got 

here? Exactly the opposite. 

 

We have one here, another pamphlet – no picture this  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2424 

 

time – but it’s from a member from Regina, Gordon Dirks, a 

former member of the government, and once again exactly the 

same statement. “A commitment to the people of Rosemont. 

Sensible taxation – reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent.” 

 

Here’s one, a picture of the handsome member from Redberry. 

It says here underneath: “Savings to you in other . . .” Here’s 

how the people of Redberry were led to believe that they would 

be saving money. It says here: “by a 10 per cent reduction in 

personal income tax.” 

 

Now I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker. There were 64 

candidates, and 64 times this was repeated. Here’s one from a 

member who sits in the government opposite right now. There’s 

a picture of a family here. It says underneath here: “Man of 

achievement – Michael Hopfner. A Progressive Conservative 

government will” – will do what? – “provide a 10 per cent 

reduction in Provincial Income Tax.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where is it? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well we’re waiting for that reduction. 

We’re waiting for that reduction. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s one 

here that sums it all up, and there’s a picture of the Premier with 

his commitment right on the campaign literature. And right here 

in his commitment he says: “The measure . . .” The headline is 

“Eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax on clothing and utility bills.” 

 

And he says he has a commitment to “the complete elimination 

of sales tax in its first term of office . . .” Another betrayal and 

that’s right from the leader. 

 

A little piece of information that all of the members opposite 

had in their back pockets to wonder how they should campaign, 

and it’s titled Pocket Politics. It’s a quick reference for PC 

policy, or on PC policy for candidates. Here’s what they were 

told to say about fighting inflation. You should tell them that 

the – those are my words “you should tell them” – but it says 

here: 

 

A PC government would battle inflation by: 

 

(by doing what?) . . . a 10 per cent reduction in personal 

income tax. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is the record. That is the record, and it’s 

an unfortunate record for the members opposite. I spoke, Mr. 

Speaker, about two things, two effects that this is having on the 

average wage-earner. First effect is that it’s causing the average 

wage-earner to sacrifice things that he ordinarily wouldn’t have 

to have had; and the second is, the effect of the broken promise; 

the effect of the double-cross; the effect it has on the mind-set 

of the people that here was a government that said they were 

going to reduce taxes and they’re increasing them. 

 

And this is not the only tax that this government has increased. 

And you can list them, and I have some here, Mr. Speaker, that 

I would like to read into the record. In addition to this tax, 

we’ve had the used car tax – the now defunct used car tax 

which the government had to rescind as a result of the public 

pressure. We know that people felt a great tax increase when the 

property improvement  

grant which was initiated by the former NDP government, used 

to be paid to them in help with their property taxation for farms, 

for homes; renters used to get this, and so did small business 

men. 

 

And, of course, the betrayal this year in the budget of adding 

the 7 per cent sales tax increase and the more recent gas tax, the 

7 cent per litre gas tax, which is a complete debacle because 

how are people supposed to keep track of this. And I don’t 

know how the government is ever going to keep track of it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I – for the reasons that I have mentioned – 

want to indicate to you that there is no way that the people of 

Saskatchewan want us to vote for this Bill. And on that grounds 

I will not be voting in favour of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with my colleagues this afternoon to address the question 

that’s before the House here today – the question of 

ever-increasing taxation burden on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to also comment, Mr. Speaker, that if the members 

opposite were proud of their record, they’d be entering this 

debate. They’d be defending their mismanagement. They would 

be defending the deficit that they have displayed to the people 

of Saskatchewan. I want to say that this government has given 

us three things – three, in fact, four things – all of the worst 

possible consequences that have developed as a result of this 

government. 

 

First of all, that we have a massive deficit, as has been 

mentioned — $3.4 billion laid on the backs of this generation 

and future generations. Coupled with that, not only do we have 

a massive deficit after the last election, now we see the 

devastating cuts in the safety net that we had developed and had 

become a tradition in the province of Saskatchewan. They have 

massively cut the drug program, and they have decimated the 

dental program. And there’s more to come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thirdly, not only do we have a deficit, not only do we have cuts 

in programs, but we have massive increases in taxes. Now isn’t 

that a tremendous legacy that any government should offer to 

its people? Massive deficit, massive cuts in programs, and huge 

and massive increases in taxes. Now that is a record that any 

government should be ashamed of. 

 

And I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan – you read the 

polls – they’re on to those boys over there. They deceived the 

people during the last campaign, and they went around 

Saskatchewan and tried to make people believe that everything 

was fine. 

 

“We’re building Saskatchewan.” Yes. They were spending 

massive amounts of money irresponsibly, and they had the 

hidden agenda that once they were elected that there was going 

to be cuts and increased taxes. 

 

Across this province, Mr. Speaker, there is a new awareness by 

people. In 1982 one of the slickest  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2425 

 

campaigns was launched by the government opposite. And 

many young people across this province didn’t have the 

experience of deficit and mismanagement and waste. And many 

people, and many people – many young people – indeed, many 

people of many walks of life believed in what they were saying 

and the campaign promises that they made. 

 

And I want to say that there’s a change in society today. The 

people of Saskatchewan are saying: this is an incompetent 

government; this is a deceitful government; this is a government 

of waste and mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to relate to this legislature my 

conversation with a young person when I went to buy my 

insurance the other day – car insurance. And when she 

recognized who I was – and many people across the province 

do – and I want to say, when we were discussing with this 

business man, and she was an employee, and the business man 

was excited about the New Democratic Party leadership and 

how we were going to develop and form the next government. 

And he was interested in this. And she said to me, oh, I know 

who you are – that was the one few that didn’t know 

immediately – but she said, she said to me, she said, I remember 

discussing whether I should vote for this government, this Tory 

government. And she said, you know, I’m going to have to bite 

my lip. She said, I made a very big mistake. 

 

She said – and I said to her, I said, I forgive you. I said, you 

were a young person; they promised you everything under the 

sun. I said, you didn’t have experience like many of the rest of 

us in respect to Tory governments because we hadn’t had one 

for 50 years in Saskatchewan; how would you know what to 

expect? 

 

But she said to me, she said, never again will I vote for the 

deception, the mismanagement, the waste, and the broken 

promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Here we have before us an increase in the flat 

tax. The total flat tax increase is 1.5 per cent on net income. 

That adds up to somewhere in the neighbourhood of $150 

million that they’re socking it to the people of this province — 

$150 million of increased taxes. But not only that, they 

destroyed the property improvement grant, which was $83 

million, which was sent back to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hundreds of millions of dollars of increase in taxation has been 

the legacy of the government opposite. And I say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, there’s an old saying that 

you can fool some of the people some of the time, but you can’t 

fool all of the people all of the time. And I’ll tell you, the polls 

in Saskatchewan are indicating that the game is up with you 

boys across the way. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance – and I want 

to give just a little bit of a record of the financial record of this 

government opposite – the financial record of this government. 

They came in in 1982 with  

$140 million of surplus. And in 1982-83, deficit forecast $219 

million, actual 227 – fairly reasonable. 1983-84, 316 million 

was the forecast of deficit – came in with 331; ‘84-85, 267 

million and they came in with 379 million; in ‘85-86, 291 – 

getting closer to an election – and they jumped it to 584. And 

then, in order to get themselves elected the last time in ’86, they 

forecast a deficit of $389 million. And do you know what they 

brought in? — $1.235 billion — $1.3 billion is the debt, the 

deficit that this government . . . in order to get elected. 

 

So what they have done is shown a total unadulterated disregard 

and respect for the integrity and the hard work and the 

dedication of the small-business people, the farmers, the 

workers of this province. They have exploited their trust, and 

they have raked upon them and heaped upon them just an 

absolutely terrible mess, a mess that each and every one of you 

should be ashamed of. 

 

I want to also indicate, the Minister of Finance gets up and he 

says, overall our taxation is the lowest in Canada. Well I want 

to read from their gospel. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Their gospel according to whom? 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Koskie: — The gospel according to the Fraser Institute, 

rapidly being adopted by the right-wing members opposite. And 

in the Fraser Institute they do a taxes on average family by 

province – 1987. They indicate that Manitoba has income tax 

for an average family of 5,095; Saskatchewan, 5,132; Manitoba 

– New Democratic government with more social programs than 

here and a lower tax base, according to the Fraser Institute, my 

friend, and you must believe the Fraser Institute; after all 

they’re writing your gospel for privatization. You’ve got to 

believe in the Fraser Institute. 

 

And then if you take the taxes on the average family by 

provinces, total taxes, and they go into all the excise taxes, sales 

taxes, automobile, fuel, motor vehicle, licence taxes, and so on, 

we find that again in Manitoba the total taxes is $14,210. In 

Saskatchewan, when you look at all the taxes paid by the 

average family, is 14,477. 

 

And so I say to you here, the people of this province are sick 

and tired of deceit, of waste, of mismanagement, of wrong 

priorities. The people of Saskatchewan and the farmers and the 

people in my constituency are saying: this government cannot 

manage; this government does not deserve. And, in fact, the 

people that I talked to say, is there any way of getting rid of this 

government without having to wait the three or four years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

that this government then, again, has given us three things: a 

massive deficit, cuts – unmerciful cuts in programs, and 

massive increases in taxation. 

 

And moreover, not only have they done that, they have sold off 

many of the assets that were owned by the people of this 

province and have squandered the revenue from  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2426 

 

the sale of those assets. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, not only 

have we the huge deficit but they have taken dividends from the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to finance their operation; 

they have sold off coal mines, and that money is gone; they’ve 

sold off highway equipment and that money is gone; and 

they’ve sold off or given away Weyerhaeuser, the pulp mill, 

and that’s gone. 

 

So look at the incredible state that we’re looking at here in 

Saskatchewan under this PC government – the most 

unmanageable massiveness of debt, and now they’re cutting 

services to the weakest citizens in our society. That’s what 

they’re doing. 

 

Today we demonstrated with the crisis centre in Yorkton . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is bringing up 

many issues, and that’s his right if he can relate it to the Act 

being discussed. If he can relate it to that, well then he can 

continue. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I certainly . . . There’s a correlation. What 

we are having here, I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, a demonstration 

of total incompetence and mismanagement. And I’ll tell you, it 

rests with the Premier of this province; that’s where the buck 

has to stop. 

 

I’ll tell you that he is a Minister of Finance. Ask yourself: 

would any business corporation keep a Minister of Finance or 

chief executive officer that couldn’t make a prediction of deficit 

within $800 million? And now he comes into this House, and 

he’s still the Minister of Finance, and he’s heaping more taxes 

on top of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, in summary, and I know that 

the people of Saskatchewan are saying: here we have a 

government that has betrayed people; they promised cut in 

income tax. And look through your brochures and hang your 

heads, because you said it. And today we see $150 million of 

increase in taxes, heaped on the backs of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, you may have tried to buy an 

election, and you had to creep down to Ottawa to get bailed out, 

but I’ll say to you here that the increases in taxation, the cuts, 

and the deficit, I’ll tell you, you’re doomed. And so I say to 

you, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to be supporting – we’re not 

going to be supporting. And they’re starting to chirp, but I wish 

they’d get on their feet and defend, defend the massive 

increases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — No, they won’t. I challenge the member from 

Saskatoon Mayfair, that formerly from Quill Lakes, that has 

travelled the province finding a seat to get elected. 

 

But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, in closing, that we are not 

intending to support a tax increase because of a lack of 

priorities of this government, because this government has 

betrayed the people of this province. And I say to you,  

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of 

being gouged by the members opposite. 

 

I want to say a great deal more, and so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 24 – An Act to amend The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After listening 

to the member from Quill Lakes for quite a while here, I’m not 

quite sure how you should introduce any Bill. 

 

In regards to Bill No. 24, An Act to amend The Controverted 

Municipal Elections Act, it has only one purpose. I mentioned 

earlier on Bill 23 some of the purposes of the Act. This here 

now will remove from statute the requirements of the Act itself, 

of that portion of the Act. 

 

Rural municipal councils have requested on several occasions 

to change the present method of breaking tied votes for 

members of council. For many years, the returning officer, 

when two candidates for council receive an equal number of 

votes, places the names in a hat or a container and draws a name 

out of the hat, and that’s the successful candidate. In one 

municipality last year, Mr. Speaker, three candidates for reeve 

received the same number of votes. The reeve was elected by 

this manner. Almost every year one member of a rural 

municipality is elected in this manner. 

 

This request of the rural municipality councillors has the 

support of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, and at least on two resolutions has suggested the 

proposed changes that’s contained in Bill No. 23, which would 

require these new elections in rural municipalities where polling 

results in an equal number of votes being cast by the candidates. 

 

Elections are not final, however, until after a re-count of votes 

and/or proceedings under The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act, if any has been concluded, re-counts must be 

requested within 14 days. 

 

Councils are not adverse to waiting for that period to lapse 

before proceeding with a subsequent election in the event of a 

tied vote. Proceedings under The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act can be commenced at any time up to six weeks 

after the election, or at a later time, with the consent of a 

presiding judge. 

 

This delay would prevent holding the subsequent elections for 

at least two months. Without this proposed amendment or a 

two-month delay, it is possible the judge could declare one of 

the tied candidates in the original election to be elected, when 

another candidate for the same office has been elected at the 

subsequent election. I agree, such a possibility is remote, but it 

could place both the elected candidates in an untenable position. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2427 

 

This amendment will prevent that possibility and prevent the 

voters of the division or the rural municipality to make the final 

election for council. 

 

With that I move second reading of a Bill No. 24, An Act to 

amend The Controverted Municipal Elections Act. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want only to make a brief comment here, Mr. 

Speaker. We have dealt with The Rural Municipality Act 

which, in fact, the minister indicated dealt with in the event of a 

tie in a municipal election. And the Bill 24, what it merely does 

is to make that applicable to The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act, and we are in agreement with that. It wouldn’t 

make sense to have it in the . . . to amend the municipal Act – 

The Rural Municipality Act and not into the other applicable 

Act, so we are in agreement with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 17 – An Act to 

amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to just 

resume some of the comments that I started on the second 

reading. And I’d just like to indicate to the House that this is 

another effort on the part of the Conservative government 

opposite to increase taxes and to attack the deficit from the 

wrong perspective. Rather than grab their mismanagement and 

get it under control, and harness their patronage appointments, 

and look at all of the other fiscal irresponsible things they’ve 

done, they’ve instead opted to increase taxes and in this 

particular case, increase taxes on some corporations in the 

province. 

 

And interesting, Mr. Speaker, that they are doing this because 

they have mismanaged the economy to the point where many 

corporations they have given tens and, in fact, hundreds of 

millions of dollars of assets that were property of the people of 

Saskatchewan. For example, the Weyerhaeuser deal which was 

. . . the PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) was provided to 

Weyerhaeuser, and that cost the taxpayers around $250 million; 

the $21 million to the Pocklington plant up in North Battleford 

and . . . 

 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, what they’ve done is that they’ve, on 

the one hand, fed their friends, their multinational corporate 

friends, as well as providing tax cuts to the oil companies; but 

on the other hand, what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is they’re 

slapping some of their friends’ knuckles, and they’re looking at 

taking some more tax money from them. 

 

And I have, Mr. Speaker, right here a copy of an article out of 

the Leader-Post dated Friday, August 14, and it basically 

reaffirms what this government is doing. They have alienated 

all people in this province that deal with the drug plan. They’ve 

alienated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all  

families that have had successes with the dental plan, that have 

used the dental plan. They have alienated, Mr. Speaker, all of 

the people in this province with respect to wage-earners, and 

farmers, and others, and the only friends they had left were the 

multinationals and the corporations, and with this Bill, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they have slapped the faces of their friends. 

 

And in this article which refers to this Bill 17, The Corporation 

Capital Tax Act, the Royal Bank as a result, or partial result of 

this Bill, are making some major decisions regarding the 

province of Saskatchewan; other banks as well, the Toronto 

Dominion Bank and the Bank of Nova Scotia. And I’ll read 

from this article, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Several major banks have reduced or are reducing head office 

staff in Saskatchewan due to corporation restructuring, the 

slumping provincial economy and a five-fold increase in 

corporate capital tax in three years. 

 

(1630) 

 

And as the article proceeds, Mr. Speaker, the bankers from the 

Royal Bank, and of course the bankers from the Toronto 

Dominion Bank, and the Bank of Nova Scotia, go on to say that 

not only does this corporate capital tax increase have a negative 

effect on them in terms of employing people, but what it also 

does, Mr. Speaker, is encourage them with regards to the 

economy and with regard to their operation. 

 

And in view of the terrifically bad economy that they have put 

together in this province these friends of the government 

opposite, these close friends that are cut from the same cloth are 

now saying to them, well, we’re going to start cutting back 

some of our operations because of this tax. 

 

But I guess the basic premise, Mr. Speaker, of my remarks 

today is that, rather than attack the real problem of the deficit, 

rather than to approach the problem of this province and the 

many problems that this government has put together on the 

plates of people in this province and therefore on the backs of 

people of this province, rather than look at some of the real 

causes of those problems, all they are doing is increasing taxes. 

And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what that means is, again, 

this government has not only double-crossed the people of 

Saskatchewan but they’ve even double-crossed their own 

friends, and I find that quite peculiar for a government of this 

colour. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that this government 

refuses to look at their own internal operations and correct 

them; in view of the fact this government refuses to closely 

scrutinize patronage appointments and eliminate them and to 

get their management on track and to start watching their 

spending in a normal fashion, we will not be supporting this 

Bill because we feel it’s another effort to grab taxes as opposed 

to resolve and clean up the mess that they’ve gotten us into. 

 

I would like to ask the minister at this point: how many other 

banks and major corporations have told him what they are 

going to be doing as a result of this new Bill and  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2428 

 

this tax increase? And I will wait, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for his 

response. I am sure he will be looking at the remarks in 

Hansard and will be anxious to respond to those questions. And 

we’ll be asking them as well as we get into committee. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to just finish my remarks by 

saying that we will not support this Bill. And that we ask the 

government to fulfil their commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan by keeping their word of tax decreases and to 

look closely at cleaning up the mess they’ve gotten this 

province into over the past four or five years. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 18 – An Act to 

amend The Tobacco Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill fits in with 

the other bills that are before us today: The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act, the amendments to The Income Tax Act, the flat tax, 

and of course the E&H tax. 

 

This is another effort on the part of the Conservative 

government not to look at the causes of the problems, but to try 

and transfer the problems onto the backs of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan, when you 

look at the figures in comparative terms, has increased this 

tobacco tax by 15 per cent in this budget. That’s a figure of 

some concern to many people, but it’s even more concern when 

you consider – and more serious, Mr. Deputy Speaker – when 

you consider the fact that this government in this province has 

increased the taxes on the tobacco products in the last 18 

months not by 14 or 15 or 25 per cent but, in effect, an increase 

of over 52 per cent. And that’s an increase that is one of the 

largest increases in taxes of any province, in terms of tobacco, 

in Canada. That is a real concern. 

 

And of course what this means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

government opposite again have gone back on their word from 

previous election campaigns. They have made commitments to 

reduce taxes, and in effect what has happened with this Bill, 

The Tobacco Tax Act, it increases further tax burdens to those 

people who are consuming tobacco products. And in my view, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s just basic fiscal irresponsibility on their part to 

heap these taxes on the backs of the people of Saskatchewan 

when, in effect, they should be looking at their own back yard. 

 

Another interesting aspect, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to raise with 

the members this afternoon, is that according to the 1987 

Saskatchewan tax initiatives, 51 in the budget, it shows that the 

corporate capital tax increase will provide $2.2 million more to 

the treasury of this province — $2.2 million. When we look at 

the tobacco tax, what they are doing with this increase, they are 

increasing the taxes to the people of Saskatchewan who 

consume tobacco products by $9 million. So they’re looking at 

the  

corporations and providing only a $2.2 million tax increase on 

them, but on the people of Saskatchewan they’re slapping a $9 

million increase on tobacco products. 

 

In my view, Mr. Deputy Speaker, four times greater a tax on 

tobacco products than there is on their large corporate friends. 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that’s a very negative way to be 

approaching resolving the deficit. And as a result, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we will be likely opposing . . . we will be opposing 

this Bill as well. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 19 – An Act to 

amend The Education and Health Tax act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I gave a 

fairly comprehensive overview of our position on the E&H tax 

during the second reading debates earlier, and I would like to 

just add a few things, if I may. 

 

Further to my remarks that were made earlier on The Income 

Tax Act, basically the E&H Bill, this Bill No. 19, is an unfair 

tax. The tax has been increased on sales from 5 per cent to 7 per 

cent – that’s a 40 per cent increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 

unfair Bill because it’s a consumption tax, and it hurts ordinary 

working people and the poor the hardest. That’s who it hits the 

hardest, and in that sense it’s very unfair, because people who 

have limited incomes still have to purchase services and 

products that are subject to the tax and their cost of living 

increases. As a matter of fact, an interesting statistic which was 

in the newspaper the other day, in the Star-Phoenix on August 

21, shows that the situation in Saskatchewan with respect to the 

inflation rate is very serious. 

 

The inflation rate for the month of July, over the previous 

12-month period, has been 6 per cent, which is the highest 

inflation rate of all of the provinces of Canada. So, 

Saskatchewan, with this Conservative government, and this was 

before the E&H tax increase, has the dubious distinction of 

having the highest cost of living in all of Canada, and Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that worries the opposition a great deal. 

 

This government preaches time after time, speech after speech, 

day after day, what a terrific job they’re doing to help the 

economy of this province. We know that Saskatchewan was the 

only province in August that had, over the previous 12 months 

ending August, had 2,000 fewer people working in this 

province. Every other province in Canada had an increase. 

That’s the terrific job they’re doing in the economy. Manitoba 

had about 4,000 more people working; Alberta had about 12 or 

14,000 more people working; and they say that the western 

Canadian economy is in hardship. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I maintain that it’s not the western 

Canadian economy but, in fact, it’s the direct result and a direct 

correlation with the government in this province. The 

government, rather than becoming involved in the  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2429 

 

economy in tough economic times, as is their obligation – and 

we heard what the definition of obligation was earlier – they 

extract themselves from the economy. They should be getting 

more involved with the economy when the economy is tough, 

but they sit back with their open for business philosophy and 

they say: let everybody else do it. Yet they add on to the people 

of Saskatchewan this ominous burden of an E&H tax, a 40 per 

cent increase, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. 

 

What this indicates, Mr. Speaker, what this Bill is clearly 

indicating to the people of Saskatchewan is that the government 

opposite has double-crossed and has misled and deceived the 

people of this province. During my remarks earlier – this was a 

few weeks ago, when second reading first commenced – I 

talked about how the government have misled people, how they 

told people what they were going to do regarding their 

government if they became elected. And I went through a 

number of individuals in the government – I believe there were 

eight or nine cabinet ministers that said in writing, with their 

names and their pictures on the documents, that they were going 

to eliminate the 5 per cent E&H tax. 

 

Well we know what the definition of eliminate is, because I 

happen to have the dictionary here. And I appreciate the 

Speaker straightening me out on the last Bill for this E&H tax, 

that I’d like to share with the Speaker and all members what the 

definition of eliminate is. And I’ll do that in a few moments, 

because I want to go over some of these commitments made by 

members of the Conservative Party that I have not yet talked 

about. 

 

For example, the former member from Wilkie, one James 

Garner, he said, we will completely remove the 5 per cent sales 

tax. It says, re-elect James Garner. And the people of Wilkie 

re-elected this member, and they brought him into this House, 

and where is he today? And where is he today? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, he is no longer here because he, he could not even 

stomach the breaking of commitments and the deceit that this 

government has practised. And I think he’s even left the 

province. 

 

We have the private member from Yorkton, one Mr. McLaren, 

and he says, vote PC; eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax and 

other taxes, and this measure will be the first phase of this new 

PC government’s commitment to the complete elimination of 

the sales tax in its first term of office – not in its second term, 

but its first term. 

 

Well I think the member from Yorkton is quite embarrassed, 

because he has broken his word to the people of Saskatchewan. 

He’s broken his word, and he’s deceived and misled people in 

his constituency. And I understand why he sits there 

uncomfortably, because if I was reminded of having my word 

broken, I would be quite uncomfortable with it as well. 

 

And of course we heard the member from Shellbrook-Torch 

River in his ads. We heard some other information from them 

earlier, but he says, savings to you in other areas by phasing out 

the provincial sales tax. He said he was going to phase it out. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Sutherland says he’s going to 

remove the 5 per cent E&H tax. He’s no longer here,  

but he’s going to his reward. Mr. Schoenhals is no longer a 

member from Sutherland. He is in effect, Mr. Speaker, involved 

with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, appointed to a 

political patronage position at a rate far greater than some of his 

former colleagues in cabinet. And that’s the reward for breaking 

his word? 

 

I wonder if some of the members of the potash community 

around the world are aware of these kind of commitments that 

this chairman of the potash corporation has made that he had no 

intention of keeping, nor his government. I wonder how they 

would deal with our potash corporation at the international 

level. 

 

And of course the member from Saltcoats, he says, we’re going 

to eliminate the sales tax, eliminate 5 per cent on clothing and 

utilities now, and the remainder in the first term of office. We 

don’t see a decrease or elimination, Mr. Speaker; we see an 

increase almost . . . it is exactly 40 per cent – from 5 per cent to 

7 per cent. 

 

The former member from Regina South in his ads as well, he 

talks about phasing out the 5 per cent sales tax. The former 

member from Rosemont, one Gordon Dirks – abolish the 5 per 

cent sales tax. That’s what he was going to do. Maybe there’s 

some amendments in this Bill we haven’t found, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1645) 

 

Maybe it means, rather than increase, maybe they’re going to 

abolish it. We should look at the wording and perhaps get the 

dictionary meanings, and we’ll get to that in a minute, as well. 

We have, Mr. Speaker, the member from Redberry who we 

haven’t talked about yet. He says in his ads: 

 

Dear Constituents: We will be phasing out the provincial 

sales tax. 

 

And he talks in this ad about how the NDP slash and cut and are 

up to dirty tricks and so on, and don’t believe the NDP. Well I 

wonder what his constituents are saying now when he’s made 

all these commitments in here, and the sales tax is just one out 

of all the others he’s broken as well. I wonder what they’re 

going to say about him and his integrity and his credibility. 

How would you feel, Mr. Speaker; how do these members feel? 

 

The member from Redberry, he sits there and he smiles and he 

laughs, and he figures that this is a big joke. And it sure is a 

joke. It’s a joke on the people in his constituency. But I’ll tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, they’re not laughing. They are not laughing 

at what this government is doing to them, but they are laughing 

at this government, because when the next election comes 

around, they’re going to be gone. 

 

We have a former member from Prince Albert, and of course he 

has gone to his reward because his commitment in writing was 

to eliminate the E&H tax as well. And the people in his 

constituency, they figured out what kind of a person he was 

because they defeated him very soundly. And I’m pleased to 

say that my seat-mate is the member now from Prince Albert 

and he’s a man of his word – the member from Prince Albert 

now. The former  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2430 

 

member certainly has not been. 

 

We have the member from Morse. And let’s look at this one. It 

says, remove the 5 per cent E&H tax. Well that’s interesting – 

remove. Does “remove the E&H tax” mean that we’re going to 

go from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, or does it mean we’re going to 

remove the tax? And I think we heard earlier the definition of 

remove. 

 

Let me remind the members. The Oxford paperback dictionary, 

Mr. Speaker, says, very clearly, that the definition of “remove” 

is to “take off or away from the place occupied,” or to “take 

off,” or to “get rid of.” 

 

And in my view, Mr. Speaker, jumping the sales tax from 5 per 

cent to 7 per cent is not taking off or removing the sales tax. 

And I think that the people of Morse are going to be wondering 

why the member from Morse has gone back on his word; that 

he’s broken his commitment; that he’s double-crossed them. 

And they’ll be raising that with him over time, I’m sure. 

 

Oh, there’s one here I won’t read, Mr. Speaker; it’s got some 

picture on it. We also have the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster. “A Progressive Conservative government 

will provide a 10 per cent reduction on income tax, plus phase 

out the sales tax.” And he goes on with all the other 

commitments. 

 

And I see the member from Redberry is still smiling because he 

thinks this is even funny when we talk about his colleagues who 

have broken their words. They’ve made commitments; they’ve 

made promises to eliminate the E&H tax, but in effect they’ve 

said, and they’ve shown by their actions, don’t do what I do, do 

what I say. And of course they do not do what they say, whether 

it’s verbally or whether it’s in writing. 

 

I think the member from Redberry is anxious to get up and 

speak on this Bill and I’m going to give him some time. And I 

invite him to do so because his constituents are asking people 

that I know up there; where does he stand with respect to the 

commitments that he has made in his constituency in writing 

about the E&H tax and the sales tax and the flat tax and the gas 

tax and the hidden taxes that have been levied on the people of 

Saskatchewan. Where does he stand? We’ll know that fairly 

soon. 

 

The former member from Canora, one Lloyd Hampton, who we 

all know is . . . his word was his bond. He said that if they get 

elected, the Conservative government gets elected, they’ll 

“remove the 5 per cent sales tax.” So I think that the member 

from . . . former member from Canora doesn’t really need to 

answer to his constituents any more because he is no longer 

there. 

 

And I have here another copy of a former Conservative cabinet 

minister from the constituency of The Battlefords, one Myles 

Morin, and he says here – actually some other people say, we’re 

voting PC – for Myles Morin because he’s a man of his word. 

He’s going to remove the E&H tax. And under his picture he 

says: I’m going to remove the E&H tax. 

 

Well I wonder how the former member of The Battlefords, Mr. 

Morin, is going to explain this to the people that he  

works with now in business that, hey, it’s okay if I write 

something that I’m going to do, but don’t believe what I’m 

going to do. 

 

Or I wonder what he’s going to do if he happens to run for 

some presidency of some Conservative Party and people are 

going to believe him? Now he wants to attract people to support 

him for the presidency of the provincial Conservative Party, 

when this guy has broken his word in writing to the people of 

Saskatchewan. You’ve got to be kidding. I hope he does get 

elected president of the Conservative Party, because this is 

something we’re going to continue to raise, Mr. Speaker. I think 

it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that he gets elected because it’ll 

highlight in spades – it’ll highlight in spades, Mr. Speaker, the 

incredible disregard and deceit the Conservative Party has for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some people are saying, Mr. Speaker, that if you can do 

something like this, you know, break your word in writing, 

deceive people and double-cross people, that maybe, through all 

of those experiences, you’ll achieve a higher office, the 

presidency of the Conservative Party. And maybe that’s what’s 

going to happen. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, another one, and it’s from the member 

from Biggar, and he’s still in this House, Mr. Speaker. And he 

says here . . . fairly comprehensive statement, but his name and 

his picture’s on this, along with the PC slogan. He says: “Harry 

Baker believes in:” 

 

Lower taxes – Governments at both levels are trying to 

squeeze the taxpayer for as much as they can. We say 

provincial income tax is too high, and will immediately 

lower it. 

 

Gasoline – There is no reason in the world gas prices in 

Saskatchewan should be more than in Ontario. 

 

And he goes on about the gas tax, and he goes on about the 

E&H tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that these kinds of written, documented 

commitments by people, whether they’re in politics, or in 

private life, or in business, should mean something. Obviously, 

it doesn’t mean a darn thing. 

 

Every one of those members, member after member, in the 

Conservative Party have made a commitment, have promised to 

reduce the E&H tax, and what do we have here today, Mr. 

Speaker? We don’t have the elimination of the sales tax, we 

don’t even have a reduction in the sales tax. We, in effect, have 

another massive tax grab by the taxman, the member for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden and his government, from the people of 

this province. They’ve got both of their arms so deep in the 

pockets of the citizens of this province that you can’t even see 

their elbows. And I think that that’s going to mean some very 

negative implications on this government come the next 

election. 

 

I now, Mr. Speaker, like to just wind down a bit because I think 

it’s very important that other members get involved in the 

debate, and I know that the member from Redberry, and the 

member from Moosomin, and the member from  



 

September 10, 1987 

2431 

 

Canora, and the members on that side of the government are 

anxious to get in on this debate, to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan that, yes, they made a commitment but you know 

our word is not worth very much so we’re going to increase the 

E&H tax. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think, I think and I expect them to so. I 

think they’re going to stand up, and I think they’re going to 

make those statements to the public of this province and to the 

members of this Assembly. And they’re going to say that their 

word, that their word in effect, is precisely not what it means, 

that they have their Conservative dictionary, that all of this, 

these Oxford paperback, and the Webster’s Dictionary is on the 

table and other forms of dictionaries are really just reference 

points and don’t really mean anything, that these words don’t 

have any particular commitment or no particular importance. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of this province, the 

people of this province are sick and tired of statements made by 

this government, promises made that have been broken. They’re 

sick and tired of hearing promises about restraint and that 

people should be practising restraints, when in effect they 

practice as a government unrestrained patronage, unrestrained 

waste, and unrestrained management. They just spend money 

and it’s out of control. 

 

So the E&H tax, Mr. Speaker, is something that we can’t 

support. It’s a tax grab, it’s an unfair tax. It’s a consumption 

tax. It will hurt the hardest those that can least afford it, and 

they are not in a position, Mr. Speaker, in my view, to continue 

governing. They have all broken their word to the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Time and again. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Time and again, we have documented 

evidence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my father would be turning in his grave if, after he 

taught me about being honest and a man’s word is his bond, if 

he taught me all of that – and he did – he’d be turning in his 

grave if I was to get up – in writing or in this House – and make 

a statement that is totally opposite of the truth, at least to my 

knowledge. I think he’d turn in his grave, and I would disgrace 

my family if I was to do that. 

 

And I think the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are not only 

disgracing their party by what they’ve done in terms of 

commitments, and not only disgracing their own families but 

they’ve disgraced the people of this province and disgraced the 

entire province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — The E&H tax increase from 5 per cent to 7 

per cent basically sticks it to the families of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think that that is a very sad, sad attempt by the 

government to raise revenues. They are not looking at the real 

reasons for the problems. We have a deficit which is 

unparalleled in any other province in terms of its rapid growth. 

We have the fastest growing deficit not only in Canada but in 

all of North America. We have a  

government which, rather than looking at how to control that 

deficit, we have a government trying to feed the deficit. 

 

What is happening, Mr. Speaker, and it relates to this 5 per cent 

E&H tax which is being increased, is that this government, 

rather than introduce new services and new programs, and 

future governments rather than having the power to introduce 

new programs and improve services, we are going to be 

hampered with a massive size of the deficit to the point where 

our only function as elected officials is to be a debt manager. 

 

Now maybe we should go back to the previous corporate capital 

tax debate. But in that newspaper clipping all of these bankers 

are laying off some of their people. Maybe what this 

government should do is hire some of these bankers that are 

being laid off and have them provide some fiscal management, 

some fiscal guidance on how to run and manage a government – 

financially at least. They obviously don’t have the talent to that. 

 

But what this government is doing, Mr. Speaker, with this 

massive deficit, it’s burdening the people of this province. It’s 

leaving a legacy, as the member from Quill Lakes has indicated 

earlier, a legacy not only for this generation but for future 

generations. And it’s not a good legacy, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

legacy of high taxes. It’s a legacy, Mr. Speaker, of restricted 

governments. And what we are going to do in the next 

government, what members and individuals in this province 

who want to run for office are going to be doing next 

government, is not to improve services or to help people in this 

province or to introduce new programs, but our major 

responsibility instead of governing is going to be managing 

debt. We may as well all take bankers courses and figure out 

how the banking system operates because we’re going to be 

dealing with the bankers and the bond dealers on almost every 

move we make. 

 

We are doing a disservice to the future and the present of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, by having this government continue 

with their increased taxes, to have this government continue in 

their irresponsible and incompetent fashion. We not only are 

going to be seeing members in the next government, Mr. 

Speaker, become debt managers, we’re also going to be seeing a 

drastic cut in services because the amount of money that’s 

required to service that debt is growing on an alarming basis. 

It’s expanding faster than a helium balloon expands. And it’s up 

now to $3.4 billion, and that means $340 million a year in 

interest payments alone; $3,400 per person in this province just 

to pay the interest. 

 

And people are saying well, we can understand when we pay 

taxes and we pay – whether it’s 5 per cent or 7 per cent E&H 

tax – we have an understanding that if we pay that tax and we 

get our children out to the dental plan, or we can go get some 

drugs at reasonable price . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. It being 5 o’clock, This House does 

now stand recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


