













































July 28, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 28, 1987 

 

 

1441 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 

of this Assembly to present a petition from several hundred 

Saskatchewan residents who are deeply concerned about 

medicare; they are among thousands of people who have signed 

petitions about medicare. The petitioners who have signed this 

petition are urging that the government not place an arbitrary 

and unfair limit on insured chiropractic care under medicare. 

 

These petitions are from several communities including 

Melville, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Langenburg, Bredenbury, 

Saltcoats, Canora, Saskatoon, Preeceville, Esterhazy, Theodore, 

Pilot Butte, Regina, and Rocanville. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 

accordance with rule 11 of this Assembly to present a petition 

signed by more than a thousand Saskatchewan people. They are 

alarmed by the government’s erosion of medicare and 

specifically urge that the children’s dental plan be preserved 

and protected. 

 

These petitioners are from many communities in Saskatchewan 

including Lafleche, Coronach, Moose Jaw, Mossbank, 

Assiniboia, Pelly, Melfort, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Porcupine 

Plain, North Battleford, and Regina. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise also pursuant to 

rule 11 to present petitions from several hundred Saskatchewan 

people regarding the children’s dental plan. They seek to 

register their opposition to the government’s destruction of the 

school-based children’s dental plan, and they urge that it be 

restored as a vital part of medicare. 

 

These petitions come from many communities throughout 

Saskatchewan including Spruce Home, Paddockwood, Prince 

Albert, Estevan, Christopher Lake, Melville, Swift Current, 

Theodore, Fort Qu’Appelle, Cut Knife, Pelly, Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Sturgis. I so present. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

pursuant to rule 11 of this Assembly to present a petition signed 

by more than 1,000 Saskatchewan people. They are alarmed 

too, Mr. Speaker, by this government’s erosion of medicare and 

specifically urge the children’s dental plan be preserved and 

protected. 

 

These petitioners are from many communities in Saskatchewan 

such as Paynton, Saskatoon, Biggar, Yellow Grass, Coronach, 

Big Beaver, Broadview, Lumsden, Yorkton, Tantallon, 

Chamberlain, Churchbridge, Springside, Saltcoats, 

Willowbrook, Kamsack, Runnymede, Veregin, Canora, Regina, 

Swift Current, Weyburn, Estevan, Moose Jaw and Regina, and 

many other communities, Mr. Speaker. I do so table the 

petition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today in 

accordance with rule 11 of this Assembly to present a petition 

signed by more than a thousand Saskatchewan people. They are 

very alarmed about the government’s erosion of medicare, and 

they specifically urge that the children’s dental plan be 

preserved and protected. 

 

These petitioners are from many communities in Saskatchewan 

including Rockglen, Yorkton, Milestone, Shaunavon, Weyburn, 

Estevan, Archerwill, Naicam, Rose Valley, Gravelbourg, 

Esterhazy, Melville, Hudson Bay, Saltcoats, Regina, Saskatoon, 

Invermay, and Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to rule 11, I 

also rise today to present to the Assembly a petition signed by 

more than a thousand residents of Saskatchewan. They are 

opposed to the erosion of medicare and the attack on the 

prescription drug plan. They urge the government to preserve 

the universal, accessible, and comprehensive drug plan under 

medicare. They are from several different communities 

including Kindersley, Saskatoon, Outlook, Aberdeen, Asquith, 

Loon Lake, Harris, Vanscoy, Meadow Lake, Estevan, Swift 

Current, Bienfait, Regina, Eston, Wadena, Kelvington, 

Lumsden, Riceton, Pilot Butte, Weyburn, White City, and 

Lloydminster. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I rise today to 

present a petition from more than 1,000 Saskatchewan people. 

These petitioners are deeply opposed to the undermining of 

medicare, and particularly the attack on the prescription drug 

plan. They urge that the government stop its attack on the drug 

plan and its attack on medicare. These petitioners are from 

many different communities including Speers, Marcelin, 

Spiritwood, Martensville, Kamsack, Porcupine Plain, Pike 

Lake, Shaunavon, Val Marie, Eastend, Admiral, Moose Jaw, 

Saskatoon, Regina, Meadow Lake, Chaplin, and La Ronge. I so 

table. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise under rule 

11 today to present a petition to the Assembly, signed by more 

than 1,000 residents of the province of Saskatchewan. They’re 

opposed to the erosion of medicare and, more specifically, the 

attack on the prescription drug plan. They urge the government 

to preserve the universal, accessible, and comprehensive drug 

plan under medicare. 

 

And they’re from several different communities, Mr. Speaker. 

They come from the communities of Pense, Moose Jaw, 

Martensville, Saskatoon, Regina, Allan, Cudworth, Asquith, 

Dundurn, Meacham, and Colonsay, and they submit to you as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To the hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1442 

 

in legislature assembled, the petition of the undersigned 

residents of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

showeth that it is not in the public interest for the 

Government of Saskatchewan to increase the direct cost to 

consumers of prescription drugs in this province, and that 

low-cost health care is the right of all citizens of 

Saskatchewan, and that increased costs of prescription 

drugs is a direct threat to the health and well-being of the 

citizens of Saskatchewan who may forego medication 

because of the cost. 

 

Wherefore, your petitioners humbly pray that the hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 

Saskatchewan not to change the cost formula of the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug program, and thereby 

ensure the continued access to necessary medication for all 

residents of this province. And as in duty bound, your 

petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant 

to rule 11 to present in this Assembly a petition signed by more 

than 1,000 Saskatchewan people who are deeply concerned by 

the government’s erosion of the prescription drug plan. They 

urge that the universal and comprehensive prescription drug 

plan be protected under medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are among more than 32,000 

Saskatchewan people who have signed petitions to save 

medicare in the past . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, that’s more than 32,000 people, 

and we’re getting petitions daily. These petitioners are from 

several different communities including Tisdale, Perdue, 

Meacham, Saskatoon, Craven, Yorkton, Southey, Cupar, 

Glenbain, Spalding, Swift Current, Watson, Annaheim, Regina, 

Tisdale and Macdowall. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — Yesterday, I received a petition which was laid upon 

the Table. I have examined it under rule 11(7) and hereby read 

and received the petition: 

 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

urge the Government of Saskatchewan to retain the 

school-based dental plan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Monsieur le Président, encore une fois, 

permettez-moi à présenter des étudiants qui sont ici aujourd’hui, 

s’il vous plait. Nous avons dans la  

législature, dix-huit étudiants de la belle province et leur 

professeur, Monsieur Mike Little. Pourquoi pas Michel Petit? 

 

C’est un plaisir pour moi, au nom du gouvernement, de vous 

accuellin ici à la législature et à Regina. Bonne chance quand 

vous étudiez la langue anglaise à l’université de Régina. 

Bienvenue. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Merci, Monsieur le président. Comme les autres 

membres de l’Assemblée legislative de la Saskatchewan, je 

voudrais dire, bienvenue à Saskatchewan, bienvenue à Régina 

et bonne chance. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Policy Regarding Medicare and Drug Plan 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the 

Deputy Premier or the Acting Premier. We have just presented 

in this legislature, petitions signed by more than 9,000 

Saskatchewan people who oppose your government’s attempt to 

erode medicare. This brings to more than 32,000 the number of 

Saskatchewan residents who have signed various health care 

petitions in recent weeks. And more are coming in each day. 

 

Saskatchewan people strongly oppose your cuts to medicare. 

They’re saying that if you need to cut costs, you should look 

elsewhere, and don’t cut at the expense of the sick. Will you 

now listen to the people of Saskatchewan and admit your 

mistake and begin to retreat from your strategy of eroding and 

undermining medicare? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we do and have and will 

continue to listen to the people of Saskatchewan. And our 

strategy, as it relates to the enhancement of health care in the 

province of Saskatchewan, has been well laid out by the 

Minister of health on other occasions. And I will leave him to 

be the spokesman for that particular strategy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ll therefore, Mr. Speaker, simply say that in answer to 

your question - will you listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan? - we have, we will, and we will continue to 

listen. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Acting Premier, you are one of the most 

powerful men on that bench, and talk is awfully cheap. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a specific question dealing with your 

destructive cuts to the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. 

Many times in this Assembly the Premier of Saskatchewan, the 

Minister of Health, has said that your government will deal with 

unique situations where a particular person or family faces 

catastrophic . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. It seems very much to 

me that the member for Saskatoon Nutana is quoting  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1443 

 

from some article. She knows that that is not acceptable, and I 

would ask her to put her question without what seems to me to 

be a quote. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I’m not quoting, Mr. Speaker. I am trying to 

ask a question. My question is simply this. When there are 

particular people in this province or families that face 

catastrophic drug costs as the result of your cuts to the drug 

plan, what specific policy announcements do you have which 

will deal with these extreme hardship situations? If you have no 

policies, you can’t help these people. What’s the policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, both the Premier and the 

Minister of Health have said on several occasions, here and in 

other places, that the kind of unique situations, as have been 

alluded to by the hon. member, will be dealt with upon being 

made aware of them. And as it relates to any policy relative to 

health, they will be announced by the Minister of Health, as is 

the normal course of events. 

 

The fact that unique situations are dealt with, Mr. Speaker, I 

know to be the case. In fact I turned one over yesterday to the 

Minister of Health. And I got a call from that constituent this 

morning, thanking me for the expeditious way in which that 

matter had been resolved. I don’t know the details of it, but I do 

know that that particular individual was very happy with the 

way that the Department of Health resolved that particular 

matter. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question, Mr. Deputy Premier, we have 

provided your government with the details of a number of 

hardship cases, but we have yet to get a single response from 

the Minister of health or the Premier of Saskatchewan. We have 

yet to get a response in terms of solving these problems, and I 

have two more right here. 

 

I have a letter from a family in Esterhazy with a child who 

suffers from asthma and a number of serious allergies. They 

show in their letter how they will have to pay more than $6,000 

this year to buy medications for their child. 

 

I have another letter, Mr. Deputy Premier, from a woman whose 

prescription drug bill each month will be $970, and that’s more 

than her monthly income. These folks don’t want your 

sympathy. They want answers. What specific policies to do you 

have to offer these people, Mr. Deputy Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. 

member has forwarded that letter to the Minister of Health, or I 

wonder if she just brought it in here to put it on the record, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think that that particular unique situation could be dealt with 

very expeditiously if the hon. member would just give it to me. 

I’m not a clairvoyant. I can’t deal with problems that I don’t 

know exist. And I’m sure if the Minister of Health was made 

aware of that particular situation, he would without hesitation 

look into the matter and deal with it as expeditiously as 

possible. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Deputy Premier, the 

family from Esterhazy gave their letter to your Conservative 

MLA from Saltcoats who said he would deliver the letter to the 

Minister of Health, himself, and they have not received a 

response. And they gave the letter on July 4. This other letter 

was given to the Minister of Health on June 29, 1987, and these 

folks have not yet received a response. What sort of reply do 

you give people, and what is your policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

tells me that on a particular date, at a particular place, a 

particular letter was raised with the MLA for Saltcoats. That 

may or may not be true. And if she tells me . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Just let the minister answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just with a great deal 

of suspicion that I take everything taken from that side of the 

House at face value. I have said to the hon. member that if I am 

presented with the case that . . . the unique case that is alluded 

to by the member, I will deal with it. As it relates to the 

allegations that she has made about the MLA getting it on July 

4, etc., etc., I will look into that. I think that if that is true . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! Order. The minister is 

answering the question. Please permit him to finish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — If that is true, Mr. Speaker, I think 

personally that that turn-around time is unacceptably slow and 

will have to be rectified. But as it relates to this particular case, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be more than pleased to look into it personally 

if the hon. member would provide me with the information. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Speaker, I will send 

these letters over to the minister. I would ask him to give us a 

full report on how these particular cases were handled, because 

it’s quite clear that they’re not handling cases. And I would like 

to know when these particular cases were dealt with? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Collapse of Supercart International 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister 

of Human Resources, Labour and Employment, and it deals 

with the January, 1987 collapse of Supercart International in 

Regina. When Supercart went under it left unpaid wages totally 

more than $46,000 which were owing to 25 employees. Under 

the Labour Standards Act, your department issued a certificate 

respecting the payment of these wages. And my question is: can 

the minister tell the Assembly whether these wages have been 

recovered on behalf of the workers in question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1444 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The member opposite knows that in 

order to recover wages you have to have somewhere or 

someone to recover them from. They cannot be a matter of 

pulled out of thin air. I know that we have worked hard to try to 

recover those wages. I’ll take notice, and I will give you further 

information as to how progress is being made. 

 

Prosecutions Regarding Non-Payment of Wages 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Minister. Last year your department handled more than 

3,100 formal complaints from Saskatchewan workers 

concerning violations of the Labour Standards Act. That was 

the busiest year in your history, but you only launched 20 

prosecutions under the Act, which was less than half the level 

of three years ago. My question is: can you explain the reasons 

why, when the number of formal complaints were at an all-time 

high, the number of prosecutions fell to such a low level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, I don’t have personal knowledge 

of each one of those 3,100 complaints that you refer to but, 

generally speaking, we take whatever action is possible, and we 

take action where we think there is any chance of success. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Minister, who seems 

unaware of what’s happening in any of the departments for 

which he’s responsible. I have here a document which suggests 

why your department is failing to protect the interests of 

working people by the laying of complaints. This is an internal 

document, a report of the annual activity which is from your 

labour standards branch, and it gives a reason, and I quote from 

it: 

 

Prosecutions are down significantly this year for two 

reasons: (a) there was an election during the year in 

question; and (b) the difficulties that your branch has been 

experiencing getting prosecutions approved from the 

Department of Justice. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want you to tell Saskatchewan workers how the 

law of this province, The Labour Standards Act, changes in an 

election year or changes because of a policy decision in the 

Department of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — First of all, an election should have 

nothing to do with the operations of my department, so I am 

very interested to see the document you refer to so I could take 

the appropriate action to see who is dragging their feet, if 

anybody. So if you will table the document, I will take notice 

and I will take the appropriate action if necessary. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I’ll be delighted to table the document right 

now. Mr. Minister, the document is perfectly clear . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. I don’t want to interrupt your supplementary, but 

I’d like to direct these comments to both sides of the House. 

 

We’re a little lax. And when we’re directing comments to other 

members in the House, please remember that you should always 

direct it through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was saying that I’d 

be pleased to table the document, and I do so now. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You can’t table documents in question 

period. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I’ll be delighted to table the document right 

after question period. 

 

My question is: do you deny the plain words of the document 

that I have spoken . . . that I’ve quoted from, namely, that the 

reasons for the low number of prosecutions is that there was an 

election during the year in question, and that your department 

has had difficulty getting approvals on prosecutions from the 

Department of Justice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I am very pleased that you, as a member 

of this Assembly, have shown the fortitude to table the 

document. And I will see it after question period, and I will 

examine it and take notice of your question and give you an 

answer, once I’ve seen the document. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Can you tell me, Minister, can you tell me - if 

the Minister of Finance is finished briefing you on a question 

which you haven’t yet heard - can you tell me if you know 

about this problem of getting approval from the Department of 

Justice; and if so, who is responsible for that policy of getting 

their approval; and how do you justify what is in effect ignoring 

the law of Saskatchewan for the reasons that are apparently 

advanced in this memo? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I told you earlier that an election should 

have nothing to do with the operation of my department, and I 

will look into the matter. If they were dragging their feet during 

an election, I certainly didn’t tell them to do that. I don’t know 

what they were doing during the election, but I will find out 

what they were doing during the election. If they are dragging 

their feet or doing other things than their jobs, I will look into 

the matter. 

 

I can tell you that I have had no problem with the Minister of 

Justice. He will prosecute anything that has a proper case. And I 

have had no problem with it, and my staff has not brought this 

problem to my attention, and maybe they are remiss. I will 

examine the document and I will give you an answer when I 

have taken notice. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. I have indicated 

the last . . . in the last supplementary that it would be your final 

supplementary. However, I would like to once again remind 

hon. members that in making comments to each other and 

answering and asking questions, to always refer to other 

members through the  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1445 

 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I want to be 

clear, Minister . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’ve indicated last time that that was your 

final. If you would like to ask a new question, you may do that. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask 

the minister so that we’re very clear. Is it a requirement that 

your department obtain approval from the Department of 

Justice for laying prosecutions under The Labour Standards 

Act? If so, when was that policy instituted; and have you had 

difficulty getting approval from the Department of Justice for 

cases which you, as the minister responsible, feel should be 

prosecuted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, could you please tell the 

member opposite that I have taken notice of the question. 

 

Grain Price Deficiency Payments 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Acting Minister of Agriculture, and it has to do with the need 

for a grain price deficiency payment for the 1987-88 crop year 

which begins on Saturday. 

 

Farm organizations, the New Democratic Party, and even your 

government, has called on Ottawa to provide this deficiency 

payment. The Mulroney government appears to have committed 

itself, at least in principle, to a second payment. My question is 

this: have you pushed Ottawa to make this payment in one 

instalment only, rather than two? And has the Mulroney 

government agreed to make this payment in the fall of this year, 

as soon as possible after harvest? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Certainly our government and our 

Premier recognizes that the difficult times and the bizarre 

practices in the global market-place, as it relates to the grain 

side particularly, are continuing. Prices are dropping, and hence 

the need for a deficiency payment this year is as great or greater 

than it was even last year. And I know our Premier continues to 

lead the charge on this, and in fact at the western premiers’ 

conference in Humboldt I think they established some numbers 

which were carried forward to the ministers of Agriculture 

meeting from all across Canada. 

 

Our Premier’s track record is sound in this area. He’s the man 

who led the charge last year for a deficiency payment. The 

federal government delivered, and I suspect that history will 

repeat itself, and perhaps even this year the payment will be 

larger than last year. And certainly the arguments in favour of a 

larger payment can be substantiated. In so far as whether it’ll be 

one or two or when, I can’t offer any of those details at this 

point in time because some of those decisions have not yet been 

made. But certainly our Premier has been there on the forefront 

making the case for a deficiency payment. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

Saskatchewan farmers know that both the Premier and Brian 

Mulroney played politics with the last deficiency payment to 

buy a Saskatchewan election. 

 

They don’t want to see their cash flow depending on politics 

again this year. So I ask you . . . I’ll ask you again: you must 

have some indication whether the payment will be in a one 

payment basis or two. And can you assure us, can you assure 

the farmers, the farm suppliers, and small communities in 

Saskatchewan that they will receive a deficiency payment and 

receive it this fall, and not in the spring of 1988? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well my sense, my sense as far as 

what farmers are looking for when it comes to deficiency 

payment are they are not so concerned about whether it’s one 

payment or two - (a) they want to know that there’s going to be 

a payment; and they (b) want to know that the Premier and their 

provincial politicians are there carrying the ball for them. And 

certainly our Premier has been leading the charge, as I 

mentioned earlier. 

 

The facts are well-known. In fact, as recently as the July 

meeting, this very month, when the ministers of Agriculture got 

together, high on the agenda was the whole question of 

deficiency payments. And the Government of Canada has called 

on . . . or the premiers and the ministers there called on the 

Government of Canada to make an early announcement relative 

to that payment. But more importantly, they went on as well to 

address the root cause, if you like, of why we’re into deficiency 

payments. 

 

Now all the farmers I know would just as soon not have to rely 

on deficiency payments for their livelihood. They would rather 

rely on the market-place to return them a reasonable price for 

their product. Such is not the case because of the international 

practices . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

your government hasn’t carried the ball on the variable rate 

issue, where they’re lengthening the crop year, and a number of 

many other issues that are funding the farmers of Saskatchewan 

this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Surely in all your negotiations with the Prime 

Minister you must have some indication . . . Surely you must 

have some indication whether there’s going to be one payment 

or two payment - very important to the farmers of this province 

who are not in very good financial shape. One or two payments. 

And surely you have an indication of whether it’s going to be 

this fall or next spring. Or is this government a small dog on a 

short leash held by Brian Mulroney? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, I would say again when it  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1446 

 

comes to the issues of deficiency payment, our Premier has 

consistently led the charge. And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, 

he didn’t wait until day 44 of this legislative session to make it 

an issue. He’s been on it since last year’s deficiency payment 

was made, and he’ll deliver for the people of Saskatchewan, the 

farmers of Saskatchewan, and the people of western Canada 

again. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

The minister is answering the question. And while I’m on my 

feet, I will once more remind members to direct their remarks to 

other members in the House through the Speaker. 

Unfortunately, the minister has not done that. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I did not hear an answer. I would 

like the minister to tell the farmers of this province who are 

trying to plan their year in advance; to tell the farm supply 

dealers who have to know what the situation is going to be with 

regard to farm finances; to tell the people, from the grocery 

store to the equipment dealer, what the situation is going to be. 

 

Surely, this government, if they are leading the fray as he says, 

surely they have an idea of when the payment is going to be 

made. And I ask him, specifically, will it be made before the 

end of this year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t say for sure when 

that payment will be or whether it will be in two instalments or 

three, or whether it will be, in fact, modelled after the payments 

of last year. The important thing is that we do receive a 

deficiency payment, and that is what our Premier has been 

working for. 

 

And as well, because the root cause of this problem is global in 

nature, that is why our Premier has taken a leadership role. And 

this very day . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Final 

supplementary. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, we have a situation in this province whereby last 

October the people were hung out on a clothes-line not knowing 

when the deficiency payment was going to be, and this 

government used it as a political tool to win government. I do 

not want to see that happen again for the next federal election, 

hanging the farmers and the rural people out to dry. I ask you, 

with all your negotiations, all your talks with the Premier, 

surely you who propose to be the saviour of Saskatchewan 

farmers, surely you shouldn’t let them hang there - and tell 

them when this payment is going to be made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well what I can tell the hon. member, 

Mr. Speaker, is at the July meeting, this very month, when our 

Premier met with the other provincial ministers of Agriculture 

and the federal Minister of Agriculture, there was unanimous 

support and unanimous resolution for a deficiency . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. The  

minister is attempting to answer the question but is not being 

given that opportunity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — . . . unanimous support for the need 

for a deficiency payment. And at the meeting in the member’s 

own riding in Humboldt, the kinds of numbers they attached to 

that deficiency payment in terms of specifics was a payment 

somewhere between 1.6 and $3 billion. The reason for the 1.6, 

Mr. Speaker, is a direct reflection of the fact that initial grain 

prices are going to drop something the order of 20 per cent in 

the new crop year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, I took notice yesterday of a question 

relative to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Farmers’ Quota Deliveries 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The question I took notice of 

yesterday on behalf of the Premier was to the effect that has the 

government contacted the federal government and requested 

that the ‘86-87 crop year be extended, and what was the 

response from Ottawa? 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has asked the federal 

government to ensure that producers will have the opportunity 

to deliver all their grain in the current crop year. In fact, in July 

9, ‘87, a letter to the Hon. Charles Mayer, minister in charge of 

the wheat board, Premier Devine requested additional quotas, 

and an extension to the crop year be implemented if necessary. 

And in fact a news release to that effect was put out on July 10 

of this month, Mr. Speaker. It indicated our concern that 

producers may not be able to deliver all their grain by the June 

31 deadline. 

 

I am happy to say that the federal government has 

acknowledged our request and is currently reviewing this issue 

to determine any changes . . . if any changes are necessary. And 

as well, at that same time, our Premier raised with the federal 

government the whole question of the changes in the producer 

car allocations, which is another issue that surfaced in rural 

Saskatchewan, and the implications for the 20 per cent drop in 

initial prices as we move into the new crop year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENT 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to table the document I referred to during question 

period, which is a report of yearly activities from the assistant 

director of the labour standards branch to the deputy minister of 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment, which document 

is dated April 23, 1987. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 

 

Extension of Crop Year for Farmers 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day. I 

rise, pursuant to rule 39, to seek leave of the Assembly to move 

a motion on a matter of urgent and pressing necessity. If I may 

just take a moment, Mr. Speaker, I will indicate to the House 

the nature of the  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1447 

 

issue and the nature of the non-partisan motion I seek to 

introduce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as all members know, the 1986-87 crop year is 

drawing to a close, but in many parts of the province farmers 

will not be able to deliver their full quota because of severe 

congestion in the system. This is a serious problem which faces 

many farmers. 

 

In some previous years such as last year, the federal 

government allowed deferred deliveries, or extension of the 

crop year. The Mulroney government should do so again this 

year. This is clearly a pressing matter, Mr. Speaker. It is clearly 

an urgent matter. 

 

I seek to introduce a non-partisan motion to deal with this issue 

along the following lines: 

 

That this Assembly unanimously call on the Government 

of Canada to recognize the present severe problem of 

congested elevators and the substantial quantities of 

undelivered quota, as the 1986-87 crop year draws to a 

close, and; 

 

Instruct the Canadian Wheat Board to make arrangements 

for deferred delivery permits or an extension of crop year, 

which will allow prairie farmers to deliver their full quota 

at the 1986-87 price, and; 

 

That the Speaker communicate the content of this motion 

to the minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board and 

the Prime Minister. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I seek unanimous leave of the 

Assembly to proceed with that motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Ensuring a Viable Uranium Industry in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today pursuant 

to rule 16 to move the following motion of which I gave notice 

on Friday last. I’ll move the motion at the end of my remarks, 

but I’ll read it now: 

 

That this Assembly encourages the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada to pursue 

strategies that will provide access to Canadian, United 

States, and world uranium markets, in order to ensure a 

viable uranium industry in Saskatchewan, to provide 

employment for northern Saskatchewan, and to protect the 

significant investment of Saskatchewan tax dollars that has 

been made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a very, very serious and grave matter that  

we’re facing at this time in our uranium industry. The situation 

facing it is a difficult one. It’s a situation that has been caused 

by protectionist forces in another country, forces which we in 

Canada, or in Saskatchewan for that matter, have little control 

over. 

 

A situation which represents a risk to the taxpayers’ 

multi-million dollar investment in the industry, but most 

importantly - and far more important than the risk of those 

dollars involved - is the situation that puts in jeopardy the 

livelihood of many Saskatchewan workers and families, 

particularly workers and their families in northern 

Saskatchewan, an area which we all know and admit there’s not 

an over-abundance of real job opportunities or economic 

opportunities there at the moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as an Assembly must do all that we can to 

ensure the survival of the uranium industry in our province. 

And every member of this Assembly, regardless of his 

particular political persuasion, has a duty to protect the people 

of this province when there is a threat to their livelihood or 

well-being. Mr. Speaker, the threat is very real to some 1,300 

people who are directly employed in the province’s uranium 

industry. Their jobs are on the line, their livelihood, Mr. 

Speaker - 1,300 jobs, 1,300 families. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, some 5,000 additional people whose jobs 

are indirectly tied to the uranium industry are facing a more 

uncertain future today. This is simply unacceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s unacceptable to this government, and it should be 

unacceptable to all members of this Assembly. Yet this 

situation goes beyond the issue of employment. It touches upon 

the need for economic development in northern Saskatchewan 

and the vital role that the uranium industry has played and is 

doing in regards to filling that need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the uranium industry generated some $30 million 

in royalties for the Government of Saskatchewan last year. But 

such a figure does not show the true importance of the industry 

to our province’s economy. It must be kept in mind that well 

over a billion dollars has been invested in our province’s 

uranium industry since the mid-1970s. And each year tens of 

millions of additional dollars continue to be invested through 

exploration efforts and the expansion of current 

operations - investments that are continuing to create additional 

jobs and further opportunities in, particularly, northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of northern Saskatchewan, where the 

mines are located, see the industry from a different point of 

view. They don’t see it as just dollars generated for 

Saskatchewan. To the people of northern Saskatchewan, the 

uranium industry represents opportunities that simply did not 

exist prior to the industry coming to their part of the province, 

opportunities to work on the exploration teams, on the 

construction projects, in the mines, in the various support 

services; opportunities to start up new businesses to service the 

industry; opportunities to start up new businesses to 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1448 

 

 service the workers and the families that are there: 

opportunities to help build the infrastructure that the mines 

need - the roads, the power lines, the mine sites; opportunities 

to have such a thing as roads brought into their area to provide 

access for them to the outside world, to the rest of 

Saskatchewan, to the rest of Canada - a link that they’ve been 

cut off from in the past, Mr. Speaker, and this has been a means 

to provide that link for them. 

 

Yes, the industry is an important one to northern Saskatchewan. 

I’m sure that the representative from the North, particularly 

from Athabasca, the hon. member there, would agree with me. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it seems like the members of his 

. . . his fellow caucus members and the party that he represents 

to do not agree with him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that when the news of the recent 

American court ruling on uranium imports reached the NDP 

caucus, they probably broke out the champagne. Why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because they want to shut those mines down. That’s 

why. 

 

They want to shut down the very mines that, just a few short 

years ago, they poured hundreds of millions of taxpayers’ 

dollars into the development of. They want to tell those 1,300 

people who are directly affected, who depend on those mines 

for their livelihood: sorry, we don’t have a job for you. Go 

home. They want to tell those 5,000 other people: sorry, there’s 

no work servicing this industry. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 

that’s fair to the people of northern Saskatchewan. I don’t think 

it’s fair to anyone in this province. 

 

What makes this position truly amazing is how the Leader of 

the Opposition has flip-flopped on this issue. I’d just like to call 

the attention of the members of this Assembly to some of the 

past, and his stance on that, to show what it’s been. I’m sure 

that he remembers most of his various stances on the issue, but 

let’s put them on the record for the people of Saskatchewan to 

take note of. 

 

Back in 1978 when uranium development was an issue in this 

legislature and in this province, the then premier, the present 

Leader of the Opposition, had this to say, and I quote from your 

NDP newspaper, The Commonwealth, of June 28, 1978. And I 

quote: 

 

This issue is not over. But I, for my part, made a moral 

decision. I think I did the right thing, and I’m prepared to 

defend it. 

 

I’d like the present Leader of the Opposition to stand up and 

defend that position today - defend it to the people of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Such a statement seems to me to indicate some conviction, Mr. 

Speaker. Yet a few years later, that same member for Regina 

Elphinstone was on open line radio shows, like the CFQC open 

line on November 7, 1985, saying, and I quote: 

 

The NDP would phase out uranium mining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one can conclude . . . one can but draw one of two 

conclusions from these statements. Either the  

people of this province were grossly misled by the premier, the 

former NDP premier of this province during the 1970s and 

early 1980s, or moral decisions by the members opposite do not 

hold the same force that they do with the rest of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the member for Regina Elphinstone how he 

can reconcile two such divergent positions that he is holding 

with regard to uranium mining. When he tells the Leader-Post, 

back in October 11, 1979, that he sees a bright future for 

Saskatchewan’s uranium industry, it seems that he supports the 

industry. And then when he’s out of power, he’s championing 

the NDP’s policy of phasing out the mines. I ask him, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the position that he and his party hold to today? 

Do they care about the workers whose jobs are in jeopardy? Do 

they care about economic development, particularly in northern 

Saskatchewan? Do they care about diversification and 

opportunities in the North? 

 

When the Leader of the Opposition was asked if the NDP’s 

phase-out policy had workers in the uranium industry worried 

about their jobs, he said, and I repeat his quote once again from 

the CFQC open line show, November 7, 1985: 

 

I suppose that at some time in the future they may have a 

worry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the future is now for the uranium industry. 

The threat of the NDP shutting down the mines has been 

replaced by protectionist action from abroad. The workers and 

their families are concerned about their jobs. They’re concerned 

about their future, and they need our support. They need the 

support of every person from this legislature. Mr. Speaker, 

they’ll get that support from this government and from this side 

of the House. Our Progressive Conservative caucus will 

continue to press to the utmost for their cause. 

 

But will they get support from the member’s opposite? I know 

that they’ll get support from their representative, from their 

MLA, the member from Athabasca. But I suggest that that 

member is lonely over there in that caucus. His concern for his 

constituents and the future economic health of the North have 

made him a lonely man in that NDP caucus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that when we’re dealing with a 

situation that is so fundamentally important, and so important 

for the economic well-being of his areas, that he’s not even here 

to speak on it, to raise his concerns, to voice his support. 

 

I would ask that member, and I would all members opposite 

though, where is the support of their leader on this issue? I 

would ask the people of the North: do they have the support of 

the party that their member is representing? 

 

Can they expect support from the member from Saskatoon 

University, Mr. Speaker? Can they expect support from the 

member from Cumberland, the other person representing many 

of the uranium mines in northern Saskatchewan? Can they 

expect the support of the member for Regina North? I think, 

likely not. Will the  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1449 

 

members for Saskatoon Centre, Regina Rosemont, or Moose 

Jaw North give them more than a pat on the back? I doubt it, 

Mr. Speaker. I doubt it seriously. Because they and their party 

want to shut down the uranium industry and they don’t care 

how it’s done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would think they possibly view this as the easy 

way out; they’ll try and view this as a way for them not to have 

to come out and do what they would like to do and what they 

profess they are going to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their position has not went unnoticed. A 

prominent political columnist from The Globe and Mail 

recently commented on the Saskatchewan NDP’s taste for 

avoiding important issues and engaging in political 

gamesmanship. He talked about skewed priorities, and I believe 

he was right. He talked about dealing with partisan political 

politics as opposed to dealing with real issues of the day; the 

real issues of the people - jobs, economic development, 

employment opportunities in their communities and in their 

areas, development of the resources that are there. 

 

The question that he was asking, one that the people of 

Saskatchewan would like to know the answer to as well is: are 

the NDP more concerned about their policy positions and 

internal divisions and infighting than the thousands of jobs and 

hundreds of millions of dollars that are at risk. 

 

Judging from past statements, the answer, I’m sorry to say, 

would have to be a yes, Mr. Speaker. But then it seems to me 

that ideological positions like those held by the NDP often 

ignore the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Their opposition to a freer trading arrangement with the United 

States is just such an example, one that relates directly to this 

motion, Mr. Speaker, a position that they can’t even square with 

their federal counterparts in Ottawa. Their federal counterparts 

have said, let’s negotiate the best deal possible. They’ve 

recognized the importance of trade to this country. They’ve 

recognized the importance to every one of it. Mr. Speaker, they 

go blindly on their way saying . . . calling for an end to 

discussions regarding freer trade. 

 

As these recent American moves against our uranium industry 

show the need to ensure continued access to U.S. markets and 

to have a fair trade dispute settlement mechanism in place, that 

need is greater than ever. Yet the NDP continue to remain 

fundamentally opposed to working towards such an agreement, 

not out of an interest for the people of Saskatchewan, 

particularly for the people of northern Saskatchewan, but out of 

an anti-American, big labour view of trade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say, and encourage the members opposite, now 

is the time to put aside their ideological blinders and take into 

account the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan, 

particularly those of northern Saskatchewan who do not have 

numerous economic opportunities available to them, and join 

the members of this government and the members of this 

caucus in supporting a motion which I move, seconded by my 

colleague, the Minister of Energy and Mines, the member  

from Swift Current: 

 

That this Assembly encourages the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada to pursue 

strategies that will provide access to Canadian, United 

States and world uranium markets, in order to ensure a 

viable uranium industry in Saskatchewan, to provide 

employment for northern Saskatchewan, and to protect the 

significant investment of Saskatchewan tax dollars that has 

been made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

second the motion that has been put forward by my hon. 

colleague, the Member from Nipawin. He has very clearly laid 

out not only the problem, but the impact of the problem on 

Saskatchewan and its people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this resolution is rather simple. It’s about jobs, and 

it’s about employment in northern Saskatchewan, employment 

for miners, and the support for their families. Mr. Speaker, this 

resolution is about economic development for the whole of 

Saskatchewan but, in particular, for northern Saskatchewan 

where it is often difficult to provide the level that should be 

there. The resolution is about giving a sector in this province an 

opportunity for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this resolution is also about investment, 

investment of dollars, an investment which provides the jobs for 

these families and the much-needed economic diversification 

for the area in northern Saskatchewan. It’s also, Mr. Speaker, 

about protection - protection of taxpayers’ dollars that were 

invested into the uranium industry in the mid ’70s. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, it’s about protection and ensuring the 

province is given a fair return on its resources, through 

royalties, for the millions of dollars that have been invested 

from the ‘70s until today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard during the last week, and it is true, 

we face a very serious situation within the uranium industry. It 

is not the first of our resource sector to feel the impact of 

protectionism, and it probably won’t be the last. 

 

In looking at the industry, Mr. Speaker, I’m often amazed as to 

how people perceive industry in itself. For many people - and I 

suspect a few across the way - when I say, the uranium 

industry, the first thing they think of is perhaps simply the 

mining company, without any association whatsoever for the 

people that go with it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the situation that we are in today is one of 

jeopardizing the existence of some of our northern miners and 

their families. Besides that, it jeopardizes the communities that 

have been slowly building up, for now and for the future. 

 

The situation, Mr. Speaker, that we are referring to today is the 

decision by the United States Appeals Court to uphold the 

district court ruling that prohibits the United  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1450 

 

States Department of Energy from reprocessing, in the United 

States, any uranium produced outside their country. 

 

(1500) 

 

Given that fully 40 per cent of Saskatchewan’s uranium is 

destined for the United States market, this court decision could 

close a very vital market to our producers. This market 

currently, Mr. Speaker, consumes over 6.7 million pounds of 

Saskatchewan uranium. To many of us, Mr. Speaker, the 

position is one of intolerable. And I call, like the member from 

Nipawin, on the members across the floor to support the motion 

and present a united front. 

 

I suspect, Mr. Speaker, there are some doubts across the way as 

to why they should support the motion. And I would like to put 

forth some very good reasons as to why our hon. friends in 

opposition should support it. 

 

Saskatchewan currently directly employs some 13 to 1,500 

people in jobs within the uranium industry. Mr. Speaker, that 

means within a year a payroll of $55 million that goes out into 

those communities and, in turn, to other communities in the 

province. It’s money that stays within this province. 

 

Indirectly, Mr. Speaker, this particular industry employs 

approximately 5,000 people. You add the two together and 

you’ve got well over 6,000, direct and indirect, that are 

employed by the industry. 

 

To put that into perspective, Mr. Speaker, according to 

StatsCanada, on average every Saskatchewan worker supports 

2.3 people. Now when you take that into account, your 6,000 

workers become enough to populate a city the size of my home 

town of Swift Current, or perhaps North Battleford or Yorkton. 

And when you allow for the multiplier effect, you have enough 

workers to support a city the size of P.A. or Moose Jaw. 

 

Other reasons that the opposition should support this, Mr. 

Speaker. Ongoing uranium exploration activities saw a further 

$22 million invested last year in northern Saskatchewan 

alone - northern Saskatchewan. And I know that the member 

from Athabasca supports that and supports this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this investment offers opportunity for the North 

and its people, as well as being vital to a further diversification 

of northern Saskatchewan. We know, Mr. Speaker, that 

diversification is imperative if the North is going to become 

economically on par with the rest of the province. 

 

Another reason, Mr. Speaker: the sales. Let’s take a look at the 

sales from last year. The uranium sector in 1986 generated 

revenues of $460 million, or about 12 times the amount 

generated by our entire forest industry. The industry, Mr. 

Speaker, also paid royalties to the province of approximately 

$30-some-million. And without that, Mr. Speaker, we could not 

maintain some of the services that Saskatchewan people have 

come to expect. And of course, Mr. Speaker, we cannot forget 

the millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money that has been 

invested over the last 12 years. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, it would be irresponsible on the 

government’s part, and in fact on this Legislative Assembly s a 

whole, if we did not work together on this one and stand behind 

the uranium industry, in light of the court action that has been 

taken against them. 

 

The members on the other side, some time ago when they 

embarked on expanding this industry, I believe today have to 

stand up for what they did then and what the industry stands for 

now within this province. I would suggest that perhaps there’s 

even a moral obligation to do so. If not, they in turn have an 

obligation to tell the Saskatchewan people why not. 

 

I have a difficult time, Mr. Speaker, believing that all members 

would not support this motion. I have a hard time believing that 

they, in fact, are willing to see 6,000 jobs down the tube, their 

investment of taxpayers’ dollars lost. And I think that they 

would have a hard time letting go of an opportunity for adding 

to the diversification of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that we need a united front on this. 

The issue of protectionism is growing world-wide. The barriers 

to trading with other countries are well known. The removal of 

those barriers however, Mr. Speaker, is another matter, and it is 

one that is going to take co-operation from all in this House. 

 

As we know, the uranium industry in the United States has 

experienced a significant decline in production levels, from 

over 38 million pounds of uranium in 1981 to just under 14 

million in 1986. This, Mr. Speaker, illustrates the serious 

problem facing the industry. Due to declining ore grades and 

older, less efficient facilities, American producers are not 

competitive. The U.S. utilities, therefore, have increasingly 

shifted their purchases of uranium to lower cost, foreign 

sources, including Canada. And if there’s one that we in this 

Assembly know about our people in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, they are competitive and they do produce. 

 

It is expected that the United States Department of Energy will 

appeal this decision to the Supreme Court, and of course it is 

our hope that they will be successful. However, failing this, 

there would be severe adjustments required within the 

international uranium trade, since the absence of the American 

demand from world markets would doubtless result in lower 

free market prices, lower levels of production, and considerable 

disruption in the production industry. In the meantime, the 

United States Department of Energy has filed for an emergency 

stay of the Appeals Court decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The resolution asks 

the Assembly to approve a motion to pursue strategies that will 

provide access to the markets of the world, including the 

American market. While it was a bit difficult to understand that 

either the mover or the seconder of this motion had actually 

read the motion, I take it that that was intended to be the debate 

that took 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1451 

 

 place in this House, and certainly we’re prepared to debate it 

on the basis of its plain wording. 

 

In the past three years, Mr. Speaker, Canada has seen a number 

of trade initiatives aimed against it by the United States. These 

initiatives have come through three different routes. The first 

has been the imposition of countervailing duties on some of our 

products. The second initiative comes in the form of legislation 

in the Congress of the United States respecting trade with other 

countries including Canada. And the third route that we have 

now seen in connection with the matter that’s before the House 

today involves the use of the American courts to intervene and 

to make orders in respect of a trading matter. 

 

Now until recently in the history of our country, we’ve had an 

outstanding record from the point of view of the defence of our 

vital economic interests. Through successive national 

governments, of whatever political stripe, Canada has a proud 

record of being able to defend and advance the vital trading 

interests of our country. 

 

Now that situation continued to exist until a very short time 

ago. And I suggest it was about the time of the election of the 

present administration in Ottawa. And at that time things started 

to get unravelled. Suddenly Canada was faced with initiatives to 

which it seemed unable to respond. 

 

I think of an example of the softwood lumber industry and the 

moves on the part of American interests to impose a type of 

countervailing duty on the importation on softwood lumber. 

That situation was not a new one. That was an argument that 

had been made to the American Department of Commerce in 

years gone by. Canada was always able, and certainly was able 

the last time the subject came up, to fight off that effort, to 

convince the administrative bodies responsible in the United 

States that there simply was no case for a countervailing duty, 

and to head off, through a variety of diplomatic and political 

measures, the effort to restrict the importation of Canadian 

softwoods. 

 

But now, suddenly we don’t seem to be able to do that any 

more. And it is my submission, Mr. Speaker, that it is the 

weakness and the incompetence of the federal government in 

dealing with the Americans and others on these trade issues that 

is the real problem and which underlies the matter that is before 

the Assembly today - the question of the importation of 

uranium into the United States. 

 

Now as I say, we have seen in the very recent past moves to 

impose countervailing duties, moves in the congress to pass 

legislation that will limit the importation of goods into the 

United States, and now court actions. And I think that we’re 

seeing such a plethora of these moves simply because the 

Americans have taken a long look at Canada and have made the 

judgement that we’re a “soft mark”; that we’re easy; that you 

could do what you like with Canada and the Canadians won’t 

respond; that you can take whatever kind of action you like to 

impose duties, to limit our imports from Canada and the 

government in Ottawa just simply won’t do anything about it. 

 

Now I suggest that the moves of the federal government with 

respect to softwood lumber, and shakes and shingles, and now 

potash and steel, have been weak and uncertain. They’ve been 

confused. Our case has been badly prepared and weak. Our 

diplomatic efforts, in so far as on can tell, have been almost 

non-existent. They have followed certain formalities in terms of 

the handing over of notes, but they seem to lack conviction and 

sincerity, and certainly lack intensity. And this is the reason 

why Canada is having as many trade problems as we appear to 

be having. 

 

Now part of the real problem is that the federal government 

seems to think, as do the members opposite, that this is 

somehow just a matter of personal relationships - the charm of 

the Prime Minister in his relationship with the President - the 

special relationship. And we hear suggestions that we might use 

route again with respect to this uranium problem, that if Brian 

will just phone his friend, Ronnie, then some moves will be 

taken and all this problem will go away. And of course, things 

don’t work like that. 

 

The question of fighting for the vital economic interests of a 

country is a complex matter requiring a wide variety of 

instruments: diplomatic, political, lobbying efforts, personal 

contacts, a proper preparation, the vigorous advancement of 

your case, and so on and so forth. And these are matters which 

are well understood by Canadian diplomats and by a lot of 

Canadian politicians. Apparently, however, they are instruments 

that are not known to the present government. 

 

We are also seeing the federal government, with the active 

encouragement of this government, putting all of its eggs in one 

basket. In the last year or so, every time a trade question has 

arisen, whether it’s softwood lumber, or shakes and shingles, or 

uranium or potash, or whatever, we’re referred to the free trade 

negotiations. We’re told that a free trade agreement would 

somehow resolve all those problems. 

 

And I suggest that the Prime Minister and the federal 

government and the government opposite know that that simply 

is not true; the free trade agreement is not going to be any kind 

of a panacea; that it is naive and, in some respects, deceptive to 

suggest that it will. 

 

In the uranium case that we’re concerned with this afternoon, 

the culprit is a law passed in the early 1950s, and there’s 

nothing in a free trade agreement that is going to make that law 

go away. 

 

(1515) 

 

I suggest that we have to go back to time-worn principles with 

respect to our trading relationships with all of the world and 

with the United States. Canada’s vital economic trading 

interests must be protected in a complex, comprehensive 

fashion. 

 

These involve, as I have said earlier, Mr. Speaker, a diplomacy, 

appropriate political moves, lobbying, properly prepared 

cases - and not quick fixes, not the quick fix of a hastily 

negotiated bilateral trade agreement; perhaps within the 

framework of GATT, a multilateral  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1452 

 

agreement that can tidy up a lot of world trading questions. But 

that, as members will know, is a slow incremental process that 

is the very opposite of a quick fix, but involves a gradual, 

reasoned, logical move towards a world that will trade freely. 

 

The idea of a world that would trade freely appeals to everyone. 

There’s no question that that has been an objective of our 

country and an objective of progressive liberal countries 

throughout the world. 

 

Now the resolution asks us to pursue strategies that will provide 

access to the world markets for our uranium, and I would say 

that we must find such strategies, and we must pursue them. 

Now I did not hear in the presentation that were made to this 

House earlier what those strategies ought to be. I have 

suggested . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on the face of it this resolution is a sensible one. In a 

motherhood sort of way it expresses a sentiment which all 

members of this House should be able to support. It seeks 

strategies, federal and provincial, to ensure the viability of 

Saskatchewan’s uranium industry, to provide growth and jobs 

in our North, and to protect the Saskatchewan tax dollars which 

are now at risk. And all of this makes good sense, Mr. Speaker, 

and I support it. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, what it purports to say on the surface is 

not the real intent of this resolution. Its real intent is to paint the 

NDP into a box to show the folly of investment decisions made 

by the NDP when they were in power 10 years ago, when they 

put at risk many hundreds of millions of Saskatchewan tax 

dollars. 

 

The resolution’s real intent is to show how the NDP has 

subsequently contradicted itself. The leader of that party, the 

member for Elphinstone, was, and probably still is, deep down, 

an advocate of uranium development. But his party is now 

taking an opposite position. They now want a way out from 

their avarice and lust for power which got them into a problem 

in a very expensive way. 

 

And that puts the NDP party, Mr. Speaker, at odds with the real 

views of their leader, and also at odds with the conscientious 

views of some of their membership, like the MLA for 

Athabasca. That is the real motivation behind this PC 

motion - to make the NDP uncomfortable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the opportunity of this debate 

this afternoon to state my position on the substance of the issue 

before us quite apart from that little game that may be going 

back and forth between the government and the official 

opposition as to who can make the other the most 

uncomfortable. 

 

First, I believe Saskatchewan’s uranium resources ought to be 

developed, developed to the advantage of the Saskatchewan 

economy, and especially northern Saskatchewan. Secondly, I 

believe the economic risks involved in that development should 

be assumed primarily by the private sector, and not by 

taxpayers. If you want a classic example of where private sector 

risk  

capital has the primary role to play, this is it. 

 

Third, I believe government must not be in the position of being 

both the owner and the developer of this resource on the one 

side, and the policeman and the regulator on the other side, all 

at the same time. 

 

What we have now is a clear conflict of interest situation. 

Government is trying to wear two hats. And in dealing with a 

commodity that is so sensitive as uranium, both economically 

and politically, with provincial, national, and international 

implications, the Saskatchewan government cannot afford to 

compromise or to appear to compromise its integrity by a 

conflict of interest. 

 

Fourth, I believe that the government must always be vigorous 

and vigilant and tough to ensure Saskatchewan people obtain a 

fair and proper return from industry on the development of this 

resource, but that can, and it should be accomplished, Mr. 

Speaker, in my view, without the government also having to be 

the owner and the developer. 

 

And fifth, Mr. Speaker, I believe Saskatchewan should become 

the world’s leading centre for research and for outreaching 

initiatives to ensure that our uranium is developed in a 

responsible, safe, and environmentally sound fashion, and that it 

is used in the world for safe and for peaceful purposes. We have 

the resource. We want to develop it. In my judgement we have 

a duty to discharge to all of humanity, to ensure that it’s done 

right. 

 

We should have in Saskatchewan, therefore, a major research, 

education, and information establishment second to none in the 

world, that constantly pursues matters like safety, 

environmental protection, and the peaceful usage of this 

sensitive and strategic commodity. Because it is our resource, 

Mr. Speaker, we should know more and do more and work 

harder than anybody else anywhere else in this regard. When it 

comes to safety, a healthy environment, and the pursuit of peace 

for all mankind, let it be said of Saskatchewan that we took a 

back seat to no one. 

 

In terms of the immediate crisis or near crisis situation, Mr. 

Speaker, we obviously have a major trade problem on our hands 

with the United States in relation to uranium. Significantly, this 

problem, like so many others in the recent past, comes not 

because of tariff barriers but because of non-tariff barriers, 

commercial action, legal action, or whatever, instigated 

unilaterally in the United States. 

 

I think that is, unfortunately, a product of some of the wrong 

messages that our federal government has been dispatching 

around the world, and particularly to the United States in the 

recent past, messages in relation to trade matters that are 

confused, messages of weakness, messages that Canada can 

perhaps be taken for granted and taken advantage of. And I 

think the federal government has a lot to account for in terms of 

those confused signals, mixed messages, and wrong messages 

that they have dispatched around the world. Because it does, 

Mr. Speaker, in this case and in so many other cases, put 

Canadians and Canadian industry in a vulnerable and 

potentially dangerous situation. 

 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1453 

 

One thing that is obviously indispensable, in terms of our 

relationships in trade with the United States, is to develop an 

alternative to the present state of affairs where we are so 

vulnerable. And that requires some kind of an independent 

dispute settlement mechanism that is not just the American 

commerce department, or the American court system, or some 

other form that is stacked against us, but in fact is an 

independent dispute settlement mechanism where problems 

such as the one that has arisen, in the case of uranium, can be 

taken before that kind of independent tribunal of one form or 

another; where we are not then at a disadvantage, but are 

playing in an equivalent kind of status with our American 

counterparts. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the objectives that should be 

pursued in terms of our trading relationships with the United 

States. It is unfortunate that in the recent past we have not had 

that kind of independent dispute settlement mechanism that can 

provide us with a way out of the kind of predicament that we 

are now facing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the hurly-burly of this highly partisan debate 

this afternoon, I would hope that these few thoughts might add 

a note of reason and common sense to the discussion. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I too want to participate in 

this debate this afternoon, and lay before the legislature what I 

think is the real intent of this resolution that the government has 

put before us today. 

 

And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you analyse the words of 

the mover and the words of the seconder of this motion, it is 

clear that the government has no interest at all in trying to 

resolve the problem that is before them today, or before us 

today, and that is the unilateral action taken by the courts in the 

United States. 

 

The sole purpose of the resolution today I think was, as stated 

by the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and that is to try 

and score some political points in the legislature. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I am not opposed to that. After all this is a 

political arena, and if that is the intent of the resolution, then I 

think we can do that on both sides of the House. But, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we have a much, much graver problem before 

us herein Saskatchewan. And it did not start, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, with the actions, or the unilateral actions taken by the 

courts in the United States. 

 

The problems that are before us today started basically in 1984 

when we elected the Mulroney government. And jumping into 

bed very quickly with Brian Mulroney was Grant Devine, our 

Premier, on the . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I have cautioned members 

many times in the legislature not to use members’ names. I 

would ask the member to refer to other members by their 

position or by their constituency. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly had no intention of 

insulting our Premier. I just wanted to let the people of 

Saskatchewan know who our Premier is in case some people do 

not know who he is. Sometimes one wonders  

whether the Deputy Premier is the real leader in this province. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to make a comment on the 

Minister of Energy and Mines and what she said to the media 

yesterday morning. And I think herein lies the problem that the 

provincial government is really facing. In speaking to the media 

yesterday, the minister made the following comment, and she 

said that it would be . . . she lamented the fact that she had no 

allies in the problem that was facing her today in the action 

taken by the United States court. 

 

And she . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Madam Minister, 

I specifically heard you on television say that it would be 

nice - and I’m paraphrasing, but this is what you said - it would 

be nice if we had some support in Ottawa. These are the words 

that she used yesterday in the media. And I was very surprised 

that the minister made this statement because, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it indicates to me that maybe now the Mulroney 

government wants to get off of the track of the free trade that it 

has been pursuing, and is leaving the provincial government in 

the lurch. 

 

I think the true views of Brian Mulroney were - the Prime 

Minister of Canada - were expressed in 1982 and 1983 when he 

took on in debate at that time another potential candidate or 

leadership for the Leader of the Progressive Conservative party, 

John Crosbie, when John Crosbie was supporting a free trade 

agreement with the United States and Brian Mulroney, of 

course, was opposed to it. And in his arguments he said to John 

Crosbie, when you’re dealing with an elephant, he said - and 

I’m paraphrasing - you’ve got some real dangers to keep in 

mind. He said, if you’re sleeping with it and it rolls over, you’re 

a dead man. 

 

I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister aptly put 

before us the problem that we are having today, and that is that 

the United States, which is such a powerful government, a 

strong and powerful country, simply is not going to change its 

policies in order to accommodate the country of Canada. And 

what this whole argument or the resolution is about, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is to see if we can’t find a resolution, resolve the 

problem of finding markets for our raw materials. Whether it is 

potash or whether it is wheat or whether it is uranium or 

whether it is lumber makes no difference. What we need to do 

is find the market for our products. 

 

(1530) 

 

And that is where the fallacy comes in of the government 

opposite and the federal government. And the member from 

Fairview brought this out very clearly. They’ve put all of their 

eggs in one basket, and that is that they want to sign a bilateral 

agreement with the United States, and which bilateral 

agreement, I contend, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the United States 

will either never sign or would never adhere to. Why should it? 

And it is the most powerful nation in all the world. It doesn’t 

need to respect the rights of other countries. And if it doesn’t 

suit their purposes, it unilaterally changes it, as you people 

found out last week, as you people found out last week. 

 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1454 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is where the government 

opposite has made its mistake. Rather than pursuing a free trade 

agreement with multi-countries around the world, it has spent 

all of its energy, all of its energy, in trying to pursue an 

agreement with the United States. And that, Mr. Speaker, in my 

opinion, is folly and should not be pursued. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, I am not opposed to trading with Russia. I am 

not opposed to trading with China. And I assume that you 

people are not. And I am not opposed, Mr. Chairman, in trading 

with Japan. I am opposed, Mr. Speaker, to putting all of our 

eggs in one basket and signing a multi or bilateral agreement 

with the United States. That what I’m opposed to. And the 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley seems to indicate that he 

doesn’t want us to pursue a multinational trade agreement, but 

that he wants to pursue it only with the United States. 

 

And that is, Mr. Member, why we’re having the problem that 

we’re having today. That is why we don’t have access to 

markets in other countries, because you people are spending all 

of your time trying to find an agreement with the United States. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the resolution, as I 

indicated today, concerns itself basically with free trade. And 

where do we stand on the issue of free trade? And how are we 

going to negotiate an agreement, not only with the United States 

but with other countries, so that we find markets available for 

our raw products? That is the issue that is before us. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of us on this side hope that the 

government is successful in signing an agreement with a 

number of countries, with a number of countries. And we 

advocate to them today - please forget about using all of your 

energies in pursuing an agreement with the United States, and 

use your energies to sign agreements with Japan and China and 

India and the other Pacific Rim countries so that you will have 

markets available for our raw products. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen in the 

United States, in Congress, a mood that one can only describe 

as extreme protectionism. And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, isn’t 

good for Canada; it isn’t good for the United States. 

 

But one can certainly understand why it is happening in the 

United States, and that is why we in this country must set up 

avenues of lines of communications with members in Congress, 

talking to them, showing them the folly of pursuing that kind of 

policy. And if we were to spend more of our energy doing that, 

rather than spending all of our energy to see if we can sign a 

bilateral agreement, our interests here in Saskatchewan, and the 

interests of Canada, would be much better served by this 

government and by the federal government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have in this province a lot of 

investment in our resources. Whether it comes to uranium, or 

whether it comes to potash, whether it comes to oil, or whether 

it comes to our wheat, these are all  

resources in which we have a tremendous investment, and it is 

incumbent upon this government and the Government of 

Canada to see to it that markets are obtained for our raw 

materials and our finished products. 

 

What we need to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to enter into this 

debate. And I thank the hon. members for providing me for the 

additional time of 20 minutes, for abandoning their one 

position, and I would like to take that opportunity to discuss the 

issue. So I thank the House Leader in his new spirit of 

co-operation to providing us the 20 minutes. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my 20-minute address - which is a very 

difficult topic to cover in 20 minutes - I want to make, first of 

all, a little bit of an observation about some of the remarks 

which have been made to date by some of those who have 

entered into the debate. 

 

First of all, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg attempted 

to discuss in bitter-sweet terms, I suppose, what he perceived to 

be - and I underline the word perceived to be - disunity with 

respect to some members of this legislature. 

 

I might just simply say in passing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

when one watches the Liberal Party of Canada and its 

disassemblement on matters of free trade, sometimes they’re for 

it; sometimes they’re against it. On the question of the cruise 

and the testing of the cruise, sometimes they’re for it, and 

sometimes against it. And one could go on and on that it ill 

behoves the hon. member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to tell 

anybody in Saskatchewan or in Canada about the need for 

unity. In fact I would argue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has rally unlocked the 

key to success for Liberal Party unity in Canada, and that is: 

elect just one Liberal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now the real subject of this resolution, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quite frankly regret that the member didn’t see fit 

to confine his motion to the real subject, stems from the 

decision a few days ago in the United States - in the court 

process a few days ago in the United States - the United States 

Court of Appeals which apparently, if its order and the wording 

of the judgement is as I understand it, restricts the U.S. market 

to only domestically produced raw uranium. And I think it’s 

unfortunate that the hon. member who introduced this motion 

and that the government speakers who’ve spoken to the motion, 

although not all of them wandered off the topic - the Minister of 

Energy, I think, was more on topic than others - didn’t really 

confine their remarks to this particular matter. Because it’s this 

ruling, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which dramatically indicates again 

the shift in policy in the United States, which is in effect a 

policy of gradually embargoing matters of trade in a lot of 

areas - uranium being one - between itself and a number of 

countries. 

 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1455 

 

Really this decision represents a serious violation of a variety of 

international agreements ranging from the General Agreement 

on Trade and Tariffs, and other matters, other agreements, other 

statutory provisions, which the federal government has brought 

to the attention of the appropriate American authorities. And 

that really should be the subject of our debate. Members 

opposite, however, have chosen a widely drafted resolution and 

in so doing have attempted - rather poorly, I might add, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker - to try to determine perceived differences 

within the NDP about the policy with respect to uranium. 

 

Well I’d like to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the members 

of the government caucus, that the policy of the New 

Democratic Party on the question of uranium development is 

clearly set out in the resolutions of our convention, resolutions 

which are obviously the product of ordinary rank and file 

members’ debate and passage, and I would commend the 

members of the government side to take a look at that resolution 

if that’s really what they’re interested in knowing where the 

party stands. 

 

But that is not, of course, what we should be debating. What we 

should be debating at this particular moment is the question of 

the U.S. court’s ruling. And may I say here also before I get 

into that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make a little bit of a remark 

about how shocking the government response has been to date. 

Really, this uranium embargo and this decision, the trade bill 

which was passed recently in Congress, I argue, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, seem to have caught the current administration totally 

by surprise and by shock. The first that the hon. members 

opposite, the minister in charge of Economic Trade and 

Development, and others seemed to know about this was the 

newspaper reports which appeared in the publications at home 

and abroad about this decision. 

 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is really a sad commentary about the 

competence of a government administration, regardless of what 

side you’re on in the issue, in tending after the nation’s business 

or after the province’s business. 

 

How do you feel, sir, to know about matters affecting this 

province by reading them in The Globe and Mail or the Regina 

Leader-Post as the first indication. And that’s exactly what’s 

happened and what’s prompted this resolution. 

 

And, in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you take a look at this 

resolution which was introduced, sadly, I say, for purely 

political, or an attempt to be purely political and partisan 

purposes, the government even now, in the fact of this rising 

tide of protectionism and other problems in the United States, is 

flummoxed as to what they should do about the situation. Here 

is today’s Leader-Post where a Mr. Gordon McIntyre reports, 

quote, in the first two paragraphs of the article: 

 

Producers can only cross their fingers and wait while the 

government monitors legal wrangling over U.S. uranium 

imports. 

 

“That’s about all we can do at this time,” Energy 

 and Mines Minister Pat Smith said after government and 

industry officials met Monday. 

 

Here’s where we are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Minister of 

Energy, just as surprised and befuddled and baffled about 

what’s happening, enunciates government policy on this matter 

by simply saying, “That’s about all we can do at this time.” 

 

Well I think that the hon. members opposite would have been 

better advised - better advised to have told the House and the 

people of Saskatchewan where they were at the time of the 

initial court actions, representing Saskatchewan’s interests. 

Why were the legal counsel? What advice did they get in 

pursuing the policies that they have pursued and why they’ve 

pursued them? This, of course, they are not able to do because 

the simple fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 

government will go down in history as the most incompetent, 

ill-prepared government on any issue going in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — But I’ll tell you something, by way of an 

opposition suggestion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The hon. member 

from Swift Current, who is the Minister of Energy, says that’s 

about all that they can do at this time. Well there’s more that 

they can do at this time. 

 

We say that this whole situation is tied up to a larger, 

mismanaged heretofore, free trade debate where our Premier 

has contented himself to sing the Hallelujah Chorus to the 

Prime Minister of Canada and the President of the United 

States. 

 

The result has been that Canadian and Saskatchewan 

people - let’s leave uranium out of the picture - potash, 

softwood lumber, on a number of areas had been kicked in the 

teeth. 

 

And here I have another quote in the Regina Leader-Post of 

July 21, 1987. Quote: 

 

Andrew (referring to the Minister of Economic Trade) 

even said that the decision could prompt Saskatchewan’s 

Progressive Conservative government to re-examine its 

support for a free-trade deal with the U.S. 

 

(1545) 

 

We haven’t heard anything today about whether or not the 

government has re-examined its free trade position at all, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker - not a word about this. 

 

Well I want to tell the hon. member, the Economic Trade 

Development Minister, and the Premier of this province, and 

the Minister of Energy: you substitute the word “uranium,” you 

put “potash,” you put “Saskatchewan lumber,” you put any 

Saskatchewan product in there, you put Saskatchewan 

agricultural products in there, and you are going to get this 

result all the time . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1456 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, I don’t believe so, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. The hon. members opposite had an arrangement with 

us where I was to be the last speaker under the rules, and I have 

20 minutes. And I shall continue, Mr. Speaker, for the 

remaining 10 minutes. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I have no way of knowing of any 

agreement between . . . Each member speaking to the motion 

shall have no more than 10 minutes in which to speak in the 

debate. 

 

Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today, Mr. 

Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, in this debate over rule 16. And I 

was rather amused at the member from Saskatoon South saying 

that it was in . . . not the proper thing to do, to work on a trade 

deal with the United States as far as uranium is concerned. 

 

I would like to ask the member what we would do with the 

other 40 per cent of uranium that we sell to the United States. 

Would we sell it to Pakistan? Should we sell it to the Middle 

East? Or should we sell it to Chile? Where should we sell it? 

We’ve spent years in developing an offshore market, and 60 per 

cent of our uranium already goes offshore. So if we want to try 

and sell 40 of the extra 40 per cent, I would suggest to the 

member that it would be very, very difficult. And that’s the 

reason why we do need to try and work out a trade deal with the 

United States and carry on with this debate and go on a 

non-partisan basis to get that trade deal in place. 

 

I feel that the issue we are addressing today, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is of critical importance to the future of our 

province - not only in terms of dollars and cents - and the 

number of jobs that are at stake. I believe my honourable 

colleagues have outlined the issue very well in those terms, and 

I, too, shall touch upon this. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are dealing with an issue that applied 

to more than one part of our province’s economy. The issue that 

I speak of is that of trade and the need to work out a trading 

arrangement with our biggest trading partner, the United States 

of America. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this debate centres on the uranium 

industry, but it could be, and indeed has been over other 

industries that have suffered because of U.S. protectionism. Our 

province’s forestry, the steel industry, the potash industry, and 

livestock industries have all been the victims of protectionism 

from the United States, and now it is the uranium industries 

which have been hit. 

 

The NDP say that this is all a result of free trade talks going on 

between Canada and the United States governments. They 

pointed to every action that the Americans take and say, look at 

what they did. You can’t trust them. Let’s retaliate. Let’s get 

back at them. Break off the talks. What utter nonsense, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP’s solution is to 

stick their heads in the sand and pretend that it is the 1970s all 

over again. But we can’t go back. The world has changed and 

so must we. The entire world economy has changed and with it 

the economy of the world’s biggest trader, the United States. 

 

The United States has seen many of its industries become  

non-competitive and its resource bases depleted. It has seen 

third world and Asian countries dumping goods on its shores. 

All this has combined to threaten jobs, and with the political 

system they have it pays to protect those jobs, even though it 

may hurt their own country by doing so. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one can easily see the extent of 

protectionism in the United States, and it doesn’t take much 

effort to find it. Protectionism is everywhere and it is getting 

worse. There are only two solutions to this problem: hoping that 

it will go away, which is the same thing as sticking your head in 

the sand, or negotiating a comprehensive trade arrangement. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Government of Canada is currently 

trying to negotiate such an agreement that will help to insure 

access to the United States market for all Canadian goods and 

services. But even more importantly, Canadian negotiators are 

working to get new fair trading rules in place and a reasonable 

trade dispute mechanism as part of a free trade deal. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, without some sort of tribunal in place, 

actions like the one taken against the uranium industry will 

continue to occur. Our Progressive Conservative government 

supports the efforts being taken to negotiate such an 

arrangement between our country and the United States. And 

unfortunately, the members opposite do not, or will not. 

 

Such is also the case with the uranium industry, Mr. Speaker. 

The NDP were doubly glad when the U.S. court decision came 

down. Not only were they able to heap scorn on the Americans, 

but they saw the court decision as a great victory. Simply put, 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP want to see the uranium mines shut 

down. They call it phasing out, but it means shutting the mines 

down, in my view. 

 

They say they would find other jobs for Northerners employed 

in and around the mines. I ask the member for Athabasca if his 

colleagues have found some way to replace all the jobs that 

would be lost. If they have found some way, we would be 

interested in hearing about it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are 1,300 people whose jobs are being 

threatened because of the U.S. court ruling. And there are 5,000 

or so other families who indirectly depend on the uranium 

industry for their livelihood. These people have the right to 

expect that their MLAs will stand up for their interests. 

 

But will the member from Saskatoon University work to save 

the jobs of people in the uranium industry? No, Mr. Speaker, he 

will not lift a finger because he and his colleagues want to shut 

them down. Will the Leader of the Opposition live up to his 

original commitment, or has he given up on these 

6,000-or-better workers? Will he reaffirm his moral decision 

that he made when he gave the go-ahead for those mines in the 

first place? Or will he continue to repeat his party’s 

commitment to shut the mines down? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I defy the opposition to present a unified position 

that reconciles their past statements with their current policies. 

They can’t do it, Mr. Speaker, and I’m  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1457 

 

sure they won’t do it. I say to them, Mr. Speaker, that now is 

the time to put to one side their ideology and remember that 

they are here to protect the interests of all Saskatchewan 

residents, be they farmers or workers, in the uranium industry. 

And I urge all members of the NDP caucus to follow the lead of 

the member for Athabasca and join our caucus in support for 

this very important industry. 

 

I can speak a little bit, Mr. Speaker, on trade, because of the 

company and the farm machinery side that I was involved with 

before getting into politics. And we used to trade with the 

United States, and we were able to ship farm machinery across 

the line with no duty, and they could ship farm machinery 

across the line this way without any duties. 

 

But a lot of problems occur that can’t usually be seen, Mr. 

Speaker, when parts become a necessity for farm machinery. 

We get attacked with tariffs on parts to service our own 

machinery. Yet the United States can sell parts to Canada and 

they come in duty free. 

 

Some of the members opposite, and I’m going to quote four of 

them, one of them saying that the phasing out of uranium 

mining would do more harm for Saskatchewan than good. 

Another observed: I have concluded the use of uranium as a 

source of energy is inevitable. I simply see no other alternative. 

And in regard to his report for uranium mining, one said: I, for 

my part, made a moral decision. I think I did the right thing, and 

I am prepared to defend it. The last person I will quote, in 

support, said, and I quote: we support uranium mining and the 

operation of nuclear power plants. The fact that there has been 

an accident at a nuclear plant doesn’t mean that nuclear plants 

should be opposed. End of quote. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, these people who strongly support 

my position are in order, the member for Saskatoon Fairview 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Time has elapsed. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I had not . . . Earlier in the 

day, I had not intended, in fact, to be here, but hearing this 

debate was on, I rushed back, knowing there was two minutes 

made available to me to speak on the subject. 

 

I want to say, in the two or three minutes that’s available - and 

that’s all that’s available I gather - is that the area of trade has 

this government, and the government in Ottawa have, made an 

unbelievable mess of the whole area of trade. And I suggest to 

the members opposite, the whole free trade initiative, out of 

which this stems, was naive and ill-timed at a period of time in 

which the U.S. was clearly protectionist. 

 

To stumble into that area and to open up a free . . . and to talk 

about free trade is asking for trouble. We have seen . . . And 

that trouble has come in spades. The latest outcome of that is in 

uranium where we face a serious, a very serious, problem for 

the industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would suggest to members opposite that the basis of the 

problem goes back several years, when this government  

and the government in Ottawa choose to ask the Americans for 

more. I think that’s a fair interpretation of how they treated it. 

 

After the war, Mr. Speaker, the U.S. was the largest creditor 

nation in the world. Now, forty years later, it’s the largest 

debtor nation in the world. That’s causing some serious 

problems in the U.S. Like people anywhere, they tend to look 

for simple solutions. The truth of the matter is, of course, a 

badly, in part, a badly mismanaged federal budget. But they 

look for simple solutions. And they . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 9 - Provision of Adequate Funding for 

Health Care Programs 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising to speak to 

a motion which I will move after I have made some remarks to 

it. My motion calls on the Government of Saskatchewan to 

provide adequate funding to hospitals, nursing homes, and other 

health care institutions so that these institutions can afford to 

employ badly needed health care staff and thereby improve 

bedside care for Saskatchewan’s sick and elderly. 

 

This resolution was put on the order papers last December, but 

it’s still very timely today. There are three reasons why I want 

to speak to this resolution and points that I will be making, 

because I think that the issue of health care and how we support 

it is a very important choice to be making in Saskatchewan right 

now. 

 

(1600) 

 

We have growing health concerns, especially for seniors. We 

have high unemployment which is continuing to be a very great 

problem, and we also have the real need to provide work for 

women in Saskatchewan - good work that women can do, not 

short-term solutions with work for welfare, etc. 

 

Now one of the points that’s being made about the Department 

of Health’s budget is that it’s been a big increase this year from 

last year. But if you look at the figures from the budget 

summaries, the 1986 to ‘87 budget was 1 billion, 1.36 million, 

with a supplementary estimate of 31 million; and the health 

capital in the property management corporation, 75 million, for 

a total of 1 billion, 242 million. The ‘87-88 budget is actually a 

decrease. It certainly isn’t the increase that the government’s 

been purporting because it’s 1 billion, 173 million, with a health 

capital of 66 million, but a deficit of 15 million from the 

property management corporation. 

 

On a straight and fair comparative basis the government has 

allocated $18 million less in ‘87-88 for health expenditures than 

was allotted last year. They introduced the health capital fund in 

‘85 with great fanfare, but it no longer exists. And the point that 

I want to particularly address is you introduce the patient care 

fund with great fanfare in 1986. And I would like to read from 

the  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1458 

 

announcement that introduced this $100 million for patient 

care - immediate release in 1986, in February: 

 

A $100 million program to enrich hospital and special 

care-home services, was announced . . . by (the then) 

Health Minister Graham Taylor. 

 

It was to be a five-year program which will provide funds for 

services, staffing, and equipment, and it was to have two major 

components. Firstly, $40 million being made available over the 

next four years to enrich patient care services in hospitals. And 

Taylor said there were three main goals for those funds: to 

reduce waiting times for surgery; to provide new equipment and 

diagnostic services; and to substantially increase patient care 

staff ratio, including the provision of about 500 additional 

nursing positions. 

 

At that time the government said patient care is the priority. We 

wanted to go . . . we wanted a program that should go straight to 

the heart of the matter - patient care, Taylor said. That was in 

‘86 before the election. It must have been another one of these 

election puffery-huffery promises that didn’t amount to 

anything, because that patient care fund no longer exists. 

 

Today we have a very serious situation in Saskatchewan. And I 

want to quote from a letter from Paul Kuling that was in the 

Star-Phoenix in April of ‘87. 

 

Six months after a major election spending spree, which 

added significantly to the deficit, these loudly trumpeted 

commitments to patients and families have suddenly 

vanished. The government’s intention to hold hospital and 

nursing operating grants to zero per cent for the next two 

years, regardless of patient needs, will result in a sharp 

decline in the quality of care for hospital patients and the 

elderly. 

 

And I’ve received a copy of a letter which was sent also to the 

Minister of Health and many other MLAs, from a health 

professional who says: 

 

I am extremely concerned about cuts and freezes that are 

presently having, and will continue to have, disastrous 

effects for our community’s health and well-being. I 

believe that given the shortfall in nursing staff levels and 

other cost-cutting measures, a hospital would be a very 

frightening place to go; especially if you are ill. I am very 

worried by the implications of many recent 

announcements affecting health. We are heading in a 

direction that will threaten universal health care and create 

a two-tiered system; those that can pay and those that can 

not. We have been the most progressive in ensuring 

universal health coverage for all Saskatchewan citizens; 

this has not just been a fad of the day, but a strong 

commitment over a lot of years. 

 

(She’s) encouraging (us) to realign (our) aspirations, 

(saying that) Saskatchewan doesn’t want to become a little 

U.S.A. with large industries (spilling great amounts of 

pollution and reducing employment through 

capitalization), and little  

social fibre. Our goal is to be less concrete and more 

human. 

 

That is a very important goal for me and one which I certainly 

endorse 100 per cent. I have a constituency with over 30 per 

cent people over the ages of 60, and when I was going door to 

door talking to people in the campaign, and even now I get 

phone calls all the time, about people who are having 

frightening experiences in hospitals because of the shortage of 

nursing staff. 

 

We have a choice that we can make here in Saskatchewan right 

now. We have high unemployment, and we can choose either to 

fund socially useful work, which is valuable - and in the health 

care services there is certainly a great lot of work to be done 

there - or we can move more and more into unemployment for 

many, many people as a result of the high-tech which the 

government side is boosting so forcefully all the time, without 

any recognition of what’s happening to people under high-tech 

that’s being brought into work places and putting people out of 

work. 

 

Given that development . . . and Develcon putting people out of 

work just lately is only another example of the many people that 

have been put out of work by high-tech. It has got potential to 

create new jobs, but it also has the potential to put a lot of 

people out of work. 

 

So we have to look at what kind of socially useful work we can 

create for people. We have two choices. We can either require it 

to be done through privatization, where people pay for private 

nurses, for insurance, and for the cost of health care; or we can 

go for public service. I think the choice is very clear now in 

Saskatchewan, and I think it’s being made by this government. 

 

The choice of the government is to go for privatization, for 

saying that health care is for people who can pay for it, and for 

the rest of us, we can just get sick and die, I suppose. We need 

to turn that around. We need to make another commitment to 

universal health care for people and to make a commitment to 

the public service and to providing work in the public service. 

 

I was particularly impressed by the many presentations that 

we’ve had from the nurses and from health care workers 

generally. In a meeting in January of 1986 with representatives 

of health care units, we were told that a survey of hospital 

nurses revealed that 92.18 per cent of nurses considered 

inadequate funding for staffing was their first priority concern. 

They pointed out then that the formula for hospital funding is 

currently based on the number of beds filled, not on the nature 

of the care required by the people in those beds, and that, 

increasingly, hospitals are providing acute care . . . and patients 

over the age of 80 often have multiple ailments and therefore 

need lots of care. 

 

I’ve heard stories of very old people in hospitals who’ve tried to 

get out of bed and have fallen and have broken their hips or 

legs, and have had to then be in the hospital for longer than they 

needed to be initially. The nurses are very worried about this, 

and I support their concern 100 per cent. 

 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1459 

 

The hospitals are providing - especially the hospitals in the big 

cities - increasingly acute care. And that care demands nursing 

services, not just based on the beds that are there, but based on 

the kind of care that the nurses have to give. 

 

The nurses, in a statement of concern in January of ‘86, said 

this: 

 

Our review of the most recent information from Statistics 

Canada . . . states that Saskatchewan has the lowest ratio 

of paid hours per staffed bed in Canada. We would need a 

22 per cent increase to bring this up to national average. 

Paid nursing hours rank tenth and require a 15 per cent 

increase to meet the national average. 

 

The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses is proposing that 

hospitals be staffed according to a patient classification 

system which assesses patient needs. A recent survey of 

five hospitals in Saskatchewan which utilize this . . . 

(service of assessing patient needs) demonstrated that 

although patient needs are assessed, the wards are not 

being staffed as required by patient needs. At present (as 

I’ve said all ready) only the bed is considered, but the 

diverse needs of the patients are ignored. 

 

One of those hospitals surveyed was City Hospital in 

Saskatoon, a hospital that’s in my constituency, which 

reinforces my concern about what’s happening in health care. 

 

In September of (1985) the nurses began providing SUN 

with the same information that has been regularly supplied 

to hospital administration. This provided evidence of 

extreme understaffing on some shifts where hospital wards 

were 49.35 per cent below requirements on the day shift, 

and 27.94 per cent below requirements on evening shift, 

and 45 per cent short on night shift. 

 

In addition, nurses have documented over 550 incidents since 

1980 where nurses believe that patient safety had been 

jeopardized by the lack of adequate nursing staff. Over 300 

incidents have been documents to date this year, and that’s in 

1985. The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses in 1985 submitted a 

brief to the Minister of Health. This was followed by additional 

research data and documentation. It was clear from the 

responses received that it’s the intention of the government and 

the Department of Health to continue to fund nursing staffs 

based on political and economic expediency rather than the 

needs of the patients in the hospitals. 

 

This is a grave error. Basic nursing care is the critical 

foundation of the health system and it is being neglected. 

Following that release the nurses had an interview with the 

Star-Phoenix, with June Blau, then president of SUN 

(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses). SUN forwarded copies of the 

reports filed by nurses to the administrators and to SUN. The 

reports that were referred to were completed when the nurses 

felt that patient care had been jeopardized and they included 

repeated requests for more staff. And here are some of the 

situations that the  

nurses documented. 

 

On a very busy night shift in the medicine unit at St. 

Paul’s Hospital nurses unfamiliar with the procedure were 

required to give chemotherapy. The chemotherapy spill 

and line reinsertions took one nurse three hours, forcing 

her to leave her patient load with an already busy 

colleague. 

 

When I read something like that I also think of the person that 

was having the treatment done to them. Imagine having a 

chemotherapy treatment and being the victim of a spill and a 

line reinsertion, taking one nurse three hours to work over you. 

How terrifying that must have been for the patient getting that 

chemotherapy. 

 

A friend of mine having a baby in City Hospital was hooked up 

to a new piece of equipment that the nurses had just got and 

hadn’t really learned how to operate properly because the 

nurses are not given enough time to be educated in the use of 

this new technology that’s coming in. Again, another example 

of what happens when you boost high tech and you don’t look 

at what needs to be done to utilize it properly. 

 

There’s new machinery being brought into the hospitals and the 

nurses were practically reading the book of instructions as they 

hooked the patient up to this new machine. That is not 

acceptable. The nurses should not be put under that stress, Mr. 

Speaker. They deserve to have enough nursing staff so that this 

new technology can be used properly, so that the nurses have 

the opportunity to be trained and to have the support staff to 

work on it. 

 

Another issue was that University Hospital, in the intensive care 

unit, nurses repeatedly had to leave their critically ill patients to 

do frequently turnings of heavy patients, and they were 

unassisted by an orderly. And for me it was interesting - when 

I’m talking to constituents in Saskatoon Centre, I meet many 

women over the age of 50 who’ve been nurses in the past and 

whose health is breaking down because they have to do this sort 

of work on their own. Unassisted by an orderly, they have to lift 

heavy people. And that is not acceptable, because the nurses 

that are put out of work at the end of it are still nurses looking 

for employment or having to go on unemployment insurance 

and eventually on welfare. That is not a good plan. That is not a 

good plan for health care services; it is not a good plan for 

creating work in the province; and it’s certainly not a good plan 

for women’s work. 

 

Another example was in the pediatric unit at Regina’s General 

Hospital. Two nurses attempted to care for 32 children, many of 

them quite ill. A unit clerk found a new administration having a 

seizure, while clerical staff discovered a two-year-old with a 

nosebleed. Those are the kinds of conditions that nurses have to 

deal with. 

 

They complained that there was no replacement for staff 

members who were sick, so that when you are sick as a nurse, 

you have to make a choice. Either you stay home and put more 

burden on the nurses that are still there, or you go to work when 

you yourself are not well. That, again, is a very unacceptable 

position to put staff in when they’re trying to staff nursing 

stations in the hospitals. 

 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1460 

 

The demands on the nurses have also increased because patients 

are being discharged earlier and earlier. There’s a greater 

turnover, and all the patients are much sicker. Many of us know 

people who’ve been sent home from hospital very early. We 

know that they need more care at home and we also know that 

the beds are being taken by other people who are just as very 

sick and need to have more care. 

 

(1615) 

 

There was a report in July of 1986, the Saskatoon joint planning 

committee on long-term care - a report that was went to Walter 

Podiluk as deputy minister of health. It represented the work of 

a six-month study on the delivery of long-term care in 

Saskatoon. This report found . . . this report limited the study to 

the elderly, define as persons 65 years and older, and it 

recommended that a special study be undertaken for younger 

persons in need of long-term care. 

 

So this is a report directed to long-term care for older people. 

They received a total of 25 written briefs from interested groups 

and individuals in response to both private and public 

invitations. And eight verbal presentations were made to the 

committee by representatives from other interest groups. Now 

the government opposite has made much of the fact that they 

like to consult with people. So this is a report based on 

consultation with a number of people about long-term care in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And it too emphasizes the need for more nursing care for people 

in Saskatchewan, an increase in the provision of rehabilitation 

services. Presently there’s an acute shortage of rehabilitation 

services in the city of Saskatoon - occupational therapy, 

physiotherapy, respiratory therapy, and speech therapy. 

 

University Hospital is the only one of the three hospitals in the 

city that has a rehabilitation unit. The University Hospital 

rehabilitation home care program has experienced a frozen 

budget for the last two years. It provides home care 

rehabilitation services to discharged patients from all three 

hospitals. Only a limited number of the special care homes 

provide rehabilitation services to their clients. The shortage of 

this service in the city is primarily due to the lack of funding 

and the availability of qualified staff, the report found. And 

that’s a report based on consultation, as I’ve said already. It’s 

obvious that people are sent home from hospital before they’ve 

been properly rehabilitated, and then they have to struggle at 

home with the lack of home care. The recruitment and training 

of qualified professional and para-professional rehabilitation 

services staff in the city should be given top priority, and a 

school of occupational therapy should be established in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Another issue that’s of concern is the expansion of the geriatric 

assessment unit on a permanent basis. This unit, at University 

Hospital, has been of great value in the assessment of long-term 

care needs of the elderly and in the recommendation of 

rehabilitative programs. Unfortunately, the lack of a permanent 

head and the shortage of qualified staff in recent years has 

hindered the  

unit’s ability to meet the needs of the community. The geriatric 

assessment unit should be expanded on a permanent basis and 

the recruitment of qualified permanent staff should be given a 

top priority. 

 

Increased provision of psychiatric services is another issue, and 

there’s much work to be done in offering that service to people 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

What is happening in Saskatchewan is that instead of funding 

the staff that are needed and the institutions that provide the 

health care, the nurses are being asked to co-operate with 

austerity measures. Delegates to a convention said, in April of 

1987: 

 

Delegates to the convention (on health) said University 

Hospital is closing beds, not replacing (the) staff on 

vacation or (staff that are ) sick, encouraging staff to take 

longer vacations without pay, and putting a hiring freeze 

on vacancies. Another hospital is reducing nursing staff 

when it is not busy on the wards. 

 

It means that we are looking after the same number of 

patients, who have the same number of illnesses, with 

fewer nurses. 

 

That’s Lorraine Bray, a director of the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses. It’s interesting to me that those questions were being 

raised in April, because we’ve certainly heard that story over 

and over again through the summer, about how the nurses are 

being asked to take leave without pay, how they’re being asked 

to take their holidays in the summer-time and not be replaced 

by staff on vacations, and how the beds are closed so that 

people are getting less and less care. 

 

In June of ’87, SUN said the elderly will languish in nursing 

home warehouses unless more nurses are hired to look after 

them. The union has asked the provincial government to try a 

new system that bases staff needs on the needs of residents. If 

the Department of Health, nursing homes, and nurses fail to 

effectively deal with the staffing question, we will be 

contending our elderly and long-term residents to a dreaded 

custodial care situation that so many of us have fought to 

prevent. 

 

The nurses want registered nurses or registered psychiatric 

nurses on duty 24 hours a day in nursing homes. Failing to have 

nurses there around the clock is jeopardizing the health of 

residents. Residents and staff have been kicked, scratched and 

punched by some of these patients who aren’t getting the 

increased supervision, special care plans, and environment they 

need. There are many documented cases of broken teeth, 

glasses, or various lacerations of staff and residents. This is a 

very serious problem that needs addressing by government 

nursing homes and care-givers. Some recommended the 

expansion of home care nursing services. 

 

Those are terrible accusations. It really concerns me very much 

to think that nurses are working in these conditions. 

 

And only last Saturday, a constituent came to me and 

complained that there are beds at the Parkridge nursing  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1461 

 

home that are not filled because there are no nurses there to take 

care of people. The beds aren’t being filled. And the nurses that 

are there, sometimes in the evenings are having to care for 80 

people by themselves. 

 

It’s interesting that these complaints from the nurses have been 

going on for over a year, and they still have not been addressed. 

It seems to me so obvious that we should be addressing these 

concerns, because the health care of our province should be a 

top priority. 

 

But yet, in July of 1987: 

 

Isabelle Harris, the president of the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses . . . (in Prince Albert) . . . said that increased 

closure of beds and wards at hospitals, coupled with the 

decreases in staffing over the summer are causing 

problems. 

 

. . . (There’s) the Victoria Union Hospital and the Holy 

Family Hospital (in Prince Albert) are closing operating 

rooms for six weeks over the summer instead of the usual 

four. 

 

Four is bad enough. Six is really unacceptable, completely. 

 

The pediatric wards are also shutting down for six weeks. 

 

. . . staff have been asked to take holidays or unpaid leaves 

of absence at the Victoria Union Hospital. Others . . . have 

been sent to work in other areas of the hospital and this 

has the nurses concerned. 

 

“. . . they’re (being put) in . . . unfamiliar work area and 

there is almost no orientation time.” . . . elderly patients 

have been complaining because of the unfamiliar staff 

taking care of them. 

 

. . . staff is being overworked and this is effecting the 

quality of care patients are getting. 

 

On Level 6, which is geriatric patients at Victoria Union 

. . . there are five nurses, per shift working five days a 

week and six for the other two days. 

 

“This is far below the standard set by Nursing Information 

Saskatchewan,” she said. “For that many patients . . . you 

should have 20 nurses in a 24-hour period and we have 

about 11.” 

 

The decrease in staff have also been creating problems 

with the 99 team at the hospital which responds to 

emergency situations within the hospital . . . when an 

emergency arises, two of the staff sometimes have to go 

off the ward on a night shift. 

 

The stories of what’s happening to patients continue to be told 

in the public domain. A letter in the Star-Phoenix of July 1987, 

listed the concerns again of the nurses. An Alzheimer patient 

died, unattended and alone, because staff was unable to observe, 

call the family, or stay with the patient. 

 

Another Alzheimer patient wandered off the ward and walked 

for half an hour in January weather to reach his home, and his 

wife had to return him to hospital. A patient who got up to go to 

the bathroom did not request assistance because he thought the 

nurses were too busy. He fell and fractured his pelvic bones. 

 

In 1986 the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses provided the 

Minister of Health with documentation of 32 cases from one 

month alone. In 1986 the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses also 

provided the minister with the internal hospital statistics, as I 

mentioned already, proving that many major Saskatchewan 

hospitals were, on average, 19 per cent understaffed. 

 

We have a choice here to make in Saskatchewan. We have a 

choice whether we’re going to provide work for 

people - socially useful, valuable work - available to everyone 

in the health care field, services available to everyone, and 

plenty of work for people to do; or we’re going to cut back and 

cut back and cut back, and have people in custodial care, people 

who are sick, on waiting lists that are so long, that by the time 

they get attention it’s too late; or we’re going to have to turn 

this around, start providing proper employment for people, start 

meeting the growing health care concerns of our seniors and of 

our sick, start providing responsible work for women in the 

health care field, the work they want to do, the work that’s 

available for them. 

 

It’s so ironic to hear people on the government side taking 

defence of the jobs in the uranium industry, jobs which we said 

we would provide alternative employment for before they were 

ever phased out. You express great concern about those jobs but 

not about the jobs as a dental therapist - the 411 women who’ve 

been put out of work. You don’t care about the cut-backs in the 

health care services because it’s . . . Why don’t you do that? 

Why don’t you develop an economic strategy that provides 

work that people can do in the health care services and meet the 

needs of the people as they’ve been documented by the nurses? 

 

A great concern among a number of people is what is 

happening to the mental health services. They’ve had a staff cut 

of 100, according to the mental health association. That’s 13 per 

cent. They expect to see a rise in the number of patients 

institutionalized again if all mental health nurses eligible for 

early retirement accept the offer. About 40 per cent of the 65 

community nurses have been offered early retirement as part of 

the government’s drive to attack the deficit. That was reported 

in May of ‘87. 

 

Doug Garlick, the President of the Battleford’s branch of the 

Canadian Mental Health Association said mental health 

out-patients in west central Saskatchewan will be waiting 

longer and travelling further for services. And these problems 

are result of government cut-backs which reduced the mental 

health position in the region by 73. Previously there were 300 

positions in the North Battleford region - 150 to 200 were 

employees working with patients at the Saskatchewan Hospital, 

and the rest worked with out-patients. 

 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1462 

 

The waiting list for some out-patients’ services was three to five 

months before the cut-backs in May of ‘87. And now the 

waiting list is well beyond nine months. These staff cuts spell 

the end of preventative services and the start of a program 

responding only to a crisis. And when you respond to a crisis in 

the mental health field you’re responding to a situation which 

has gotten far beyond the bounds of where it needs to be. 

 

Preventative care in mental health services should be a top 

priority. We should be caring about what’s happening to people 

in this area as well as the people who are physically sick. 

 

The North Battleford region, which I’ve mentioned, covers the 

area bordered by Lloydminster, Meadow Lake, the Borden 

bridge, and Biggar. And the number of nurses covering that 

area will be cut from 11 to five. The report is that 10 nurses 

could barely cover the 650 out-patients in the region. Their 

case-load of 65 patients was double the recommended number 

of 30 to 35. 

 

In March of ‘87, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, again 

desperate to promote and present their position to the public, 

made a presentation to us in the legislature. Their concern, 

particularly regarding the Parkridge Centre in Saskatoon, I’ve 

mentioned that already, how the lack of funding for adequate 

staffing for adequate and safe care of the long-term care 

residents. 

 

The work-load for the nurses has been significantly increased in 

certain areas. And people . . . Beds are not being filled when 

they need to be filled, by a government that boasts about how 

it’s presented more nursing . . . built more nursing homes for 

people. But without the staff to staff the nursing homes, the 

service is not provided. 

 

(1630) 

 

I have a great deal more to say on the health care issue. But I 

know that the person seconding the motion that I’m to present 

would also like to have the opportunity to speak to it. 

 

So with my concern, in conclusion, about the need for 

providing work in a time of high unemployment and many, 

many jobs to be created in the health care field; my concern that 

work for women be supported by this government and not 

destroyed, as it is being done with destroying the dental 

therapists and not providing the nurses with the support that 

they require; and my concern about the sick and the elderly who 

are being very badly beaten up by this government - with those 

three points, I want to present this motion to this Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly call on the Government of 

Saskatchewan to provide adequate funding to hospitals, 

nursing homes, and other health care institutions so that 

these institutions can afford to employ badly needed health 

care staff and thereby improve bedside care for 

Saskatchewan’s sick and elderly. 

 

I am moving this motion, seconded by the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, Pat Atkinson. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to 

second the motion put forward by my colleague from Saskatoon 

Centre and to enter this debate on this most urgent matter. We 

have an urgent and critical situation in Saskatchewan hospitals, 

Saskatchewan nursing homes, and other Saskatchewan health 

care facilities. 

 

In Saskatoon for instance, Mr. Speaker, we have over 10,700 

people on the hospital waiting list - people waiting for surgery, 

Mr. Speaker. Patients, doctors, nurses, administrators, boards of 

various health care facilities, other health care workers, want 

action and they want it now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recall that the former Minister of Health, the 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley, released a press release 

with a great deal of fanfare on February 25, 1986, and that press 

release said, “$100 million for patient care.” And I’d like to 

read that press release into the record to refresh some of the 

members opposite’s short memories: 

 

A $100 million program to enrich hospital and special care 

services was announced today by Health Minister . . . 

 

The member from Indian Head-Wolseley. 

 

The five-year program, which will provide funds for 

services, staffing and equipment, will have two major 

components. Firstly, $40 million is being made available 

over the next four years to enrich patient care services in 

hospitals. (Taylor said) there are three main goals of these 

funds: one, to reduce waiting times for surgery; two, to 

provide new equipment and diagnostic services; and to 

substantially increase patient care staff, including the 

provision of about 500 additional nursing positions. 

 

Secondly, $60 million will be provided for staffing and 

other costs associated with new beds being made available 

under the five-year construction program announced last 

year. (Taylor said) plans for the 40 million phase were 

developed over several months through a detailed review 

of hospital needs and through discussions with health care 

officials. 

 

He said patient care is the priority. And I quote: 

 

We wanted a program which would go straight to the heart 

of the matter - patient care (Taylor said). And that is what 

this program will do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this commitment was made prior to what the 

Tories thought was going to be a spring of 1986 election. This 

commitment, this promise, is now a betrayal. 

 

The Tories won the October 20, 1986 election, and the promise 

is gone. Another betrayal. No wonder the public doesn’t believe 

the members opposite. No wonder they can’t take the 

Conservative Party at their word. These  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1463 

 

were phoney funds whose sole purpose was political, and that 

was to get the members opposite elected. These phoney funds’ 

sole purpose was to appease hospital workers so that these 

members opposite wouldn’t be embarrassed - workers who 

know what’s taking place in Saskatchewan hospitals and other 

health care facilities. 

 

And I’d like to talk about what’s happening in Saskatchewan 

hospitals, Saskatchewan nursing homes, and Saskatchewan 

health facilities. And I want to talk about bed closures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s quite interesting. This summer in the city of 

Saskatoon we have St. Paul’s Hospital, an institution that’s been 

in our fair city for a number of years. This summer, Mr. 

Speaker, for the first time, we will have 69 beds closed for a 

two-month period. 

 

City Hospital. City Hospital this year for the first time will 

close 110 beds from June 27 to September 6. they’ll close two 

complete nursing units, and they expect to save $400,000. Staff 

will take their vacation periods at this time, and some staff are 

taking leave of absences without pay. 

 

It’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker, last year there were only 50 

bed closures. Last year we were looking at a possible election, 

and an election that did occur. At University Hospital, Mr. 

Speaker, we had 129 beds closed this summer - tremendous 

number of closures. 

 

And I want to talk about some of those beds. In a surgery unit 

3,000 there were 12 beds closed, out of a possible complement 

of 38 beds; in surgery 3,300 we had another 12 beds closed; in 

orthopaedics we had 10 beds closed; in neurosurgery, another 

13 beds closed; in the geriatric unit, the unit that serves the 

older people of our province and the older people of Saskatoon, 

we had seven beds closed; in obstetrics, six beds closed; in 

gynaecology, 11 beds closed; in pediatrics 3,100, eight beds 

closed. 

 

And I want to tell the members opposite that University 

Hospital deals with some of the very, very sick children in this 

province. In pediatrics 3,200 we had another 10 beds closed. 

The neonatal unit, Mr. Speaker, we had four beds closed, and 

the neonatal unit deals with very, very, very sick newborn 

babies - and the members opposite should be ashamed of 

themselves. 

 

In the rehab unit we had four beds closed; in the kidney unit we 

had 12 beds closed; and in the cancer unit, Mr. Speaker, when 

we have men and women in our province waiting for up to four 

weeks to get into hospital, we had 25 beds closed - and it’s 

appalling. 

 

I also want to talk about the Regina situation. The Pasqua 

hospital, 37 bed closures; the Plains, 37 bed closures; the 

General, 27 beds were closed. And last year there were no 

closures at the General. Why? Because we were going to have 

an October election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what’s taking place in P.A. 

hospitals. The Victoria Union Hospital will be closing its 

operating and recovering rooms, and surgical and pediatric 

wards, for six weeks starting June 12, according to a newspaper 

report. 

This means, Mr. Speaker, that for almost one-quarter of the 

year, according to someone from Prince Albert, hospitals in 

Prince Albert will have surgical and pediatric facilities 

functioning at only half capacity. And that’s appalling, in view 

of the former Minister of Health, the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley’s commitment to patient care. How appalling. 

 

I want to talk about Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. In Moose Jaw, 

they’re closing 37 beds this summer for two months, instead of 

20 beds last year. They’re reducing elective surgery, and 

closing a hospital floor, and increasing accommodation charges 

and hospital meal prices because of the underfunding of 

hospitals in this province by the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, the situation in Saskatchewan is 

getting very, very bad. And it’s time the members opposite 

woke up to the reality of what’s happening in our institutions 

across this province and became aware that their policies, their 

economic policies, are seriously leading to the deterioration of 

our hospitals and other health care facilities in this province. 

 

What does the Minister of Health, our famous Minister of 

Health, have to say? Well he says in a recent interview, and this 

was in May 14, 1987, that the hold-the-line budgeting approach 

won’t affect the quality of health care in this province. Well, I 

can assure the members opposite, the quality of the health care 

in this province is seriously being undermined because of your 

spending priorities. 

 

You can spend money on Peter Pocklington and his pork plant 

in North Battleford. You can spend money on your $20 million 

advertising campaigns - some very sick advertising campaigns 

that we’ve seen in the last few weeks - new savings for 

Saskatchewan motorists, when you’ve introduced the gas tax. 

You can hire $10 million worth of political staff who can’t 

respond to letters from the members opposite when they’re 

dealing with serious health questions in this province. And I’m 

thinking of the prescription drug plan - $10 million for political 

staff, but they can’t fund Saskatchewan hospitals. And as a 

result, what is happening? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what’s happening in 

Saskatoon hospitals in terms of the waiting lists. We know that 

as of June 30, 1987 there are now 10,729 people waiting for 

elective, urgent, and emergency surgery in the city of 

Saskatoon. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Ten thousand, seven hundred and 

twenty-nine people. The University Hospital, we have 2,622; 

St. Paul’s Hospital, 3,673; and at City Hospital, 4,434; for a 

total of 10,729 persons waiting for elective surgery. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have had citizen after citizen after citizen 

contact our constituency offices, concerned about the fact that 

they cannot get into hospital. 

 

I can list numerous examples of people who’ve been on  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1464 

 

hospital waiting lists for months and months and months, and 

can’t get into those hospitals. And I really do congratulate the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses for setting up their SUN health 

hot line, because they have been able to, in a very credible way, 

draw to the attention of the Government of Saskatchewan and 

the members of the opposition some very, very serious health 

hazards and health concerns in this province. 

 

And I want to talk about some of the comments that were made 

by people contacting the hot line. Here’s an example. This 

woman needs bladder repair surgery. The operation can’t be 

performed in a local hospital. She was told she’d have to wait 

because it’s not life threatening. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you imagine, because of the underfunding of 

the Government of Saskatchewan, we have a situation where a 

woman is in need of elective surgery, obviously in an 

uncomfortable state and she’s having to wait because the 

members opposite won’t properly fund our Saskatchewan 

hospitals. And I think that’s appalling. I think it’s outrageous. 

And I can’t believe that you people are governing this province. 

 

Here’s another one. This person is waiting for gall-bladder 

surgery. The solution suggested was to keep beds open and 

don’t decrease service. That’s the solution for the person that 

contacted the hot line. And I agree with that solution. Let’s keep 

those beds open and let’s make sure that we don’t decrease 

service, because that’s certainly what’s happening. 

 

Here’s another one. This man’s been waiting for one year for a 

prostate operation. The condition is not cancerous, but it’s very 

inconvenient - no kidding - it’s inconvenient. The client 

suggests that we need to start petitions to keep the beds open. 

 

Here’s another one. The caller has cancer of the bladder and is 

having to wait two months for surgery, and yet we had a 

situation at University Hospital where there have been 

numerous beds closed in the cancer wing because of the 

underfunding of Saskatoon hospitals and hospitals throughout 

the province by the members opposite. 

 

(1645) 

 

Here’s another one. This caller has been waiting for hip 

replacement surgery since November of 1986. She was asked, 

presumably by her doctor, if she wanted to be placed on the 

urgent list. She declined if it meant replacing someone with 

cancer. I can’t believe it, I can’t believe it, and neither can my 

colleagues. Here we have a situation where, if she were put on 

the urgent list, she’d get in a little faster, but she doesn’t want to 

replace someone who is waiting for cancer surgery. And I really 

commend that women. But I think the government opposite 

needs to start getting its priorities straight. 

 

Here’s another one. This caller had to wait one month for a bed 

to diagnose cancer. Because of the fear of cancer she became 

depressed. She feels she speaks for many seriously ill patients 

who have grave concerns about health care in this province. 

And she’s absolutely right, she does. 

 

Because we know numerous examples, Mr. Speaker, people 

who’ve contacted me directly, who have fear of cancer; they’re 

waiting to get into hospital and they can’t. And they’re scared 

and I don’t blame them. I’d be scared too, and so would the 

Minister of health, and so would the Deputy Premier, and so 

would all the other people over there. And I think it’s time that 

we re-open some of those hospital beds throughout this 

province and started funding health care the way the people of 

this province expect and deserve health care to be funded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have another example of a situation where this 

woman’s been waiting for bladder repair surgery since ‘86. 

She’s been given a possible surgery date in October of 1987. 

She noted her brother-in-law had to leave Saskatchewan and go 

to Calgary for bladder repair surgery. And it’s interesting - I 

recalled members opposite talking about patients flooding out 

of Saskatchewan to go to Manitoba - we had no examples of 

that in Manitoba. But we have example after example after 

example of people leaving Saskatchewan because they can’t get 

health care services here. They can’t get into hospitals and they 

have to go to Calgary or other places for elective surgery. 

 

And I think that’s appalling in a province that for the last 25 

years has seen health care as an important priority of its people. 

I think it’s appalling that in the 25th year of medicare when 

we’re celebrating the anniversary of medicare - at least the 

members on this side of the House are celebrating the 25th 

anniversary in medicare, and thousands and thousands of other 

people are - that we have a situation where people have to leave 

this province to get health care. And I think if the members 

opposite understood the people of this province and understood 

how important health care is to the people of this province, that 

they would make sure that they properly fund the health care 

system in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some other people. This caller 

has a son who has ear problems. The problem was noticed in 

October of 1985, and they couldn’t see a specialist until 

February of 1986. They then waited for a bed until August of 

1986 when he had surgery. During this period of time the child 

lost 20 pounds. He dropped from 50 pounds, Mr. Speaker, to 30 

pounds. Due to the long waiting list the child has a speech 

impediment and must see a therapist. He’s also developed a 

heart murmur. He is behind in physical development. He is 

doing poorly in school. He’s completely lost hearing on his 

right side. 

 

And this is interesting, Mr. Speaker. This caller says that in 

1982 her daughter had the same surgery and only had to wait 

two months from the time she saw her GP until surgery - 1982, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the year that we had been in government. 

That’s the year that people of Saskatchewan still had some 

semblance of health care because these people hadn’t had time 

to bring in their wrecking ball, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have another example. This caller’s daughter 

waited seven months to get into hospital for surgery on her ear. 

Now the child is deaf, due to a long waiting list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to talk about some of the staffing  

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1465 

 

problems and staff shortages that we see at hospitals and health 

care facilities around this province. And I want to talk about 

how the University Hospital, for instance, is dealing with the 

whole question of staffing. This is the phase one of their 

program, and this program apparently is designed to save as 

many dollars as we can, in order - and I quote - “to save jobs.” 

And this document is as of April 2, 1987, and what it says is the 

following: 

 

University Hospital has had to introduce these measures 

because of the funding shortfalls of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. All vacant staff positions are frozen 

immediately. All forms of relief for vacation, sick leave, 

maternity, will be severely restricted. Sick leave utilization 

will be carefully reviewed, and firm steps will be taken to 

promote responsible use of this benefit. Staff who have 

been off four or more times will be interviewed by their 

department head and employee health office. A more 

extensive health program with the appropriate counselling 

will be established, and a wellness incentive program will 

be announced. Student employment opportunities will be 

restricted to available government funds - and we all know 

that non-profit organizations did not get any student funds 

this summer because of the policies of the members 

opposite. 

 

Hospital orientation and CPR (cardiopulmonary 

resuscitation) training will be reduced or eliminated. 

Standing orders in diagnostic tests will be reviewed by the 

medical staff, and reductions will be made wherever 

possible. Opportunities to expand revenue will be 

explored. Reductions are to be made in all operating 

expenses, including the frugal use of all supplies. A 

decreased bed census for the period June 19 to September 

7 is to be organized, including controls in out-patient 

volumes. Such a plan will permit staff scheduling, with a 

view to having employees exercise the option of taking 

leaves of absence without pay. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there we have it. That’s how one hospital is 

responding to the critical nature of the underfunding of health 

care in this province, brought on by the policies of the members 

opposite, members opposite who aren’t committed to medicare 

in this province. 

 

I want to talk about the wellness incentive program. This is 

interesting. This is what we have taking place in our 

hospitals - one hospital - as a result of the funding of the 

government opposite. 

 

The wellness incentive program, or initiative, is a program 

which is aimed at rewarding employees who have perfect 

attendance during an individual month and/or for an entire year. 

The program is effective June 7, 1987 and will run under a trial 

basis until June 6, 1988. Five employees who have had perfect 

attendance for two consecutive pay periods beginning June 7, 

1987 will be randomly selected through the personnel 

computer, and each will receive awards of $100. 

 

Announcements of the awards recipients will be made at  

the 15th of the following month. There will be 14 draws made 

using the above criteria. In addition, a further draw will be 

made of five randomly selected employees who have had 

perfect attendance for 26 consecutive pay periods, or one year. 

Further information will be made available as the results of the 

programs are known. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support employees coming to work, doing a 

good day’s work, being paid. I don’t support employees coming 

to work in health care facilities when they may be sick. My 

concern with this particular measure is that we have an 

incentive program that may, and I say may, encourage 

employees to come to work when they’re ill. That’s the kind of 

procedures we’re having introduced in hospitals, one hospital, 

as a result of the underfunding of hospitals throughout the piece 

by the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I wanted to talk about some of the 

other staffing problems that have been identified by the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. And here’s what the staff 

shortages have meant for a number of patients around the 

province. 

 

Here’s an example. The caller’s sister-in-law passed away in 

July of 1987. The resident was ill . . . Pardon me, I’m reading 

the wrong one. Hospitals are not replacing staff enough. Nurses 

are having to do other jobs - example, housekeeping. These 

duties keep nurses away from nursing care. The caller asks that 

staff be allocated to coincide with patient needs, and my 

colleague from Saskatoon Centre certainly talked about that. 

 

Here we have another example. The caller’s husband had 

emergency surgery for an acute vascular problem. Before 

surgery, the husband was a strong, elderly man. 

Post-operatively, a lack of staff led to inadequate care. The 

patient had to sit up in a chair for hours. He received a scrape 

that didn’t heal. The caller said this was not the nurse’s fault. 

The caller said that she spent most of her day in hospital, Mr. 

Speaker. She fed her husband lunch and supper, looked after 

her husband, was called in by the head nurse to sit with her 

husband during blood transfusions, due to a shortage of staff. 

 

The special care unit had only one nurse for four critically ill 

patients. The caller has seen nurses running down corridors to 

do their work. The doctors prescribe many medications to keep 

this caller’s husband quiet. The caller feels her husband 

wouldn’t be alive today if she hadn’t been there to take care of 

him. The caller requested her husband be transferred from that 

hospital. He’s not in another hospital recuperating. He’s been 

taken off all of the medication and still has an unhealed wound 

from the fall. The caller states that more nursing staff is needed. 

 

Here’s another example. The caller stated in her experience as a 

critically ill patient that nurses become short tempered with 

their clients when they’re chronically short-staffed. And 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, when you’re run off your feet and 

people are asking you from all directions to help them, you 

don’t have enough support help with you, you don’t have 

enough professional colleagues with you, obviously you’re 

going to be short tempered. 

 

  



 

July 28, 1987 

1466 

 

And I and a number of other people in this province, do not 

blame health care workers if they become a little short tempered 

because of these staffing situations in this province, because of 

the understaffing of health care by the members opposite. 

 

Here’s another example. This caller stated that in January of 

1987 her mother was kept in emergency for 26 hours, then 

discharged. Her father was kept in a recovery room for a longer 

period because there was a shortage of staff. She encourages 

people to give information re problems with hospitals. And the 

list goes one and on. 

 

Here’s another one. The caller told the hot line that certified 

nursing assistants are being left alone on wards without R.N. 

supervision during Code 99’s. How appalling. That’s what 

hospitals and other health care facilities are having to resort to 

because of the underfunding of the members opposite. 

 

Here’s another example. This person’s son was admitted to a 

pediatrics unit in a city hospital, only two nurses on duty for the 

whole ward. There were several interrupts during the admission 

procedure and while the nurse was starting his IV. Nurses never 

had time to read information on the admission forms. Caller 

states that there should be more nurses on the evening shift so 

nurses have time to read the information and do their duties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously we have to have people in hospitals that 

have time to read the charts. If we don’t, patients’ health care is 

undermined, and patients’ health is put in jeopardy. We don’t 

want that sort of underfunding in Saskatchewan hospitals where 

it could possibly lead to a situation where someone’s life is in 

jeopardy and threatened. That’s not the kind of health care 

people in this province want. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s another one. This caller knows a nurse who 

worked on pediatrics and two nurses had to look after 45 sick 

children on a regular basis. In one case she was carrying a child 

who was vomiting while tending to another patient. A young 

boy had to hook himself to a machine because the nurse 

couldn’t get to him. The nurse quit nursing because it was too 

stressful. Caller feels this is an unsafe situation. Nurses are 

overworked and more staff should be provided. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve spoken to numerous 

nurses. Some of them have left the profession because they 

cannot, they cannot put up with the stress of the situation; they 

can’t put up with the stress of being constantly overworked; 

they can’t put up with the stress of constantly being 

understaffed; they can’t put up with the stress of being sick and 

feeling as though they have to go to work. Because if they 

don’t, it may lead to ill feelings with their colleagues because it 

only means their colleagues have to do so much more work 

because sick nurses aren’t being replaced. And I tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, the situation is critical and it’s time the members 

opposite realize what was happening in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another situation. This caller is concerned 

about the cut-backs in the hospitals because she is booked for 

surgery. She called the office of the Minister of Health; she 

expressed concern in regard to  

these cut-backs in the hospital. She was told to discuss these 

concerns with her doctors and the nurses in the hospital. Well 

isn’t that something! 

 

The Minister of Health and his staff who are responsible for the 

overall health care system in this province, the overall health 

care policy in this province, is contacted and advised that we 

have a patient here who can’t get into hospital. And what does 

the minister’s staff say? - call your doctor, call your nurse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on at great lengths about this issue, as 

an important issue, as an issue that we will be raising on a 

number occasions in the months ahead. I would encourage the 

members opposite to support this critical and very urgent 

motion that we put forward. It’s important to the overall health 

of this province. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I have been waiting anxiously to get 

into this debate and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 


