


















































November 3, 1987 Hansard Afternoon


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 November 3, 1987 
 

3865 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — It is my privilege then, and with a great deal 
of pleasure that I introduce to members of this House the new 
rector of St. Mary’s Anglican church in Regina, Father Derek 
Nicholls. Father Nicholls is seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
Originally from Cardiff, Wales, he came to Canada as an 
exchange teacher in 1961. He was ordained at All Saint’s 
Anglican church, Edmonton, in 1963 and was priested in England 
in 1966. Father Nicholls most recently served in Westlock, 
Alberta. 
 
I ask all hon. member to join me in giving a warm welcome to 
Father Derek Nicholls to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Employment of former MLA by Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation 

 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I had intended to direct my 
question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. I’ve been having some difficulty 
finding out who’s running the corporation over there and who the 
employees are, and I don’t know who to direct this question to. 
Perhaps there’s someone on the government side that could 
respond on behalf of the property management corporation. 
 
I want to find out, Mr. Speaker, if the minister, or whoever is 
responding for the corporation, can confirm that one Louis 
Domotor, who you would know as a defeated former colleague of 
yours on that side of the House, is now employed by the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of the 
question. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Now we’re finding out who’s in charge of 
the property management corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question to the Deputy Premier who’s taking 
notice of the question. I want the minister to also confirm that Mr. 
Domotor has been hired as something called a classification . . . or 
compensation classification officer. Now the minister, up to this 
point, has refused to give me the names of the positions in the 
corporation, so I’m not sure whether he’s a compensation 
classification officer or some other position, and I want to know if 
that is, in fact, his title. 
 
And I also want to know, Mr. Minister, can you tell the House 
what are the qualifications that are required for this particular job, 
and does Mr. Domotor possess those qualifications, and what will 
be his rate of pay, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — During the . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note the 
government’s response to these questions about a patronage 
appointment. 
 
During the estimates, Mr. Minister, of the property management 
corporation before this House, I asked for a list of officials of this 
Crown corporation. You said that no permanent . . . The minister 
said that no permanent job designations had been made. 
 
Can you tell me now — and this was on page 3595 of Hansard — 
can the minister now tell me if such designations have been made, 
and will that minister supply us with a list of the positions and the 
persons in them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we see here is an 
incomplete answer to a question by the government. And it shows, 
I think, Mr. Speaker, quite clearly that the old double standard is in 
position and working well for this government. 
 
And I say to the Deputy Premier that you can tell the farm families 
of Saskatchewan, you can tell the working families of 
Saskatchewan that you have to hike taxes and cut services, but 
your Tory friends, there’ll always be one position more for them at 
the trough. 
 
And I want to know how you justify to the people of 
Saskatchewan why they should continually put up with this double 
standard, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry I wasn’t paying 
more particular attention to precisely what the question was, but I 
think what he was asking . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Allow the 
minister to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think what he was asking, Mr. Speaker, 
is: what is this government doing for working people in 
Saskatchewan? And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to go through a 
litany of . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 

Lay-off Notices to Sask Forest Product Corporation 
Employees 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was 
to be to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Forest 
Products corporation. Perhaps my questions directed to the Deputy 
Premier will indicate exactly what you’re doing for the working 
people. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday employees of the Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation head office got their lay-off notices. The 
notices were given under article 15.01 of their agreement which 
calls for six months notice of discharge or permanent lay-off in the 
event of “substantial  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3866 
 

changes in working methods or facilities.” 
 
The lay-off notice says, and I quote, Mr. Deputy Premier: 
 

The Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation head office 
staff will be substantially affected by the pending sale of our 
Prince Albert treating plant, the Hudson Bay plywood plant, 
and the Carrot River saw mill. 

 
Mr. Minister, can you tell this Assembly how many employees are 
facing permanent lay-off? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I know quite a bit about 
Sask Power, and I know quite a bit about Agdevco, and I know 
quite a bit about the Provincial Secretary, and I know quite a bit 
about House leading, as does the member for Quill Lakes, but I 
don’t know everything there is to know about Sask Forest 
Products, and I don’t know everything there is to know about the 
property management Crown because I don’t happen to have 
responsibility for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Health is telling the wonderful story of this 
government’s health care programs to the TV audience of 
Saskatchewan at this very moment, and the minute that the 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation gets back, I’ll have him come over and deal with 
those questions with you specifically. 
 
And as it relates to your question relative to the number of people 
who received their notices, if in fact they did, at the Sask Forest 
Products plant in Prince Albert, I will take notice of the question 
and provide the member with that information. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question directed to the Premier. The 
Deputy Premier can’t answer any questions today, so I’ll ask the 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, since you’re now advising, and your government is 
now advising the head office employees at SFPC (Saskatchewan 
Forest Products Corporation) they’re no longer required, and as 
you’ve sold off the corporation, can you now fill the people in as 
to a few details that your minister can’t answer? Can you table the 
agreement for sale? And can you tell us who bought the assets and 
for how much? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, as the Deputy Premier just 
mentioned, he took notice of the question and would provide 
details. And I would just reiterate what the Deputy Premier said: in 
specific details, give us the opportunity to go get that information, 
and we’ll provide it to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. perhaps the 
Premier could table that document. It seems the longer they sit 
here, the less they seem to know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Backlog at Land Titles Offices 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — My question was for the Minister of Justice, 
who’s not here, and I would ask the Deputy Premier not to answer 
this question, but it can be answered by any other member of the 
cabinet. It has to do with the Land Titles offices. In Saskatoon, the 
Land Titles Office is three weeks behind in processing documents, 
and I understand that in Regina it’s about the same amount of days 
behind. This is causing great problems in the processing of real 
estate transactions — people getting title, people getting their 
money, people getting possession dates, and the like. I would ask 
the minister: are you aware of this situation, and what plans does 
the government have to remedy it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — My understanding, Mr. Speaker, is that in 
Saskatoon there was a three-week average delay. The bulk of the 
problem comes about because of a strong take-up under the early 
retirement program, and the Department of Justices are moving to 
fill the position. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: —A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In the estimates 
of the department, there was quite a cut in the number of positions 
in the Land Titles Office, and some of these positions that you 
speak about have been vacant for some period of time. Can we 
have the minister’s assurance that both of these offices will be 
adequately staffed so that the turnaround time for real estate 
transactions can be brought up to a matter of days rather than a 
matter of weeks? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That will certainly be the objective. 
 

Changes to Student Loan and Bursary Program 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Education, and it 
concerns Saskatchewan student loan and student bursary program. 
I want to ask the minister how he can justify to young people in 
this province studying post-secondary education, that his 
government, as a result of the changes in the bursary program, has 
in fact cancelled 2,800 student bursaries this year; has taken 2,800 
students off the bursary rolls that received bursaries last year in 
this province as a result of the changes he’s made to the program. 
 
Can he justify that to those young people, and to thousands of 
others in this province who, while they haven’t necessarily lost 
their bursaries, are getting greatly reduced bursaries as a result of 
his changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve been 
around the Horn on this issue three or four or five times over the 
last three or four months. Our approach on student assistance, Mr. 
Speaker, is to make more assistance available to more young 
people, and the record clearly shows that. I think funding over the 
last five years or so has tripled, or even more than that — the 
numbers of students is tripled. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3867 
 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, if one looks at the numbers, we’ve 
gone from providing about 6,000 students in this province with 
some form of student assistance to now providing something in 
the order of 17,000. And we’ve gone farther than that, Mr. 
Speaker. Given the increasing numbers, and obviously not infinite 
resources, we have as well targeted particularly the assistance to 
those students with special needs, if you like — the disabled, 
single parents, the native population. 
 
I have nothing to apologize for in our student aid assistance. I 
think in some ways we’re the envy of other provinces across this 
country and are continuing to lead the way, and such will continue 
to be the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you’ve cut the number of students who receive bursaries in this 
province form 7,000 last year to 4,200 this year. 
 
But I want to ask you specifically a question with respect to native 
people and the assistance they get from your government. Are you 
aware that applicants for a student loan in this province are asked 
if they are native, if they have applied for status? And if they’ve 
applied for status, Mr. Minister, are you aware that they are 
refused provincial aid because they are deemed to be a federal 
responsibility? Are you aware of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I recognize that they indeed are a 
federal responsibility. I also recognize that there are some cases 
that fall through the cracks because of the fact that they don’t meet 
provincial criteria at one given moment and they may not be 
declared “status” by the federal government. 
 
Recognizing that isn’t good enough. We want to assist those 
people, and because of that, this very week I’ve been in 
consultation with my officials who have assured me that they’re in 
discussion with the federal government to make sure we don’t 
have young people, natives or others, who might fall through the 
system because of jurisdictional responsibilities. They’re 
interested in results, not jurisdictional haggling, and that’s what 
we’re trying to provide for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister is 
obviously aware of the fact that if a young woman or some other 
native person applies for status, that at the present time they don’t 
get student aid from the province merely because of the fact that 
they’ve made the application for status, even if that application is 
not granted. 
 
Will you give your assurance, Mr. Minister, is this House today 
that any person who applies for status is not automatically denied 
provincial student aid as a result of making that application; that 
they will only become a federal responsibility if that status is 
granted? Will you give native people of this province your 
commitment on that matter? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Well as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
interested in making sure these people have the opportunity to 
enter post-second institutions. I’m aware of the situation. In fact, 
my officials have been working on that now for some time. 
 
Obviously I do not want to put the province or the public purse of 
Saskatchewan in a position where we’re pricking up a vacuum left 
by the federal government in an area that’s clearly the federal 
government’s. I don’t think that would be judicious use nor 
responsible use of our taxpayers’ dollars. I don’t want to see those 
students left out, if you like. But at the same time, I’m not about to 
let the federal government create vacuums where we’re expected 
to step in, because that too would not be right nor proper, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Very briefly, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 
Education. Mr. Minister, what I’m asking you to give this House a 
guarantee on, is that your government will stop discriminating 
against native people in this province who apply for status but are 
not granted status, but merely on the basis of their application are 
turned down automatically for provincial student aid. You have 
cancelled Saskatchewan student loans for young women who’ve 
made application for status, even though that application hasn’t 
been accepted. And I’m asking you now: will you give us your 
assurance that you will end that discriminatory practice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is 
clearly off base when he uses such rhetoric. The reality is our 
government’s track record, if you like, as far as us being able to 
help; and what this government can do to help native population 
is, in fact, we’ve put special programs in place because we 
recognize they do have some special needs. 
 
And one that I could point to that we very recently signed was the 
agreement on the institute side, Mr. Speaker, that we signed with 
Gabriel Dumont Institute. A first, as far as we know, in North 
American, where not only will native community have joint 
management but also joint ownership of a post-secondary 
institution at the institute level. They will have a representative on 
the board of governors, and they will have a vice-president at that 
institute, a vice-president of the native services division. 
 
Our track record is second to none in this area, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re proud of it, and we’re going to continue to do more. At the 
same time, we have negotiations under way to make sure that any 
glitches that exist get cleared up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Development of Core Curriculum 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3868 
 

Minister of Education and it has to do with the development of the 
core curriculum in our education schools. 
 
As you might recall, the previous minister set out with great 
fanfare to expound on the curriculum development that was going 
to take place. Now we see a great big stall. The six common 
essential learnings which the minister has in his department has 
not been fanned out to the public. The flow to the public has been 
stopped. 
 
And I want to know from the minister when he will issue the six 
common essential learnings to all the educators in the province so 
they can continue to participate in the development of the core 
curriculum. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well relative to the core curriculum, Mr. 
Speaker, this past March, four or five months ago, after what — 
four or five years I think — of consultation and dialogue across 
this province; I think, 800 meetings, 14,000 written responses 
back in so far as what that curriculum should look like as we 
define goals, as we move towards the 21st century; the first 
curriculum review in 20 or 25 years, I think; something like that. 
 
In March of this year we defined what that new core should look 
like, what that minimum expectation that we should have for our 
young people as they find their place in this new global village, if 
you like. That was an important first step. 
 
The next step was to define and to develop — define the common 
essential learnings, and to write and to develop curriculum and 
then to implement that curriculum. You just can’t drop a 
brand-new curriculum on teachers overnight, Mr. Speaker. The 
whole notion of in-service and professional development have to 
go hand in hand. 
 
The process is an ongoing one. In some areas we are farther along 
than in others. I think there’s something in excess of 50 teachers 
seconded to help write and develop curriculum, Mr. Speaker. And 
the perception that there is somehow a stall would be exactly that, 
a perception in the hon. members’ minds. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the minister missed the point 
altogether. There was no . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The public, the universities, the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), the trustees, and the 
educators have all been involved over the past five years looking 
at the information that was available and then giving feedback. 
And here you are not providing information. You are withholding 
information from the public of Saskatchewan. I want to know 
when it’s going to be tabled, when you’re going to issue that 
information, and if you’re holding it up, why are you holding it 
up? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says we 
are withholding information. He is clearly in error on this one. As 
I understand it, the arrangement that has worked and worked well 
in the field of education is the tripartite relationship, if you like, 
between the department, the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. That 
relationship worked well in putting together and defining the core 
curriculum, and that is the approach we are using as we work 
towards defining the common essential learnings and, as well, in 
making sure that the curriculum, as it’s developed, meets the needs 
of our young people as we move towards the 21st century. 
 
There is nothing to withhold because in fact, Mr. Speaker, we are 
working it up in conjunction with all those interested parties, and 
that is the course we will continue to stay on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Hudson Bay Plywood Plant 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the 
Premier. Earlier in this question period it has been indicated that 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation has given notice to its 
head office employees pursuant to, as the notice said, the sale of 
the plywood plant at Hudson Bay. Mr. Premier, that plywood 
plant at Hudson Bay is worth several millions of dollars, at 
minimum. I wonder if you would advise the House whether either 
you or the Minister of Finance know who the purchase of that 
plant is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it there is a 
six-month notice requirement with respect to any transactions on 
into the future that is provided. And if there are sales, and if there 
are . . . or any transactions, then that information will be made at 
the appropriate time. And I’m not prepared to make any 
announcements today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, notice has been given, six months notice that a sale has 
been consummated. Mr. Premier, are you declining to tell the 
House to whom you have sold the plywood mill at Hudson Bay? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the notice doesn’t mean that at 
all, doesn’t mean that at all. And if it did mean a number of things, 
then we will explore a number of things. They may have some 
possibilities of this, that, or whatever. But it doesn’t mean that it is 
a sale, and I am not prepared to announce what it is today. And I 
will make the appropriate announcements in the future when, in 
fact, the information is appropriate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, the notice from the corporation referred to the pending 
sale of the Prince Albert treating plant, the  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3869 
 

Hudson Bay plywood plant, the Carrot River saw mill. Very 
clearly the sale isn’t pending unless you’ve struck a deal. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, will you tell the House to whom the asset, the 
substantial asset of the Hudson Bay plywood plant has been sold? 
do you know? and if you do, will you tell the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can say to the hon. member that we’ve had 
several offers, and when I am prepared to announce which offer 
that we have received and in what detail, then I will make that 
information public. That’s exactly the position we’re in today. 
 

Accrual Accounting for Farmers 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Agriculture, the Premier. Mr. Minister, you will know 
that the Wilson tax reform package came out with a 
recommendation to have accrual accounting for farmers. That 
means that they will have to count their grain in stock in their bins 
as income. 
 
What representation have you made, Mr. Minister, to the federal 
government to oppose this oppressive reform? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we have indicated to the 
Government of Canada . . . Of course, that proposal is part of the 
federal tax reform package. We have indicated to the national 
government our opposition to the changes, and depending how 
circumstances go this week, I will be further meeting with the 
federal Minister of Finance to further carry the message that we 
want changes. 
 
We have been in consultation as well with other provinces, 
particularly Alberta, who has taken the same position as the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you will know that 
this accounting system — I hope you have related this — will 
remove this ability of income for farmers. It will remove the 
five-year averaging provision. 
 
And I would ask you . . . I would say to you that you haven’t stood 
up clearly and loudly enough for the farmers of this province, and 
I also ask you: will you table your correspondence with the federal 
government to this House after question period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a little difficult in this game 
of politics to take from the NDP about anyone standing up for the 
farmers, and nobody abandoned the farmers more than the New 
Democratic Party did in the late 1970s and 1980s, and who took 
the opportunity when low prices were there in the 1970s to buy up 
the farmers’ land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have indicated to the federal government our deep  

concern and objection to the proposals with accrual accounting for 
farmers. Secondly, as recently as two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, the 
federal associate deputy minister of Finance, I believe was his 
title, was in the province of Saskatchewan meeting with my 
officials on the very issue, and our objections were expressed 
again in person, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Presentation to Members of the Legislature 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I 
would like to make a small presentation to members of the House. 
I had planned to do this, Mr. Speaker, during Provincial Secretary 
estimates, but I would like to do it now. 
 
As you will recall about two weeks ago or three weeks ago, 
Saskatchewan was honoured with the visit of her Majesty, the 
Queen, and His Royal Highness, the Duke of Edinburgh. And the 
occasion of that visit was to commemorate the 75th anniversary of 
this building. 
 
Now for all members of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to present, to commemorate that occasion, the occasion of the visit 
of Her Majesty and the 75th anniversary of this building, I’d like 
to present all members with a print, Mr. Speaker, of this painting, 
which is a painting of the legislative building from a perspective of 
across the lake. 
 
Now the reason that I was asked to do this today, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we happen to have the artist in the gallery. We weren’t quite 
sure when we would get Provincial Secretary estimates on, and 
he’s a busy man running his medical practice here in town. So if 
the House would bear with me, I’d like to introduce the artist, and 
I’ll read his biography, because it’s well done. 
 
And it would seem that painting as the principal art form is as 
natural to this country as is the Premier’s sport of skating. Why 
this should be so may be understood by a close scrutiny of the 
particular environment it offers its inhabitants. 
 
There have been, and are, a number of great Canadian artists who 
have interpreted the land and the people in individual terms of 
form and colour on canvas. It is comparatively rare, however, that 
someone born and raised in another part of the world should 
develop such an awareness of aspects relating to life in the 
provinces and record the same in such sharp reality as many of his 
prairie landscapes. 
 
William G. Hobbs was born in Alderney in the Channel Islands 
and came to settle in Canada in 1959. Notwithstanding the 
considerable demands in time alone imposed upon him by his role 
of physician and surgeon in a rural community, he managed to 
develop a technical skill in painting which won him first prize in a 
major Canadian art show in 1978. 
 
He took the first place at the Fifth Texas International Art Show in 
1976 and second place at the seventh in 1978. He has been 
honoured with a number of one-man shows,  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3870 
 

as well as having his work selected for showing at the 
International Grand Prix of contemporary Art in Monte Carlo. His 
work was on exhibit at the winter garden pavilion in December, 
1978, under the high patronage of Their Serene Highnesses, the 
Sovereign Prince and Princess of Monaco. 
 
Much of Hobbs’ work reflects the influence his immigration had 
on him, as is portrayed in a series consisting of six major works on 
that subject. 
 
Hobbs studied painting for four years in England, and finally 
switched from the West of England Academy of Art to the 
medical school at Bristol University. He has also attended courses 
at the Pan American University, Banff School of Fine Arts, and 
the Emma Lake Campus at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
His work is in many North American and European collections 
and also in those of Mitsubishi Ltd., Marubeni Ltd. and Tohoku 
Electric Power of Japan, and other collections internationally, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have provided the Leader of the Opposition with one print and 
the Speaker with one print for your perusal, and because they are 
of some size and perhaps a little awkward to deal with in there, all 
other members will have them delivered to their office. And I 
would like to ask Dr. Hobbs to rise and be recognized, and I would 
ask all members to join me with a nice welcome for Dr. Hobbs. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would to add my words to 
those of the Deputy Premier in commendation to Dr. Hobbs for 
the outstanding painting of the Legislative Building which is to be 
presented, and the print thereof, a copy of which I have here. 
 
I think just one look at it indicates that Dr. Hobbs has exceptional 
technical competence in the drawing aspect of painting and prints, 
and has real feeling with respect to the composition in the painting 
aspects. 
 
You ask, Mr. Deputy Premier, why Saskatchewan seems to attract 
painters. I have . . . my son’s wife’s mother is a professional 
painter who exhibits her painting not only in eastern Canada but in 
the eastern United States, and I asked her why this was so — she 
once lived in Saskatchewan for a brief time; she’s an Austrian 
woman who came here — and she said it’s the light. Now I don’t 
understand what that means, but I gather that the nature of the 
light, the sunlight in Saskatchewan, is stimulating to many, many 
artists. And I think that . . . I don’t know what stimulated Dr. 
Hobbs, but it was obviously very successful in allowing him to 
produce works of this calibre. 
 
I close, Mr. Speaker, by noting that the print I have is number 249 
of 250, and I say, “How soon they forget!” 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Speaker: I understand the member for Regina Lakeview has 
a little business you’d like to bring to the attention of the House. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Non-Controversial Bills Committee 
 

Bill No. 81; Bill No. 95; Bill No. 96 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to file the third 
report of the Non-Controversial Bills Committee, and it is briefly 
this: that we report Bill No. 81, An Act respecting the 
Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation Act, as 
controversial; Bill No. 95, An Act to provide for the Registration 
and Regulation of Persons Engaged in the Real Estate Trade, as 
controversial; and Bill No. 96, An Act to amend The Provincial 
Court Act, as controversial. 
 
And I’m wondering if I could have leave of the House to file that 
report, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Second reading next sitting. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated beside me 
is Peter van Es, the deputy minister of Environment and Public 
Safety; and behind him, Larry Lechner, director of the lands 
pollution and air pollution divisions of the Department of 
Environment. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
words that I would like to say regarding this Act. As the chairman 
knows, our caucus and party supported this Act in principle on the 
second reading of the Bill, and we did that for some very specific 
reasons. We wanted to make it clear to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and clear to the retailers of Saskatchewan, clear to 
the consumers of Saskatchewan that we are not in principle 
opposed to their demands for the sale of beverages, whether it’s 
soft drinks and, I suspect very soon, beer in cans. 
 
Having said that though, and our caucus having demonstrated in 
practice that that’s our position, we have some very serious 
concerns that we believe that the Minister of the Environment has 
not addressed in this Bill, very serious concerns as to questions he 
himself has raised in discussing the intent of this Bill. For while it 
talks about a Bill which basically is a Litter Control Act, in 
essence, according to the minister’s public statements, this is a Bill 
which would change the consuming patterns of Saskatchewan 
people in terms of how they’re served beverages, which may not 
appear as a big matter. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3871 
 

It may not appear as a tremendous issue out there, except to the 
extent that we’re talking the loss of literally hundreds of jobs in 
this province. This Bill represents a turning back, and the potential 
turning back of the clock when it comes to questions of the 
environment, questions of littering, questions of the defacing of 
the landscape. 
 
And we had here an example today of a noted painter who talked 
about Saskatchewan, who talked about the light that we all see that 
bathes this province in the kind of landscapes that we all have 
come to enjoy. Our concern is that we don’t want to see the face of 
that landscape defaced, and we feel that in this Bill there is the 
potential for the defacing of that landscape. And the minister’s 
own statements, the minister’s own public statements have done 
nothing to alleviate those fears. 
 
The minister’s own statements, saying that this Bill, far from being 
just a litter control Bill is really a method to introduce into the 
province cans and other, cans and other non-refillable containers, 
raises the concerns over for those environmental issues as they’re 
raised. 
 
I know that the members of my caucus, the members of the caucus 
here, the party I represent, have a great many issues that they want 
to raise with the minister in these regards, in regards to the loss 
and potential loss of jobs, and into the loss and potential loss of the 
environment as we’ve come to know it. And is so far as those 
comments, I will cease at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in a Bill that’s just 
amending a piece of legislation, it’s hard to deal with all the issues 
that the member speaks of, but I want to assure the hon. member 
that we haven’t moved forward with this Bill without having 
considerable amount of discussion and meetings with the people 
that this Bill will affect. 
 
You indicate the loss of jobs as a major issue, and it is a major 
issue and a concern that the government has had, and that the 
department has had over a long period of time. The member also 
realizes that in the past year the number of cans of soft drink that 
have appeared in our stores has been considerable — considerable 
numbers. As those cans have come into the province, they’ve 
displaced the market share that many of our producers of soft 
drinks have had here in the province. So the jobs, in a sense, have 
been in jeopardy, and in some cases are lost even before today. 
 
On the other side, the soft drink bottlers themselves have moved 
away from actually bottling, in some circumstances, and have 
been trucking bottles form Alberta and from Manitoba into our 
own province. So they have made a conscious decision that their 
bottling operation was not able to stand alone, and therefore they 
have gone to the business of trucking soft drink in. 
 
I think by the time that we’re finished with the regulations and put 
in place the process of collecting the cans for recycling, you will 
indeed find that we may not have job losses. We might have jobs 
that are different, but we may indeed have more jobs than we have 
today. So that area, I  

think, has been adequately addressed and will continue to be 
addressed, and when we’re finished, I believe that likely the job 
issue that you raise will not be a serious one — rather, the jobs 
will still be there. 
 
(1445) 
 
The pollution control side is also being addressed and addressed 
very seriously. We have met with people in the recycling business 
form the United States, from eastern Canada, from Manitoba, from 
across the nation, really. We’re bringing together the expertise of 
the most qualified people in that area to give Saskatchewan the 
opportunity to go out and lead the pack as far as Canada and the 
United States are concerned, by bringing together the technology 
that’s available today. We expect, when the regulations are in their 
final form, that indeed Saskatchewan will be well served, and we 
intend to protect the environment from having cans left out there 
for a long period of time. 
 
As you realize, cans are perhaps one of the easiest methods of 
recycling. They have a value in themselves of about 3 cents a can, 
which is enough to begin to generate the recycling cost and to 
encourage people to bring them back for recycling. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would care to 
elaborate on those two aspects. On the one hand you say that you 
have plans or regulations that you intend to put into practice in the 
province that deals with job loss, and on the other hand those same 
regulations intend to deal with the recycling of cans. 
 
Would you outline exactly for the people of this province: (a) how 
you’re going to save the jobs, and (b) how the can and the 
recycling of those cans is going to work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the regulations aren’t complete, as I 
indicated to the member. The Bill is the first stage; the regulations 
are the second stage. We are working very closely with both the 
brewers association and the soft drinks association from 
Saskatchewan in the developing of the regulations and the 
recycling process. It’s a slow process, but I think one that warrants 
the time that we’re using. Now the House will not be in session 
probably in another week or two or three, and we’ll have more 
time to work on some of these things. It’s been difficult with the 
House is session all summer. 
 
But we have been working, and we have special consultants 
working at this time in the development process to put in place the 
recycling for the cans. So I can’t give the member all the detail 
that he might like today. But I can assure the member that we are 
taking great pains to put in place a proper recycling method, and I 
believe that what will come out of this process will be one that he 
will indeed be pleased with. 
 
As you move into recycling, you generate other jobs. That’s what 
I’m indicating to the member, that likely you may lose a few jobs 
on the bottle line; they could transfer over to a can line if anybody 
goes ahead and establishes a can line, or they could move into the 
recycling side, and those options will be made available to the 
people. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3872 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, on the job side for a minute, and on 
consultation. You’ve met with . . . I know you’ve met with the 
brewery workers and with the soft drink workers and with the 
owners of the . . . or the managers of the breweries here in the 
province. 
 
And I’m wondering: do you have any idea, first of all, of whether 
or not the brewers plan to set up a can line in the province? And 
secondly, what impact did the brewers tell you would happen 
vis-a-vis jobs in the province in . . . We’ll deal with the brewing 
industry first. In the brewing industry, how many jobs did they tell 
you that were going to be lost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I have met with the union that represented the 
brewery workers. I didn’t meet with the union that necessarily 
represented the soft drink workers. There are so many of the small 
companies that I’m not sure which union you might turn to in their 
circumstance. They’re not as well organized as the brewers. 
 
In the meeting that we had with them, they registered their concern 
about the possible loss of some jobs. But you know, it’s all on 
assumption at this point that there will be a loss of jobs. It depends 
on the market-share that cans take. It depends on whether or not 
the brewers and the bottlers decide to put can lines in 
Saskatchewan. And there are indications that they’re looking very 
seriously of that aspect of it, and there’s a good possibility they 
may indeed put their lines here. 
 
If they do that, it’s a possibility that we may see even more jobs 
than what we have at this point. So I can’t tell you how many jobs 
we may or may not have; that’s something that a lot depends on 
the businesses involved. So I don’t know what more I could tell 
the hon. member on that side. I think I’ll just have to leave it there. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’ve met also with the unions 
that represent both the brewery workers and the soft drink 
workers, and basically the soft drink industry isn’t as fragmented 
in this province as you make it out to be. We have one owner, 
basically, for all the Coke franchises in the province. 
 
But be that as it may, isn’t it true that at a minimum — at a 
minimum — both the brewery workers and the brewery managers 
in this province told you that as a minimum we’re going to lose 30 
per cent of those employed in the brewing industry — 30 per cent 
of those employed in the brewing industry, which does not even 
take into account those jobs which will be lost, for example, at the 
Saskatchewan bottlers association return plants. And there’s 60 
temporary workers there in the summer who probably will lose 
their jobs, and up to 30 regular full-time workers who probably 
will lose their jobs. 
 
Because that’s what they told me, Mr. Minister, and that’s what 
they told me they said they told you. And when they said they told 
you, that your response to them was go get a job in the ethanol 
plant — go get a job in the ethanol plant — that you yourself 
recognize that in fact there was going to be job loss, as you did 
today; there’s job loss on the bottling lines. Also there is job loss 
and permanent job loss in this province because you know very 
well that the brewers are not going to establish can lines in  

Saskatchewan because you were told that Carling O’Keefe, for 
example, which had, sitting in storage, a can line in Saskatoon, 
moved it out to Winnipeg and is able to serve their entire western 
market by the operation of that can line one day a week. 
 
And you know very well that you were told that the breweries 
were going to try to, what they call, rationalize or centralize their 
production, and that that rationalization and centralization, with 
the possible exception of Molsons, would take place outside the 
province — that Labatts would set up their operation in the 
Calgarys, that Carlings would be in the Winnipegs, and maybe 
Molsons would stay in Regina. But that depended on a number of 
factors, none of which seems to be within the realm of possibility 
of you looking at it terms of trying to control those. 
 
Have you, Mr. Minister, as a government, developed a plan to 
encourage a brewers or force brewers or force soft drink 
manufacturers — if in fact they’re going to sell cans in this 
province — have you developed some kind of plan, or have you 
developed some kind of legislation which will force the brewers 
and the bottlers to produce those cans and to save those jobs and to 
keep them here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member raises an issue that I think is a 
little blown out of proportion when you speak of all of the people, 
the 60 people in the bottle refund situation losing their jobs, and 
you speak as though the whole brewery was going to shut down 
and all of the people in the brewery were going to lose their jobs. 
And that’s not the case. 
 
Even if you go to cans, as many cans as the market will demand, 
they tell me that in Alberta and in Manitoba it runs 20 per cent, 
approximately, in the winter-time, and 25, 26 per cent in the 
summer-time. I would anticipate Saskatchewan might be higher 
than that because of the novelty factor in the very early stages, but 
would likely level back to what is more the norm across the 
country. 
 
When I spoke to the people from the brewers’ union and he 
suggested to me that if 20 per cent of the product went into cans, if 
it happened to come from another province, he said we wouldn’t 
need as many brewers as we have now. And I suggested to him 
that likely one of those people could get a job with an ethanol 
plant because it’s the same type of operation — they actually 
operate a brew operation, and they need a brewer. And that’s a 
very realistic approach. I didn’t got to him with the idea that all of 
the people would go to the ethanol industry. It’s not that large. 
 
There may be some changes in jobs but, as you realize, many of 
the jobs when you stand along a bottling line are not specialized 
jobs; they’re jobs that most people could walk in and do with very 
minimal training. So to change the opportunities for those people 
to work in a different area may not be that difficult, and our 
technical institutes and other educational facilities certainly are in 
place to do that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, not to overly belabour this 
point, not to belabour it, but probably to bring it to  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3873 
 

your attention, because when you lose jobs, as you will, and as 
you were told, and it’s not a maybe, not a maybe unless you 
guarantee that those can lines are set up in this province, it won’t 
be a maybe unless you guarantee that. There will not be a maybe. 
 
But there are spin-off effects. Now your government has time after 
time after time talked about how they want to diversify the 
Saskatchewan economy. And brewing and bottling, given its 
geographically central location vis-a-vis the major market areas to 
the west of us and to the east of us and also to the south of us, 
could be a possible source of diversification. But if you shut that 
down, if you shut down this industry which is not necessarily 
hooked to the agricultural industry but, in fact, is a diversified 
industry, you, in fact, are defeating your own purposes in your 
rhetoric. 
 
Let’s take this for example: we have the MacMillan-Bathurst plant 
in Regina which employs X amount of people. Part of the product 
that they make here goes into the cartons, to form the cartons in 
which the beer bottles are shipped out. 
 
You have in Biggar, a malt plant, the major malting plant — one 
of three in the country. If, in fact, you contribute to shutting down 
the brewery operations in this province — now don’t say it hasn’t 
happened because we’ve seen the shutting down of a number of 
breweries in this province, including the Molson’s brewery in 
Prince Albert and the Carling brewery here in Regina, and other 
breweries — if, in fact, you contribute to the shutting down of 
those breweries, what of the people who work at the Biggar malt? 
And how is that going to impact back on the firm to the farmers 
who grow malting-grade barley? That has, as you, I’m sure, 
understand, Mr. Minister, that spin-off effect. You know, and it 
doesn’t have to happen at the whims of the international 
market-place. It doesn’t have to be that way. 
 
You can take steps as a government to ensure that those jobs 
remain here in Saskatchewan. You can take steps as a government 
to ensure that the can lines are set up. You can take steps as a 
government to ensure that the soft drink manufacturers 
manufacture their product here and can that product here. You can 
take those steps if you have the political will to do so, and if there, 
in fact, is political will behind your rhetoric of diversification of 
the economy. I want to know, sir, what steps you as a government 
are going to take to ensure that can lines are set up in the province 
and that jobs are kept here in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t know whether the hon. member lives 
in a vacuum somewhere in our society. If you look around you, 
the demand of the general public is that we have canned soft drink 
and canned beer. And it’s a very keen demand by the people. If we 
don’t move to fill that need, then other provinces are indeed filling 
it now. So we’re going to open up the borders of Saskatchewan. If 
we put in can lines here and they can gather market in Manitoba or 
Alberta, so much the more power to them. Let them ship there. 
 

But as far as we as a government are concerned, we have no 
intention of coming into a position of forcing anybody into 
establishing a can line. They have to do that in the market context. 
If we force them into a can line and they go bankrupt. I don’t want 
that on our government’s record. 
 
If they decide that in their wisdom, and as their business 
management dictates, that they should put in a can line, and they 
do and go forward and it’s a successful business, it’s to the credit 
of that company. That’s the way that we intend to work with it, not 
in the method of forcing people to do things. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
have no quarrel or no argument with the fact that the people of this 
province are very favourable towards canned drinks in this 
province. I think we’re all clear on that. As well, I don’t think 
there’s any doubt that the retailers would welcome canned soft 
drinks in their operations. 
 
But I want to share with you, Mr. Minister, as well, that the 
retailers are afraid of more job losses in this province than we’ve 
already experienced. And I don’t think, Mr. Minister, in your 
response to the questions from the member from Regina 
Rosemont, that you have addressed those issues. From my 
understanding, when he asked you if you had done anything in 
terms of job opportunity creation in terms of recycling in this 
province, I don’t believe we had a favourable answer. 
 
I would like to know if you would address that issue and if you 
would ensure the people of Prince Albert, and Regina, and other 
areas of this province, and of Saskatoon, that the people who will 
be put out of work because of this will be able to find an alternate 
source of employment. And I ask, specifically, if you’ve done that 
in terms of recycling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I couldn’t begin to give you the number of 
jobs that recycling will entail. I can tell you that we do intend to 
put in a recycling system. And we demand that the product be 
recycled, so that in itself will generate jobs. I can’t tell you how 
many because I don’t know what the circumstance will be. 
 
The method of collection in Manitoba is one that we very 
definitely looked at. It does demand a considerable number of 
people. We’ve looked at the one in Alberta and find it a very 
costly method. 
 
So we’re looking at a variety of things, and I can tell you that 
we’re also looking at the Saskatchewan scene and the mentally 
handicapped situation where a number of those facilities are 
anxious to be involved in the recycling process. And if we can 
provide jobs for those people that are mentally or physically 
handicapped, I think it would be advantageous to them. 
 
But we haven’t a final decision on who will do the recycling. 
We’re working on it. We have a number of people in the 
consulting business working on it. And likely in the next few 
months we’ll be able to finalize that side. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3874 
 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, it appears as though 
you’ve gone half way again. You’ve introduced the legislation that 
will mean job loss, but you haven’t gone the other step. You tell 
me you’re consulting in terms of recycling and jobs through 
recycling, and I would like to know specifically if there is going to 
be an in-province system set up, or are you going to be exporting 
jobs to Alberta or Manitoba and use their recycling facilities? 
 
I would like to know if there is going to be a system to gather that 
litter in this province, and I would like to know if it’s going to be a 
centralized situation? Or are you going to . . . if this program 
comes in place, in effect, is it going to be here in Regina, as you 
have centralized the hundreds and hundreds of government jobs? 
Are you going to be doing that in terms of recycling? 
 
Mr. Minister, those are the two questions I have. Is it going to be 
in-province? And I want a specific time frame as to when we will 
know that these jobs are going to be created. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well I think that the member says we go half 
way. Let me tell you, there’ll be no authorization of cans until the 
regulations are in place. It’s the regulations that give that 
authorization, so they will come in place at the same time. Just 
because we pass this legislation doesn’t mean that cans of beer or 
soft drinks are available tomorrow. It’s the regulations that spell 
that out. 
 
The legal authorization of the change comes when the regulations 
are final, and I can’t give you an exact time frame because, as I 
told you, we have consultants, and I think the best in the industry, 
available to us now. They’re working with us, the brewing 
industry is working with us, and the bottling industry is working 
with us, along with the retailers. So when we put them all together 
and we come up with the best system that those people with their 
expertise can develop, I think that has to be a plus for 
Saskatchewan, and we may indeed lead all of Canada in the 
method of recycling when we’re completed. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, let me make it clear to you, if 
you’re not aware of the fact already, there are cans for sale in this 
province, and there have been for a considerable number of weeks. 
I think you’re pretty clear . . . I would hope you’re pretty clear on 
that. 
 
I want to leave it with this, and I’d like to make a few closing 
remarks. I say to you that the changes in these regulations are 
going to allow you to allow cans to be in this province, and other 
containers, plastic containers, and so on. But we know that that’s 
going to happen, because it’s going to happen like that. They’re 
going to be here. 
 
And I’m asking for a commitment on behalf of the retailers in this 
province, on behalf of the working people in this province, that 
you will not allow those soft drinks in those containers until 
you’ve got a system that will allow for job creation through the 
jobs lost by those containers being allowed to be used in this 
province. And I say to you, if you can stand up and give that 
commitment to the people of this province today, then you will go 
a long ways to  

satisfying the two concerns that I have regarding the changes to 
these regulations, one being job loss, and the other being no 
system to pick up that litter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think as far as I can go in giving the 
member the kind of assurance that he is wanting is to tell you that 
we are aiming at the tying together of the approval of the container 
with the recycling capability of that container, and the two should 
take place at the same time. If we do that and we don’t approve the 
container sale within the province until the recycling method is in 
place, then the jobs should come at the same time. 
 
I have not been successful in stopping the cans coming in from 
outside of our province. Those cans coming in from across our 
borders from both east and west are indeed taking some job share 
today, and I suppose are going to continue to. But they are here 
without coming in as a legal entity. and I think the people of the 
province realize that, that they are breaking the laws of 
Saskatchewan when they do it. I really don’t have a method of 
controlling that at this point. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the minister’s 
problem is one of his own making. He simply failed to enforce the 
law that’s on the books, which states that beer and soft drinks can’t 
be sold in cans. 
 
And then he tries to claim that with all these canned soft drinks 
and canned beer coming into the province, that the market share of 
Saskatchewan manufacturers in the industry is being lost. And lo 
and behold, that’s because you, sir, have failed to enforce the law. 
 
I want to ask you two specific questions. One is with respect to the 
question of recycling. You failed, Mr. Minister, to provide 
members of this House and members of the public with the 
assurance that the recycle jobs will be recycle jobs in 
Saskatchewan, and not recycle jobs in Manitoba or Alberta or 
some other part of Canada. So I want to know what you’re going 
to do to ensure that those recycle jobs stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I also want to know, Mr. Minister, whether you will give this 
Assembly your assurance that the deposit fee on canned soft 
drinks and on beer cans is going to be at least equivalent to the 
deposit fee that currently exists when those goods are sold in 
bottles. 
 
Will you, for instance, for soft drinks, ensure that the deposit on a 
can is at least 5 cents, equivalent to the deposit on a soft drink 
bottle? Because if you don’t do that, Mr. Minister, there’ll be no 
incentive for the consumers to return the cans, as there is currently 
with the bottles. So I ask you for your assurance that the deposit 
on the can will be at least equivalent to what it is on the bottle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the member covers a number of things. 
I guess maybe I share some responsibility for the fact that there are 
cans in the province now, but I don’t believe that I take all the 
responsibility. 
 
The department did take a case to court last year in August, I 
believe. When the case went to court, it was thrown out on a 
technicality, but the indications were that  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3875 
 

the law was not strong enough really to fight the case adequately. 
That case triggered the number of cans that started to come in all 
over the province, and it has been difficult. 
 
Now certainly when I became minister last November, had I tried 
to take the people to court, I would have had to take not hundreds 
but literally thousands of store owners to court — that’s the only 
way that you could have dealt with this issue. 
 
I don’t think it was a realistic approach to go that route. It was not 
a realistic approach because I don’t think our court system could 
have even handled the volume of cases that we would have had to 
deal with. I know the Justice department could not have handled it. 
So we didn’t choose to go that way, we felt that it was better that 
we look at what we were doing and what the demands of the 
public that we serve were. And that public was demanding a 
change. 
 
The phone calls and the letters and the meetings that I’ve had with 
groups across this country, they all indicate to me that they want 
cans. And I think that the hon. member realizes that, and the very 
fact that the opposition voted in favour of this Bill in second 
reading would also indicate that. If you had thought the public 
thought otherwise, then to be in favour of what I’m doing you 
would have voted against the Bill — don’t question that, I know 
you would have. But because you know that the public demand is 
there, you want to be on the side of what the public is saying, so 
you voted in favour. And I appreciate the fact that you did. 
 
But now we have to get on with the fact of finishing the job, 
putting this one through committee and through third reading, and 
then get the legislation and the regulations in place to allow it to 
really happen legally. That’s the process that we’re in. I won’t give 
you a guarantee to put a 5 cent, or a 10 cent, or a 2 cent deposit on 
cans, because that is not final until the regulations are in place. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, what I was asking for is 
assurance that the deposit on cans will be at least equivalent to the 
deposit on bottles. Because if you don’t do that, Mr. Minister, your 
recycling program is simply not going to work. I also asked you 
for a guarantee that the recycle jobs would be in Saskatchewan, 
and you’ve refused to give us that guarantee, Mr. Minister. If you 
care to comment on either of those items, I’d welcome your 
comment. 
 
I want to ask you one final question in addition to that, and that is 
whether the Department of the Environment — before you made 
this decision to allow cans to come into the province on a 
widespread basis — checked many of the recent studies that have 
been done with respect to the fact that the use of canned soft 
drinks, and for that matter cans on a number of other food items, 
contribute to such things as increased aluminium levels in the 
blood — that that is a health concern. 
 
Did the Department of the Environment examine that health 
concern at all before making this decision? 
 

(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well you’ve asked a number of questions. 
When you started, you talked about the deposit. And I indicate to 
you that I will not give any guarantee of any specific amount of a 
deposit because we do have the experts in the field of recycling 
from Coca-Cola, and Alcan of Canada, and some of the major 
players in this business that are doing the study that should give us 
that kind of an answer of which direction is the best to go at this 
point. 
 
For me to stand here and give you a guarantee that I’m going to 
have a certain level of deposit would not be realistic. It would be 
making decisions in advance of the information that I believe 
should give us the right direction, so I’m not prepared to do that. 
 
I believe that the other area that you raised with regard to the 
health side, that is better dealt with through the health people than 
the environment people. We have cans across Canada and across 
the United States and indeed across the world. If they were 
causing a major concern, that would not be the case. And so, I 
guess, we trust to some extent what has happened in other parts of 
the world as an example that we may follow. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I want to deal with your 
manner in which you intend to deal with the evolution of this 
process if cans are allowed in Saskatchewan. And it appears clear 
from your responses to earlier questions that your manner in 
dealing with it will be a laissez-faire fashion. In other words, you 
will allow a commercial rationalization to be decided by the 
companies that are involved. 
 
And if in fact that is correct, Mr. Minister, as I believe I heard you 
say, I want you to consider this, that in Saskatoon, we have two 
breweries, Labatts and Carling O’Keefe Breweries. Now if, in fact 
— Carling O’Keefe brewery is quite a small brewery, and their 
main operation is not in Saskatoon — and it’s interesting to note 
that Carling O’Keefe back about two and a half years ago had 
brought in a bottling assembly for their plant. However, they did 
not proceed with the bottling system, and they sent it to Winnipeg, 
and it’s installed in Winnipeg, and it’s idling in Winnipeg, just 
waiting for an opportunity to be brought up to speed by canning 
more beer. 
 
Now the consequences of a laissez-faire attitude towards the 
development of, the evolution of this system, will be that perhaps 
Carling O’Keefe brewery in Saskatoon would shut down. Now, 
Mr. Minister, that means this year, this year $76,809 in property 
tax will be gone from the city of Saskatoon; that means that 
$14,200 in business tax will be gone from Saskatoon, for a total of 
91,000, in excess of $91,000 loss of revenue for the city of 
Saskatoon on that one brewery. And if in fact the employees are 
dispersed elsewhere because the plant is shut down, an annual 
payroll of over $2,800,000 will be lost to the area. I’m not 
suggesting that there won’t be some offsetting factors such as 
storage, but that will be a small offsetting factor in relation to the 
consequential effects of the policy that you’re talking about in the 
imposition of cans for beer in Saskatchewan. I wonder if the 
minister can comment  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3876 
 

on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well let me comment in a couple of ways. 
First let me tell you that I’ve met with Carling O’Keefe and with 
Labatts and with all of the brewers, and the indications are that 
they had some concerns, but they want to be able to bring canned 
beer to the public in Saskatchewan. 
 
Almost every car that goes into Alberta or Manitoba, if the person 
is a beer drinker, they buy beer and bring it back in cans, or if 
they’re drinking soft drink, they buy that and bring it back in cans, 
and that’s been happening. And you just talk to people who travel, 
and likely when you’ve travelled yourself you’ve done the same 
thing, so we can’t keep our borders entirely closed. 
 
The assumption that you make that Carling O’Keefe is going to 
close its doors and Saskatoon is going to lose all this money, you 
know, that’s simply a wild guess that has very little meaning. I 
think you’ll see that Carling O’Keefe will be there this year and 
next and probably 10 years from now. They had more concern 
about other things than they had about the cans coming, believe 
me. 
 
I think that what the member throws up is really hypothetical 
cases. They won’t stand much in the light of day. You should have 
thrown that up after supper. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I still feel that you have not 
examined or addressed the consequential effects of this legislation. 
My concern is not that whether we drink our beer out of a can or a 
bottle. That’s not my primary concern. My concern is the 
consequential economic effects of what you’re doing. And I 
believe you haven’t addressed that problem, Mr. Minister. And 
I’m going to circle this issue in my debates, and I’m going to 
come back in about two or three years from now when you’re 
ready to call an election, and I’ll have this section circled in my 
debates, and we’ll see who was right because that will be the test 
— that will be the test. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member . . . I missed 
one point when I was speaking last time, and I should have 
touched on it, I think. He indicated that Carling O’Keefe had a can 
line brought into Saskatoon and then, because they couldn’t sell 
cans in Saskatchewan, they had to send it on to Winnipeg. That’s 
the results of the kind of legislation that was put in place at the 
time that the hon. member was on the government side of the 
House. If we had moved sooner to get rid of that kind of 
legislation, likely we’d have had that can line in Saskatoon. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You were the government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we were the government. But you were 
the government when this type of legislation first came in. I think 
it’s high time we change it. I’m sorry that we didn’t change it in 
time to take advantage of that can line. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just wish to add my voice to that of others, 
and particularly so since I am Labour critic, Mr. Minister. 
 

Mr. Minister, it’s been apparent for some time that cans are going 
to occupy a large portion of the consumer market in drinks, 
whether they be beer or soft drinks. That’s as apparent as the fact 
the sun is going to rise. We have here a local cottage industry 
which itself believes it is unlikely to survive the onslaught. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve had a good deal of time to take some steps to 
ensure that the jobs weren’t lost, that the industry’s protected. 
You’ve done nothing. In typical Conservative fashion you’ve sat 
and done nothing, and all of a sudden, out of the blue, you admit 
the obvious. And by so doing at this point in time, Mr. Minister, 
you have put in jeopardy a large part of the industry. I must 
confess, I don’t see the humour in the situation, Mr. Minister. 
 
We have met with — which I’ll bet you is more than you have 
done — we have met with members of the unions involved who 
represent the workers whose jobs are on the line. Mr. Minister, 
their concern . . . the bottlers agree, everybody connected with the 
industry agree that bottles are going to have a difficult time 
competing in their present form without some form of protection, 
and you’ve done nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you believe that cans are not going to adversely 
affect the bottling industry in this province, then you’re the only 
person with a passing interest in the subject who believes that, 
because nobody else does. The bottlers don’t believe it; people 
involved don’t believe it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve done nothing; you’re just simply going to 
allow this industry . . . you’re going to allow nature to take its 
course — laissez-faire, as my friend said. The result is going to be 
a good deal of hardship which could have been involved had you 
got involved and done some forward planning in this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t know where the hon. member has 
been for the last hour while we’ve been talking about this. My 
department have met, and I have met, with groups across this 
province many times in the past year. The bottlers association are 
working very carefully with us to bring forward the kind of 
recycling plan that we need in order to make cans a viable issue. 
 
But beyond that, this legislation allows for the use of non-refillable 
containers — that’s approved, non-refillable containers. The 
bottlers association indicate to us that they could move to plastic 
bottles and still use the lines that they have now. 
 
Now this may not happen immediately; it depends a lot on the 
recycling capability. And I think the two must be tied together, 
that as you approve the container, you also have the recycling 
method in place to bring that container back off the roads and out 
of the ditches and to keep it out of our land fills. 
 
So we have that opportunity. And that’s what the bottling 
association has been looking at, is that if we can put it together 
properly, they could likely make a change over the next few years 
to where they’re bottling in plastics, which are also a very popular 
form of soft drink container. And that’s likely the route that they 
would go to maintain  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3877 
 

their jobs. 
 
We’re looking at it, and they’re looking at it, and I believe that 
working together you’ll find that this isn’t going to have the 
impact on jobs that you’re anticipating. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the problem is not that they use 
glass. The plastic isn’t necessarily going to solve the problems. 
The difficulty is that cans, and I suspect plastic, lend themselves to 
very large assembly lines, if they’re allowed to do that. And thus 
huge plants produce enough containers to do a very large market. 
In the existing industry we have avoided that sort of centralization 
and gave us some local benefit. 
 
Unless, Mr. Minister, you understand the nature of this local 
industry of ours, a change from glass to plastic isn’t going to 
change a thing. You allow nature to take its course. The containers 
will be produced in very large factories, and Saskatchewan will 
get none of that benefit. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s an amendment to clause 5 of the 
printed Bill. Moved by the member for Regina Rosemont that: 
 

Section 5 of the printed Bill: 
 
Amend section 6 of the Act as being enacted by section 5 of 
the printed Bill by adding the following subsection after 
subsection (2): 
 
(2.1) The minister shall not approve a non-refillable 
container unless it is manufactured out of aluminium and a 
deposit is charged on each container in an amount that is not 
less than the amount charged as a deposit on refillable 
containers. 

 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a comment on this 
amendment. Given what the minister’s said today in terms of 
recycling and incentives for recycling, and that it must be in terms 
of aluminium which is the recycling material, and he’s already 
talked about the high value of that, hopefully the minister will 
support this amendment which will make it clear to the people of 
Saskatchewan that the non-refillable containers which will be 
introduced will be recyclable, will have value, and that in fact that 
they will receive value for the non-refillable containers that they 
do turn in. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. 
 
The second amendment to section 5, moved by the member for 
Regina Rosemont: 
 

Section 5 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend section 6 of the Act as being enacted by  

section 5 of the printed Bill by adding the following subsection 
after subsection (7); 
 

(8) The Government of Saskatchewan is liable to make 
compensation for any job that is lost as a result of the 
approval of any non-refillable containers. 

 
On page 233, paragraph 773(7) of Beauchesne’s, I find this 
amendment not in order. 
 
It’s a money amendment and it’s not in order. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could make a 
comment about that. The intent was not to, in fact, specify any 
moneys that the government had to pay out. It was to make the 
government liable should anybody lose their job or should a 
bottler in fact suffer some business injury. What it does is then 
make the government in law liable for an action. 
 
It does not specify — and the intent is clear — it does not specify 
that any money must pay out, but in fact merely makes the 
government liable for any jobs or any business that is lost through 
the introduction of the approved containers. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, “Liable to make compensation” makes 
it a money amendment, and it’s not in order. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 9, moved by the 
member for Regina Rosemont: 
 

Section 9 of the printed Bill: 
 
Amend section 13 of the Act as being enacted by section 9 of 
the printed Bill by renumbering it as subsection (1) and 
adding the following subsection: 

 
(2) No person shall sell, offer to sell or distribute beer, as 
defined in The Liquor Act, in non-refillable containers 
unless those containers are filled in Saskatchewan. 

 
This amendment goes beyond the scope of the Bill, as on page 223 
of Beauchesne’s, clause 773(1), so I find the amendment not in 
order. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, the Bill deals with containers and 
approved containers and what’s to be sold in those two approved 
containers and how the process of those approved containers are to 
be regulated in the province. 
 
And with all due respect to your ruling, sir, it seems to me that this 
amendment that is offered up says that when those approved 
containers that the minister shall take into  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3878 
 

account . . . the filling of the beverage in those approved 
containers as part of the setting out of the regulation and as part of 
the regulating of those approved containers. In other words, it says 
that he won’t approve the containers for sale unless they’re filled 
and bottled or canned here in Saskatchewan, sir. 
 
Could you please explain to me the reasoning for, your reasoning 
behind that? It seems to me, sir, that this amendment — without 
wishing to challenge your ruling on it, I would certainly like some 
explanation as how the fact that these containers have to be filled 
in Saskatchewan is outside the jurisdiction or outside the purview 
of the Bill? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member . . . Order! The member 
from Regina Rosemont is referring to section 9(13) of the printed 
Bill, “to sell, offer or distribute containers,” and in his amendment 
is “adding . . . or distribute beer as defined in The Liquor Act,” 
and goes beyond the scope of the Bill. 
 
And I will read on page 223, paragraph 773(1): 
 

An amendment is out of order if it is irrelevant to the bill, 
beyond its scope of governed by or dependent upon 
amendments already negatived. 

 
It’s my judgement it’s beyond the scope of the Bill. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 10 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now be read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 94 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to explain the 
purpose of these amendments to The (Saskatchewan) Medical 
Care Insurance Act. 
 
Several months ago, our government announced its intention to 
eliminate the Medical Care Insurance Commission as a separate 
entity and to incorporate the medical care program into the 
Department of Health. That change will be implemented on 
January 1, 1988, and a major purpose of these amendments is to 
accommodate and reflect the change. 
 
The administrative amendments can be divided into three main 
categories. First, all those sections of the Act which deal with the 
existence and membership of the  

commission and related matters are being repealed. Second, the 
necessary authority and responsibility associated with the 
operation of the program are being transferred from the 
commission to the minister. And third, the commission’s various 
powers with respect to the making of regulations are being 
transferred to the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize several important points about 
these changes. The employees of MCIC (Medical Care Insurance 
Commission) will become employees of the Department of 
Health, and the program will continue on as it does at present. For 
the public, the transfer will not create any change in program 
policies or procedures. For the professionals who provide insured 
services, the change will be that they will now be dealing directly 
with the department and the minister rather than with the 
commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apart from these purely administrative amendments, 
there are a number of others which I would like to point out. Mr. 
Speaker, until now residents of one province who receive medical 
services in another province were reimbursed at their home 
province rates. In other words, when a Saskatchewan resident 
receives a medical service in Alberta, MCIC pays for that service 
at Saskatchewan rates, not at Alberta rates. As a result of a 
reciprocal billing agreement which has been negotiated among all 
the provinces in Canada, this situation will now change, and all 
services will be paid for at host province rates. For patients this 
will mean that they should no longer be billed directly for services 
in another province. For MCIC it means eliminating the need to 
process hundreds of cheques a month to beneficiaries to reimburse 
them for such services. In other words, Mr. Speaker, a better 
arrangement for everyone. 
 
Another important amendment relates to extra billing. Mr. 
Speaker, in 1985 this government took a major step to protect 
medicare by banning extra billing for insured services. However, 
in some other provinces there is evidence of service providers 
attempting to circumvent extra billing rules by levying 
administrative fees and similar charges on patients. Although 
we’re not aware of this problem having arisen here in 
Saskatchewan, we are moving now to prevent such problems in 
the future. Specifically we are defining any such charges as 
constituting extra billing within the meaning of the Act. Mr. 
Speaker, this is further evidence of our commitment to protecting 
the very basic principles of medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one other substantial set of amendments to 
the Act which I want to outline for all members of the House. 
These amendments relate to the process by which representatives 
of the professions in conjunction with officials of the medical care 
plan review the billing patterns and practices of individual 
practitioners and recover funds where excess billings are 
identified. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, this is an area in which differences of 
opinion can arise with the professions over what constitute 
appropriate processes and rules. However, we are talking about a 
program which cost the taxpayers of our province close to $200 
million a year. We believe, therefore, that it is appropriate and 
essential  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3879 
 

that we have a strong and effective mechanism to monitor and 
protect the disbursement of these public funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the process that is currently in place in the statute is 
cumbersome, it’s drawn out, and has encountered significant 
problem sin the courts. In short, it has become almost totally 
ineffective. It is therefore being replaced with provision which 
spell out in detail a clearer and more direct process to ensure that 
we are not spending taxpayers’ dollars improperly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not suggesting that substantial numbers of 
health professionals are billing MCIC improperly — not at all. 
The vast majority operate within the plan with no difficulty 
whatsoever. And the new system isn’t designed to punish or 
penalize a practitioner for the occasional honest mistake in his or 
her claim. And that needs to be made very clear. This is simply a 
matter of being able to ensure responsibility and accountability in 
the minority of cases. 
 
It isn’t just a matter of dollars and, as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, 
this process operates through a system of joint professional review 
committees. In other words it is a peer review process which 
enables the professions themselves to monitor standards of 
practice by their members and identify cases in which intervention 
may be required. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that all these amendments to the 
Act have been discussed with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, the Chiropractors’ Association of Saskatchewan, and 
the Saskatchewan association of optometrists and, I might add as 
well, with the College of Physicians and Surgeons. As a result of 
the discussions, a number of revisions were made to the original 
proposals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments to The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act are necessary to allow the transfer of the 
medical plan from the commission to the Health department and to 
accommodate related administrative changes. They are necessary 
to implement an interprovincial agreement on claims that will be 
of benefit to Saskatchewan residents, and they are necessary to 
implement an effective new reassessment and peer review process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject matter 
of this Bill recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
And I move that a Bill, An Act to amend The Medical Care 
Insurance Act (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
members will know, the Act was not introduced into this 
legislature until late this evening. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, we 
are now just reviewing the contents of the  

Act to amend the Medical Care Insurance Commission. 
 
I would like to point out, however, Mr. Speaker, that while the 
minister says that he has consulted with these groups, that there 
are some groups in Saskatchewan that are taking issue with the 
minister’s method of consultation. Mr. Speaker, the minister and 
all of us have known for some time now that the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission was going to be rolled into the Department 
of health. A number of professional organizations, particularly 
medical professional organizations in this province, were told that 
there would be no significant changes to the legislation, and that 
they would be consulted with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I want to inform the members of the House that that 
consultation came this past weekend, November 1, before the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, and they met with officials of 
the minister’s Department of Health until late into the evening on 
Sunday night. 
 
Now the medical professions are having some difficulty with what 
the minister simply calls “housekeeping” or “no significant 
changes.” In particular, Mr. Speaker, they are having difficulty 
with the joint professional review committee and how it is now 
structured under the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to have some time to review the legislation, 
and we will be consulting with other medical groups around the 
province before we have any further comment. Thank you. 
 
I now beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 
1981 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to explain these 
amendments to The Medical Profession Act, 1981, which deal 
with the manner in which physicians are able to lodge an appeal 
against disciplinary action by the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons. 
 
Under the existing Act, appeals are heard as a trial de nouveau, or 
new trial, by a three-member appeal tribunal. These tribunals 
consist of a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench as chairman; one 
member appointed by the University of Saskatchewan, usually but 
not necessarily a physician; and a layperson appointed by the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the trial de nouveau appeal before these tribunals is 
not an appropriate or effective way for such matters to be handled. 
It runs counter to the basic principle of our health professions 
legislation, namely that the people best able to assess matters of 
professional competence an conduct are the members of the 
profession itself. By the time a physician’s licence has been 
revoked or suspended, his competence or conduct have been 
reviewed thoroughly by 15 or more of his professional peers. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3880 
 

It is not appropriate for this entire process to be repeated by a 
tribunal which includes only one physician and two individuals 
with no medical expertise. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the present 
process contributes to lengthy delays in having appeals heard. 
Time is needed to obtain names for the three members and then to 
arrange a hearing date suitable for all the individuals involved. The 
result is that appeals tend to be heard a long time after the actions 
which initially prompted the disciplinary action. 
 
The proposed amendments will replace the current appeal process 
with the right of appeal directly to the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
Either party may also request leave for a further appeal to the 
Court of Appeal on a point of law. 
 
Let me emphasize a number of points, Mr. Speaker. First, the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons has been fully consulted — in 
fact, has requested this change — about these amendments and 
believes that they effectively address the concerns it has raised 
about the existing provisions. 
 
Second, there is no other province in Canada in which medical 
legislation provides for appeals such as those now in place here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And third, apart from four other health professions which are 
based on the medical model, which we’ll be dealing with in just a 
few moments, no other professional group in Saskatchewan has 
this kind of appeal. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the proposed 
amendments are neither unusual nor radical but are, in fact, fully 
in keeping with the most common way of handling appeals by 
professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public awareness and expectations with respect to 
quality medical care have been steadily rising. The College of 
Physicians and Surgeons is attempting to effectively fulfil its 
responsibility to protect the public by enforcing high standards of 
competence and professional conduct. The proposed amendments 
will assist the college in this respect while still giving physicians 
the same kind of protection through appeal as is available to other 
professions in our province and across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure now to move second reading of Bill 
No. 69. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again we have 
had very little time to review the legislation. We are of the 
understanding that the legislation was amended in the early 1980s 
to allow for an appeal tribunal and not for the doctors to go 
directly to the Court of Appeal. We now have a situation where 
some five or six years later we have the government coming 
before the legislature to amend this piece of legislation back to 
what it was prior to 1981. 
 
We want to consult with a number of individual doctors in the 
province as well as a number of lawyers, so I would now beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is largely 
consequential to the amendments to the appeal provisions of The 
Medical Profession Act, 1981, which I just spoke about a moment 
or two ago. 
 
The appeal provisions for ophthalmic dispensers were modelled 
directly on those for physicians and they include cross-references 
to The Medical Profession Act, 1981. But there’s one additional 
amendment which involves the board of examiners required to be 
established under the Act. The Act states that this board must 
include an ophthalmologist and a non-dispensing optometrist. 
However, there are few, if any, optometrists in the province who 
do not dispense as part of their practice. And some difficulty has 
arisen in finding a qualified individual to serve on the board. 
 
The proposal is to remove the statutory reference to the 
composition of the board and to have the composition defined 
instead by by-law under the Act. This move will provide greater 
flexibility and eliminate the potential for the registration process to 
be stalled because of inability to establish a valid board of 
examiners. 
 
With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
Bill No. 67, An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, we’ve had a 
very little opportunity to review the legislation. Because we want 
to consult with a number of professionals in Saskatchewan as well 
as some legal people, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Dental Profession Act, 
1978 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is simply 
consequential to the amendments to The Medical Profession Act, 
1981. The appeal provisions for dentists were modelled directly on 
those for physicians and they include cross-references to The 
Medical Profession Act, 1981. The amendments are intended to 
maintain this consistency of approach and to keep the 
cross-references accurate. With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of Bill No. 68, An Act to amend The Dental 
Profession Act, 1978. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, for the same reasons that I’ve 
previously articulated, I’d like to beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Denturists Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill as well is simply 
consequential to the amendments to The Medical Profession Act,  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3881 
 

1981. The appeal provisions for denturists were modelled directly 
on those for physicians, and they include cross-references to The 
Medical profession Act, 1981. These amendments are intended to 
maintain this consistency of approach, and to keep the 
cross-references accurate. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second 
reading of Bill No. 66, An Act to amend The Denturists Act. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we all 
realize, these Bills have recently been introduced in this 
legislature. We have not yet had a proper opportunity to review the 
legislation, and I would, therefore, beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 96 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, changes are required to The 
Provincial Court Act to ensure that the principle of judicial 
independence from the executive branch of government is 
apparent in the legislation. The requirement in the Canadian 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms is that an independent tribunal 
must hear the case and make a decision when a person has been 
charged with an offence. 
 
Therefore the legislation must be structure din such a way that 
judges actually are, and perceived to be, sufficiently independent 
of government. For judicial independence reasons, regulations will 
provide for the salaries of judges, any associate chief judges, the 
Chief Judge, and retired judges who may be appointed temporarily 
to hear cases. 
Presently the Act provides that cabinet can fix salaries of judges. 
In practice, the salary fixed is the same amount for all judges 
except the Chief Judge, or associate chief judge. The amendment 
will enshrine this practice in legislation. 
 
In the existing Act, judges beyond the age of 65 years of age can, 
with annual approval of cabinet, hold office until they reach 75 
years of age. To provide some flexibility, the Act permits these 
judges or barristers to be appointed by the minister or Chief Judge 
to hear cases in circumstances where no other judges are available. 
For judicial independence reason these provision are being 
replaced by a provision that will allow cabinet to compile a list to 
which they may add, but not remove, names of retired judges who 
may be hired on a contractual basis to hear cases. 
 
Where, due to the absence of a judge it is necessary to have an 
additional judge temporarily hear cases, the chief Judge will be 
able to choose a person from this list for that purpose. Where the 
need for a temporary additional judge relates tot he business of 
court, such as backlog of work, the Chief Judge must obtain the 
approval of the minister before appointing a person on the list. 
 
The appointment of the Chief Judge will continue until 
resignation, retirement, or removal for cause. The appointment of 
any associate judge will be for a term of . . . associate chief judge 
will be for a term of five years. Under the existing provision a 
chief judge or associate chief judge can any time be demoted to an 
ordinary judge by an order in council. The amendment will 
remove the “at pleasure” aspect of these appointments. 
 

Redesignation of a judge’ residence will be made by the chief 
Judge with the approval of the minister. Presently the initial 
designation and subsequent designations of a judge’s residence are 
made by the minister. Thus a judge could be transferred from one 
place to another in the province upon ministerial order only. This 
almost never occurs in practice, but the existence of the provision 
in legislation is not in compliance with the charter requirement. 
The judicial council is given the power to make orders, based on 
results of inquiries into complaints by committees of the council 
constituted for that purpose. 
 
Such orders include: dismissal of the complaint; suspension of the 
judge for a definite period of time; and reprimanding the judge. 
Presently the judicial council makes the decision as to whether a 
judge should be removed from office and makes that 
recommendation to cabinet which decides upon the actual 
removal. The judicial council should also be able to make a 
wide-range of disciplinary orders to deal with the circumstances of 
a case. 
 
(1600) 
 
With respect to extra-judicial duties, the following amendments 
are proposed: 
 

The approval of both cabinet and the Chief Judge will be 
required before a judge can engage in any business, trade, or 
occupation. 
 
When his role is as a commissioner, arbitrator, inquirer, 
mediator, or so forth, the approval can be by cabinet or by way 
of legislation after consultation with the Chief Judge. 

 
The Act now provides that a judge can engage in extra-judicial 
functions or act as a conciliator, arbitrator, commissioner, etc., 
when authorized or appointed by cabinet or legislation. 
 
Approval of the Chief Judge will also be required where the 
function is not essentially judicial in nature. 
 
There are also certain changes relating to judges’ pensions. Most 
of these result from changes to federal legislation. For example, 
the provision will ensure that the proportion of their salary that 
judges contribute to the pension plans is maintained. This 
proportion is tied to the present legislation, in the present 
legislation, through the maximum deductible registered pension 
plan contribution amount. As a result of the federal government 
eliminating the specified maximum deductible for registered 
pension plan contribution to The Income Tax Act, the judges’ 
contribution to their pension plan will automatically rise 
significantly and their take-home salary decrease correspondingly 
unless these changes are made in our Act. 
 
Amendments are also required as a consequence of federal 
changes through the Canada Pension Plan, which became effective 
on January 1, 1987. The intent is to maintain the status quo in 
terms of the judges’ contribution and benefits formula as they 
relate to the Canada Pension Plan. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3882 
 

I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill, 
recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. And I move 
that a Bill, An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There are a 
number of inquiries which we will wish to make on this Bill, and 
we would therefore beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 10 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
take this opportunity to introduce my officials to the leader of the 
Opposition and to members opposite. Norman Riddell is deputy 
minister to me, and cabinet secretary, Sheldon McLead, is acting 
director of administration, and Bonita Heidt is administration 
officer. 
 
And if I could, Mr. Chairman, I would just, briefly as I could, 
outline a few of the activities and responsibilities of Executive 
Council. And I will be as brief as I can to summarize the last 
year’s events to give an idea of some of the activities that we’ve 
been involved in. 
 
The cabinet secretariat has continued to provide cabinet and 
cabinet committees with the process to deal with the public 
generally. We’ve had out-of-town meetings, certainly some 
interesting and very useful cabinet meetings in Saskatoon and 
Pelly, and, in fact, in Pelly it coincided with the town’s 75th 
anniversary. 
 
The secretary helps us co-ordinate delegations to cabinet, 
including major religious organizations and women’s groups and 
various other people from across the province. Information 
services is involved in news releases and provides the liaison to 
media throughout the province. Intergovernmental affairs branch 
— that is my responsibility — deals obviously with 
interprovincial, national, and international affairs, and we’ve had 
some, I believe, some valuable contributions made recently with 
respect to intergovernmental affairs. 
 
The 1986 western premiers’ conference was a case in point, and 
we dealt with international subsidy wars with farmers, and I think 
at least shared in the lead for deficiency payments and help for 
farmers. The 1986 annual premiers’ conference was responsible 
for what we know as the “Edmonton declaration” to try to get a 
commitment to get Quebec into the country in terms of the 
constitution, and that’s been relatively significant. The 1986 first 
ministers’ conference on the economy pursued many similar 
objectives in terms of a national agricultural strategy, the support 
for western economic  

diversification. And when we did sign those, we were prepared to 
look towards some interesting economic development in the 
future. 
 
The 1987 western premiers’ conference was also part of our 
responsibility, handled here in Humboldt with some 
straightforward objectives with respect to agriculture again, and 
diversification, and was successful, I believe, in providing that 
kind of direction. The 1987 annual premiers’ conference, we had 
major objectives of agriculture, health, and education. And we put 
them on the table again, and particularly with respect to health 
care, and have made several significant contributions with respect 
to agriculture that I think will speak for themselves. 
 
Regarding the constitutional conferences, Executive Council has 
been involved extensively. And clearly one of the most notable 
things of this has been the agreement that is known as Meech 
Lake, and we have been prepared to endorse that and have passed 
that here in this legislature, as they have in Quebec, and my staff 
has played a very important role in the negotiations of that. I 
would say that under the recent times and events, that I believe 
that history will record that it was in the best interest of the 
country. 
 
Similarly we took a lead role with respect to the first ministers’ 
conference on aboriginal constitutional affairs in March of 1987, 
and the fact that this process ended in failure in the eyes of some is 
an indication that there is wide divergence of views, and that we 
contributed and have placed before the nation several alternatives, 
and many, in fact, were accepted by the aboriginal people 
themselves. 
 
First ministers’ conference on trade — obviously we found it very 
interesting and did a great deal of homework, and Executive 
Council people worked on towards the reduction of protectionism, 
the reduction of tariffs, and looked at the fact that we make most 
of our living from exporting to other countries. Our objectives of 
having less and less tariffs and less protectionism world-wide, and 
particularly with our major trading partner, was something that I 
believe our officials carried very well. 
 
We’ve done the same with respect to the national governance 
association, the premiers’ governors’ forum, various other border 
advisory groups, and have had the opportunity, with my staff, to 
contact senators, secretaries, cabinet minister and others in the 
United States and in various kinds of groups to allow us to pursue 
objectives that would reduce subsidies and protectionism. 
 
The same applies to Japan — and it’s a major trading partner of 
ours —and we’ve been involved there in a twinning process and 
exchange of information, and in terms of getting Japanese people 
to invest here in many things in terms of, say, turbines, for 
example, manufactured here; continue the interest in energy, 
whether it’s upgraders; looking at sources of revenue in terms of 
borrowings which have been very attractive for Saskatchewan; 
and for us to penetrate markets there by some of our business 
firms. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3883 
 

Finally, let me say, with respect to protocol internationally, we 
have looked at many visitors here. President François Mitterrand 
was here; Her Majesty the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh 
visited our province. The monarchs obviously promoted a very 
powerful understanding of the parliamentary system during their 
visit and participated right there in this Assembly in celebrations 
marking the 75th anniversary of the Legislative Building. 
 
Other distinguished guests include the Deputy Prime Minister of 
the U.S.S.R., Mr. Murakhovsky, and Governor Gao Dezhan of 
Jilin in the province of China. 
 
We’ve been involved with, my staff has, the Saskatchewan Award 
of Merit and obviously, as well, the Policy Secretariat, in terms of 
planning and priority and research that has been tied to virtually 
every commodity and every facet of our life. And the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Planning Agreement is administered by the 
secretary. 
 
So in conclusion, let me say that the Department of Executive 
Council has been instrumental within our province and within our 
nation, and also internationally, in developing, defining, and 
communicating the objectives of our province and assisting me 
and all of government in the attainment of our objectives in 
providing as many opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan 
as possible. 
 
Finally, I would like to say in my opening remarks that if in fact 
the rumours are true, Mr. Chairman, that my colleague and the 
Leader of the Opposition perhaps may be stepping down — and I 
won’t speak for him, but if in fact that may be the case, and this in 
fact may be perhaps our last opportunity to have an exchange in 
the legislature on estimates related to Executive Council and 
probably everything else in government, that I would just say very 
sincerely that I have learned a great deal from the Leader of the 
Opposition. I respect very much his experience, the years here, 
and his contribution to the province, and to his political party. I 
wish him well in his new career or careers — whichever they may 
be — and it’s been a pleasure to have been with him here in the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, first I 
thank you for those kind words. I think, at least in part, your 
supposition is entirely accurate in the sense that I am unlikely to 
be here again in the capacity of Leader of the Opposition. Whether 
I will be here in any other capacity, I suppose, remains to be seen. 
But I do thank you for the kind words, and then I would perhaps 
repeat what my wife will have said to me, and perhaps other wives 
will have said to them: flattery will get you nowhere. 
 
I want now to turn to the estimates which we have before us. And 
I think in order to save some time, I would ask the Premier 
whether he has prepared or would have prepared a list of the staff 
of the Executive Council together with the salaries of all of the 
staff members over, let’s say $25,000 — pick a figure in there 
which will . . . It can be somewhat higher than that, depending. 
But basically I want the people who are in a decision making role 
to see what changes have been made. 
 

With respect to the half dozen or so senior people in the 
Department of the Executive Council, will the premier indicate 
what changes there may have been since the last budget? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I have the top seven 
positions and two out of the seven are new. And the entire list of 
those making over 25, we’ll send over when we put it together 
here. But there’s only seven of them and I’ll give them to you: Mr. 
Riddell, and his monthly salary is 7,595; Mr. Martin, Larry 
Martin, 6,292; Mr. Harrold, 6,132; Mr. Hewitt, which is new, is 
5,691; Mr. Dutton, 4,917; Mr. Pringle, which is new, 5,750; Mr. 
Shorvoyce, was here before, 5,579. Those were as of August 31. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
we have been reviewing the estimates of a number of the 
departments. We now are at Executive Council, which is in a 
sense the department which manages all other departments. And 
the overwhelming theme of the review of the other departments 
was the fact that money was short, that this is a time of restraint, 
that there is an absence of money. And I was looking at the 
television last night, and hearing the Minister of Health recount 
that same story to the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association, that 
we had to recognize the fact that there was a shortage of money. 
 
And I looked at the estimates and I’ve seen some increases, 
clearly, but one of the most impressive increases in all of the 
spending undertaken by the government — one of the most 
impressive ones — is the interest on the public debt. In one year 
that figure has gone up by close to $100 million, about $95 
million, which is indeed an impressive figure. And every 
indication that it will go up next year by a similar amount, 
probably more because of the massive deficit announced by the 
Minister of Finance in March — $1.2 billion — which must now 
be covered for a whole year. And we can expect, I think, that 
figure to rise to a figure approaching $400 million. These are very, 
very large figures, and they really set the framework for the entire 
policy of the government opposite — the fact that we have had 
massive government deficits. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, it perhaps not fully realized the size of the 
government deficits. I have looked up the record of government 
deficits from 1945, which I have before me. And aside from two 
modest deficits, each under $4 million, which were caused by the 
greatest crop failure in this province since 1937 — the crop failure 
of 1961 — aside from those two very modest deficits which were 
. . . the total of the two were more than covered by the 1964 
surplus so it was of no account in terms of crating any ongoing 
deficit, we have had surpluses in all of those years. 
 
And then we look at the deficits which we encountered for the 
years ending March 31, ’83, ’84, ’85, ’86, ’87 — we don’t know 
what the ’88 one will be — and they total close to $3 billion. and 
that is the overwhelming fact of what has happened to the 
Government of Saskatchewan in the last five years. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3884 
 

We are now seeing the result of those types of financial measures 
in other countries. We have seen the stock market crash, which is 
very, very widely attributed to the succession of government 
deficits run up by the Reagan government. 
 
We are now hearing this type of financing which consists of a 
steady string of government deficits — each one, for the most part, 
bigger than the last. And that was certainly true up to now — ’84 
was bigger than ’83, and ’85 was bigger than ’84, and ’86 was 
bigger than ’85, and ’87 was bigger than ’86. I don’t imagine we 
can top 1.2 billion, but that type of financing is now being very 
widely called voodoo economics — voodoo economics, the 
financing which says we can lower taxes, somehow money will 
come in, somehow by lowering taxes we will get a great influx of 
industrial activity or something, and money will come in. Well 
that was the supply-side economists who kept saying that, in the 
late 1970s and early 1980s, and they had their way and we see the 
result of this voodoo economics. 
 
Now we clearly cannot put the Government of Saskatchewan on 
the same footing as the Government of the United States, because 
we are not looked upon as financial leaders — thank goodness! 
But none the less, we also are constrained by the same rules which 
say that when you spend money, you must raise it. You don’t have 
to raise it right away, but sooner or later you’ll have to pay. 
 
Mr. Premier, someone has said that deficits are only deferred 
taxes. And I think you will recognize that phrase, and I could give 
you a number of others coming from you; that one is your quote. 
But for many other people, I could give you Mr. Andrew . . . 
excuse me, the member for Kindersley, when he was minister of 
Finance. And we have to ask ourselves whether or not this can go 
on. 
 
Now everybody can put up a reason for spending money. There’s 
always a reason. There are difficult times in this industry or that 
industry or resource revenues are down or they’re up or whatever. 
But those things have been true since 1945, and we have managed 
to balance budgets. 
 
Resource revenues are massively greater than they have been in 
any year prior to 1980 — massively greater. I suspect they’re 
higher than they’ve been in almost any year in history, but 
massively greater than they were in any year prior to 1980. And 
yet we had balanced budgets up to that time. Agriculture, net farm 
income is much, much greater than it was in years like ’69 or ’70 
or ’71 or ’72 — much, much greater. And yet in those years we 
had balanced budgets. 
 
Now everybody knows that governments, everybody in 
government is in favour of more spending, everybody’s in favour 
of lower taxes, and everyone’s in favour of balanced budgets. And 
we all know we can’t have all three, unless the money is dropping 
from heaven and it frequently does not. And therefore we have to 
make the choices, and making choices is what government is all 
about. 
 
And I submit to you, Mr. Premier, that over the years of your 
administration you have made the choices, and the  

one you have eliminated is the balanced budgets. You haven’t 
even aimed at that. You have preferred the more spending and the 
lower taxes. But unbalanced budgets simply means higher taxes in 
the future, and unfortunately the future is now upon us. 
 
And that’s why we’re discussing the budget that we are now. 
That’s why we’re dealing with cuts in education, and that’s why 
we’re dealing with cuts in health. That’s why the Minister of 
health is saying that to believe that we have enough money to 
carry on is to be unrealistic. That’s why we have the Minister of 
Highways writing letters saying, I’m sorry, we can’t fix your road. 
That’s why we’re having the Minister of Justice saying, we don’t 
quite have the staff to keep the Land Titles offices going, and on 
and on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And that is the fundamental fact of this 
budget. And I suggest to you, Mr. Premier, that we in this 
province have to address the hard fact that although we all like 
more pending and that we all like lower taxes and that we all like 
balanced budgets, we know we can’t have all three. You have 
opted to ignore any, any requirement for balanced budgets. I 
believe that we have to change that approach. 
 
I’m not saying that we should have a balanced budget next year. 
That may be impossible. But I believe, and I believe 
Saskatchewan people believe, that we can’t spend money as if it 
did not matter any more. We’ve done it for five years, and it can 
no longer go on. 
 
(1630) 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, it was not said that that was going to be what 
was going to happen. The member for Kindersley, the former 
minister of Finance, started out by saying that he was going to 
balance the budgets over a four-year term. I invite you to read his 
speeches. 
 
And I don’t want to deal with the intricacies of the budgets, except 
that he laid out a financial policy which said, we will follow a 
policy of balanced budgets — not necessarily in every individual 
year, but over a four-year period we will balance. 
 
And each year it got worse. And each year the promise of a 
balanced budget, or anything approaching it, receded into the 
distance. And the ultimate receding into the distance was in March 
of this year when a deficit of $1.2 billion was announced. 
 
Now I believe that your government owes to the people of 
Saskatchewan a statement, and I invite you to give it now, as to 
what you think the financial policy of your government will be 
over the next three or four years in your next term of office; when 
you believe you will be able to return to a balanced budget; 
whether you believe the figures put forward by the Minister of 
Finance that somehow in three or four years we were going to 
reach balanced budgets. 
 
I think it is desperately important that people know that — that 
they know that you have abandoned the policy you  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3885 
 

have followed over the last five years, and that you are committed 
to somehow getting the finances of this province into some 
reasonable shape. 
 
Even if the proposals put forward by the Minister of Finance turn 
out to be true . . . And not a single one put forward by any minister 
of Finance since 1982 has turned out to be true. Not one. All have 
been worse. But even if they turned out to be true, we would owe 
$4 billion and have carrying charges of well over $400 million a 
year — twice what it now costs us to operate the medicare plan. 
Combined it would be more than it costs us to operate the 
medicare plan and what we spend on roads, both capital and 
operating, repair of the roads, construction of the roads. Those are 
big, big figures — twice the cost of medicare in interest. The 
bankers and bond dealers who are not in our province, for the most 
part — a few of the bond holders are, but massively they live 
somewhere else. 
 
And that is if everything turns out for the best, that’s our situation. 
If they turn out for the worst, if they follow the pattern of the last 
five years, we will be spending much larger sums. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I’m going to ask you to make a statement. 
Obviously there’s great reservations about the policies of your 
government in the financial community — and I’ll come to that — 
what the rating agencies say about your government, not in words 
but in actions, and that’s what counts. 
 
But I’ll take my seat now and ask you to make a statement to the 
people of Saskatchewan on what you believe the broad outline of 
the finances of this province will be over this term of office, 
between now and the next election. I think the public are entitled 
to that and it can only come from the first minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me say 
at the outset to the hon. member that we have to take our case and 
the province’s credit position, our expenditures and our revenues, 
to the rating institutions on an annual basis. And the hon. member 
knows that. So I . . . It’s always reviewed in the competitive sense 
by all the rating institutions, and compared to other provinces and 
jurisdictions and states that go through this process. 
 
We have just received, and have been maintained, an A-1 credit 
rating which, granted, is below what we had before, but is as high 
as Saskatchewan’s credit rating in the good part of the 1970s. And 
in the latter part of the ‘70s when commodity prices really rose, 
credit rating rose. But it was at A-1 in the 1970s. 
 
I can say that under these circumstances — and I will take a 
minute to describe them — I don’t think there’s a jurisdiction in 
the country that hasn’t faced some difficulty in running up a 
problem with normal expenditures but the lack of revenue. 
 
Let me say at the outset that — and we’ve had this discussion 
before — that we decided, in difficult times, to protect people and 
to really make a serious attempt at protecting them. 
 

When you look at interest rates at 21 . . . or 20 to 21 per cent, we 
opted to protect people against high interest rates, and that costs 
money. And we opted to protect farmers with 6 per cent interest 
rates and home owners with nine and three-quarters and thirteen 
and a quarter, and I admit that cost some money. And we were . . . 
If we were asked to do that again in the face of 20 per cent interest 
rates, we would do it again and people appreciated that. 
 
Now in some other jurisdictions they did not protect them as much 
or they followed our lead at a period. And particularly during the 
early ’80s when interest rates were so high, it was just a terrible 
burden because your payments on your farm or your home or your 
property doubled, with no fault of your own. You took out the 
mortgage at 10 per cent and the interest rate went to 20 or 21 per 
cent. 
 
Now you and your administration, in all fairness, decided not to 
stick up for farmers and home owners in that regard. You decided 
that you were going to do something else with the money. And 
clearly, I mean we don’t have to review all that, but it’s on the 
record and in speeches and so forth. It was not the provincial 
government’s responsibility to protect people against high interest 
rates, it was the banks and it was an international problem. 
 
We didn’t accept that. We said we will defend farmers and home 
owners and small business, and we will maintain expenditures on 
health care and education and social services particularly, because 
of the economic need, and obviously because of the political 
sensitivity. 
 
Now I can point out that you did decide to borrow money from 
international bankers. To be fair, you borrowed money for potash, 
and it’s never been paid back. And you borrowed money for pulp 
companies, and you borrowed money from Crowns, and in many 
cases the so-called Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations 
received more attention than real families, because you would not 
protect the families of farmers and home owners against high 
interest rates, but you would go into the international markets and 
borrow from bankers in New York and Chicago to buy potash. 
 
Well clearly, any historic evidence will tell us if we hadn’t 
borrowed all that money to buy the potash mines, it would make a 
significant difference to the financial picture in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We wouldn’t have that debt. 
 
Now the pulp company — we’ve sold the pulp company and the 
300-and-some million dollars that was in debt, because it was 
never paid, is obviously something that we inherited. And we 
wouldn’t have bought it, but that’s the decisions that your 
administration made. 
 
Now you can say, well, but at the same time you balanced the 
books because you didn’t defend people against high interest rates 
but, by gosh, you were out there buying corporations and land, a 
million acres of farm land and so forth, with borrowed money. 
You borrowed it. Now you said, but we still balanced the books. 
Well if we look at the prices, I mean, since 1981 — I mean, we’ve 
been here before — but wheat’s declined by 50 per cent,  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3886 
 

oil by 34, potash by 29, uranium by 25 per cent. Resource 
revenues have fallen by 47 per cent. 
 
Now you can say, well, Mr. Premier, that’s true, but we went 
through cycles and we balanced the books. You’ve said that. our 
total spending — we’ve tried to maintain in social areas, and if 
you look at social, economic, and administration in the revenues 
that we pulled together, we’re just short of money. If you took all 
the income tax and all the sales tax and all the oil royalties — and 
you know that’s a considerable amount of our potential to collect 
money — it doesn’t quite pay for the health care budget alone. 
And it’s up considerably, and we can discuss that. But our health 
expenditures are up over 60 per cent compared to 1981-82. 
 
Now if you could take all those three revenues and you can’t even 
make your Health budget, or if you took just income tax alone and 
it’s sucked up by your Education budget, then you have a choice, 
and I suppose the choice is — and you state very clearly — you 
would have balanced the budget as opposed to defending people, 
one, against high interest rates or some of the other programs 
we’ve got out, like a billion dollars at 6 per cent. And your 
colleagues have been asking me for more and more and more all 
through my Agriculture estimates — more money, lower interest 
rates, longer term, rewrite it all; more for health, more for 
education. And as you state clearly, I mean, but they don’t want 
more tax, and they don’t want a cut. 
 
So when your revenues decline in resources, just the prices, by 47 
per cent as an aggregate of all the things that were used to collect 
money, the demands by health on health care system and the 
demands in the education and social services system do not cut . . . 
are not reduced by 47 per cent. 
 
The Alberta government, with the same administration, has a 
deficit, and I remind the hon. member that. Same administration 
that put money in the Heritage Fund now has a deficit, and a 
deficit in every province in Canada. And some have been, I think, 
pretty frugal, and Ontario has a manufacturing sector, and others, 
and are not affected by the commodity swings. 
 
So I agree with you — we’d rather have a balanced budget. Under 
extremely unique times of 47 per cent decline in resource 
revenues, we have said we will not balance the budget all at once 
when people are frightened of losing their homes by high interest 
rates, or because of drought, or $2 wheat and other things. But we 
will cut some expenditures in certain areas, and we will raise some 
income tax — and you’re familiar with those because you’ve 
debated the budget — and put ourselves on a track that says we 
would like to be able to move towards a balanced budget with any 
sort of normal international economic conditions. 
 
We’re at the bottom in terms of commodity prices for a long time, 
and I think it’s a reflection of the stock markets and maybe even to 
some degree the commodity markets. It’s not a particularly fun 
time to be trying to balance the budgets. But I could point out that 
our objective is to put the government on track towards a balanced 
budget. 
 

Let me just say briefly that the rating institutions have said, yes, I 
see a revenue base there that is reasonable, and you have contained 
some of your expenditures, and I know your political commitment 
o social services, economic . . . agriculture and health, and those 
budgets are up, and you know they’re up — all three of them — 
more than they’ve ever been. We have a commitment to 
diversification to deepen and broaden the economy to make us a 
little stronger — upgraders and processing plants and paper mills 
and the kinds of things that don’t move so much with respect to 
inter-commodity and the international cycles, and obviously our 
commitment towards as much trade as possible with other nations, 
multilaterally and bilaterally, as a commitment to continue to 
grow. 
 
So I mean, I agree with you. We would much rather have a 
balanced budget. Nobody likes tax increases. Nobody likes to 
tighten your belt in terms of expenditures, but when your 
revenue’s cut and, you know, cut in half, how do you cut the 
Health budget and the Education budget and the Agriculture 
budget and your expenditures in half? 
 
I mean, and you’ve been there. You’ve got to look at that this is a 
cycle, and I believe you’re quoted . . . I remember quoting you 
years ago saying, during difficult times we could have a deficit to 
help people through a particular situation. Well maybe this is 
longer than more people care to admit, world-wide — world-wide. 
And our commitment is to move in the appropriate direction. 
 
The rating institutions say that you do have a revenue base, and we 
can see that and, right, if the forecasts are anywhere in the 
ballpark, then they can see us having a balanced budget in the 
immediate future — in a matter of years, less than a handful. The 
track is there because we’re going like this. If you look at a dollar 
wheat, or if you look at potash continuing to decline, if you look at 
oil revenues going down significantly, it will have an impact. Now 
if that’s the case, you have three alternatives: you can either cut 
expenditures, raise taxes, or you can look for economic growth — 
and there’s no other source; it’s those three. 
 
If I could finally say, and I will take my seat, when I look at the 
kind of expenditures that you are prepared to make, and we went 
through a campaign in 1986, but the kind of expenditures that I 
saw outlined in terms of a home program and so forth were very, 
very lucrative. And from your experience and you knowing the 
debt that we had in the province in 1986, and knowing the 
hundreds of millions — and I indeed believe it’s billions that it 
would cost for this 70,000 at 7 per cent and so forth. That’s a lot of 
money. 
 
(1645) 
 
Now you had to take that out of somebody’s hide, so I would ask 
you: who would you tax, the farmers, these days? Would you tax 
those in the potash industry? Would you tax those in the oil 
industry? Would you tax those in the pulp and paper? Would you 
tax . . . Where would you find this extra tax? You say, well, we’ll 
get the big railroads, we’ll get the banks, and we’ll get so forth. 
You know very well that I tax railroads and banks much more than 
you ever did — much more. The banks pay through  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3887 
 

the nose, and they complain about it. And we can compare the 
records. They’re taxed much more than the NDP ever taxed them, 
and the railroads pay much more than the NDP ever taxed them. 
 
So you say, well what other big business? Well then we get into 
the whole question of whether it’s a good idea to have the royalty 
structure we have in terms of oil to encourage that investment here 
or not. And you say, well we could get all those billions out of the 
oil patch. Well I think you could . . . It’s fair ball out in the coffee 
shop to tell everybody that that’s possible, but you know yourself, 
when revenues decline by almost 50 per cent, you’ve got a pretty 
handsome problem. And you have to help people through that 
because they feel the same revenue declines. When they have no 
money in farming at $2 wheat, how do you tax them? Where do 
you get the revenue and the tax revenue to immediately balance a 
budget under those circumstances? 
 
I can say, Mr. Chairman, finally, that even in terms of Crown 
corporations, to spread the borrowing around Saskatchewan as 
opposed to just internationally, we have offered, for example, the 
several series of power bonds so that Crown corporations can go 
to the people, borrow the money at a fixed rate, pay the interest 
back to Saskatchewan people, and that has circulated the money 
and the savings back to our own. Hundreds of millions of dollars 
out, as opposed to giving it to bankers some place else in New 
York or other places. 
 
Now it’s popular, and they buy them up as quickly as possible, 
and to the extent that we can do that more and more with respect 
to debt that is here, or we can do that, and we discussed it 
yesterday with respect to various forms of investing in agriculture 
to make sure that we can encourage that investment here; we’re 
prepared to look at any and all of those instruments. 
 
So I agree with you. Nobody likes a deficit. And it’s been difficult 
times. Everybody across the country has one. Our neighbours do 
that are NDP, and our neighbours do to the west that are PC, and 
they all wring their hands. And I talked to the premiers. I’m sure 
you did. Boy, how are we going to handle this? Extreme demands 
in health care, extreme demands in education, and agriculture’s a 
big problem. We got to get money out there, but here’s no money. 
It dried up. 
 
Now that’s what we face. And for better or for worse, we have 
said we’re going to go and protect people first under these 
circumstances and not the Crowns. And certainly in terms of 
interest rates and those kinds of things, we will make sure that 
people have as many breaks as they can so that they feel as secure 
as possible in getting themselves out of the situation. 
 
Well, I can’t argue with you that it isn’t a good idea. I mean, I 
agree with you; deficits are not pleasant. And there isn’t a premier 
in the country that wouldn’t say just as you said: deficits hurt; 
sooner or later you’re going to have to pay for them. And that’s 
true. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I can only concur with the hon. member that 
you try to put together the best financial package you can under 
difficult circumstances, and you  

raise some taxes, and you do make some decisions with respect to 
expenditures, and you cope with the difficult time in terms of the 
lack of revenue and put yourself in a position to maintain your 
credit rating — not as good as it was — but maintain it at an A-1 
as it was in the ’70s, a good part of the ’70s, and then hopefully, as 
you look to the future, you can see improved conditions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I 
asked you, as you will recall, to lay out your financial plan for the 
next four years. And if that’s the financial plan, then I am sure that 
many, many people will be concerned. 
 
You didn’t indicate when you think the budget will be balanced; 
you didn’t indicate at what speed you propose to pursue that 
objective. You indicated that you would protect people, and 
obviously everybody wishes to protect people, and we can all 
argue about what’s the best way to do it. And as with other things, 
the proof of the pudding is in the eating, and we know just how 
many farmers are being protected now compared with the 
previous situation. 
 
There’s no point in talking about the future by resolutely looking 
at the 1970s. We’re looking at the 1990s, and I’m asking you 
whether you will outline a financial plan. And I take it the answer 
is you will not, because there was ample opportunity. And I take it 
you are simply not prepared — not to guarantee, no one can 
guarantee the future — but you won’t tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what you’re aiming at by way of balanced budgets, 
whether it’s two years or three years. And when I sit down, I’ll ask 
you again to tell the people of Saskatchewan what you’re aiming 
at. 
 
Always recognizing that none of us can predict the future with 
certainty — the future will buffet us if we don’t have a plan. 
Unless we have some plan, you can hardly tack with circumstance. 
If you let yourself drift, you will get nowhere. It is my submission 
that financially you have let us drift over the last five years 
because you didn’t know what you wanted to reach. 
 
Now I come to this question of the credit ratings. I have here a 
clipping of a few months ago dealing with the dominion bond 
service credit ratings. And, Mr. Premier, when you came to office 
there were two provinces in Canada who had a better credit rating 
than ourselves, Alberta and Ontario. And we were better than most 
other provinces. Depending on which agency, we ranked 
ordinarily with B.C. and everybody else was behind us. 
 
We now have the distinction of being ahead, at least by the 
dominion bond rating service, ahead of one province, 
Newfoundland. And I say to you, Mr. Premier, anyone is in bad 
shape when their credit rating isn’t any better than 
Newfoundland’s. We are now the same as New Brunswick’s, 
which I’ve heard described as a financial basket case — I think 
that’s unduly harsh, but certainly it’s not a great target to aim at, 
the financial status of the province of New Brunswick or, in fact, 
of Nova Scotia at the current time. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Premier, that is not what I am saying about 
your financial report; that’s what the dominion  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3888 
 

bond rating service is saying about your financial record. 
Newfoundland is down in the B category, and most of the cities in 
Canada will do a little better than that. So I think it is no great 
distinction for us to be better than the province of Newfoundland. 
 
Mr. Premier, you attribute your difficulties to sharp drops in the 
value of resources, but I point out the obvious fact that the value of 
resources was highest — or at least of oil —was at its highest level 
in 1985 at $30. Value of oil was never above $10 before 1978; 
1979, $12; 1980, $21; ’81 was a very good year, but so was ’82 
and ’83 and ’84 and ’85. We were up in the 25 to $30 range in all 
those years. ’81 was a bad year for production. So in terms of 
gross revenue, ’85 and ’84 and ’83 and ’82 will be better than any 
years prior to them. Now I don’t want to argue about that because 
it’s not relevant to what we’re doing in the 1990s. 
 
But I ask you again, Mr. Premier, will you outline for the public 
what you believe the financial outcome will be of your financial 
plans for the next four years, for this term of office, so that the 
public will know at least what you’re aiming at, recognizing that 
circumstances may well make it impossible for you to meet your 
targets? People are forgiving if they think you have got a plan and 
are working toward it. They are very uneasy if they think you have 
no plan and you’re saying, well I’m going to deal with the 
problem that’s on my plate now, and next year will look after 
itself. That is the feeling they have of what you did from 1982 to 
1987, and I ask you again: do you have a plan for the next four 
years, or do you not? And will you outline it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I will, Mr. Chairman, briefly reiterate 
the plan for the hon. member so that he can review the plan. 
 
Let me say, just at the outset, that when we’re looking at the credit 
rating and how it ranks with other provinces . . . I mean, he’s 
quoted one rating institution, and we can look at them all, but if we 
look at 1987 and if we want to look at Standard & Poor’s or we 
want to look at Moody’s, we see that indeed British Columbia has 
a better rating than Saskatchewan and Alberta does, and then 
there’s Saskatchewan. And Moody’s credit rating, we’re the same 
as Manitoba and we’re above all the rest of the provinces. 
 
I mean, you’ve got Standard & Poor’s, who ranks Ontario’s higher 
now. As of April ’87, Alberta is an AA plus and British Columbia 
is an AA, Ontario is an AA plus, and then there’s Saskatchewan 
with an AA minus. And Moody’s credit rating, a little different 
symbols, but they’ve got an AAA — B.C., and an Aaa ( with the 
two a’s, small a’s) in Alberta, and in Saskatchewan an A-1. 
 
So I agree with that it’s not as high as B.C.’s and Alberta, or 
Ontario, which has had some rather good times, and many 
consider it a boom. But under these conditions, we’ve certainly 
ranked according to the rating institutions. 
 
And both Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s have recently affirmed 
the province’s credit rating, and the affirmation of that rating now 
is from the fact that the province’s  

revenue initiatives, and the province’s initiatives to control 
expenditures have show them that despite difficult economic times 
we still rank an A-1, or as the other put it, AA minus. Well we can 
argue about that, I suppose. 
 
Let me say that what we plan to do, and part of it is in the budget, 
but what we plan to do is increase and stabilize revenues through 
diversification of our economy. And there are many things that we 
can do to do that, and I can mention a few. We plan to bring 
government expenditures into line with projected revenues with 
two major considerations. One, that we protect people during 
difficult times; and secondly, that we maintain good employment 
figures in the province in terms of jobs. Now you can argue about 
whether we’d like to do that or not. But in any event that’s what 
we’d like to do, and at the same time to project a balanced budget, 
under the forecastable conditions to date, by 1990-91. 
 
(1700) 
 
Now we will continue to expand projects, and I won’t need to go 
through them all, to maintain the employment and to generate 
economic activity and things we do in the oil patch and upgraders 
and paper mills and bacon plants and recreational vehicles and 
turbines, and so forth, which I think are positive, and the rural gas 
and some other things that we’re doing across the province. 
 
We will hopefully maintain our employment level at either the 
best or the second-best in all of Canada. We’ve ranked there right 
around number one in western Canada during these really difficult 
times. I think our housing program, and part of the reason why 
you had a housing program, or promised one, was for the same 
reasons. 
 
Now we will watch our employment and we will watch our 
protection programs, and our objective will be to diversify the 
economy and contain expenditures in line with the forecasted 
revenues. And the target is by 1990-91 to have ourselves a 
balanced budget as we see growth, as we see near the best 
employment record, and we protect people from circumstances 
beyond their control like high interest rates or drought or some 
things that might come down the pike. 
 
Now we’ve stated that in the budget document on page 12 . . . the 
Saskatchewan Economic and Financial Report, pardon me, March 
1987, by the minister, and our objective is to at least contain 
expenditures before we go into the taxation base area as much as 
possible — and I know that that’s kind of fodder for the 
opposition in terms of, we cut a few things — but to at least 
maintain expenditures and review them. And then we look, 
obviously, to the only other source of money, which is getting 
revenue from people. And we’ve been through some of that before 
in terms of property improvement grants and flat tax and other 
things. 
 
The plan is to stabilize and diversify revenues, diversify and 
increase revenues and have them stabilizing through 
diversification and economic development, particularly in 
processing and manufacturing, to bring expenditures in line with 
our forecasted revenues, while we protect people and maintain 
employment, and move towards a  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3889 
 

balanced budget by 1990-91. 
 
I can say that it would have been an interesting exercise for you, 
sir, given the revenue forecasts and the difference between 
expenditures and revenue of your last budget, to deal with about a 
400 to $500 million gap in what was forecasted in terms of 
revenue and the way it turned out. 
 
Now obviously it wouldn’t have been any fun for you and it 
wasn’t any fun for us, but it was extremely difficult to forecast 
that, and I’ll say that. Even though it was an election year and you 
might have been a little generous here or there, you know, I mean, 
you’re out a lot. And you’ve said, well I was out as well . . . Well 
that’s . . . I guess it’s going around. 
 
The forecast there was very, very wrong, as you know, in terms of 
potash revenues and some other revenues and so forth. Then we 
had to deal with that. And then it kept getting worse in many cases 
and it fell right off to now, in terms of wheat . . . it’s like the 
1930s, in terms of all that revenue we get from wheat and income 
and sales tax. It’s gone. 
 
So the plan is, as outlined on page 12, and with the caveats that I 
would point out that we want to maintain employment and we 
want to protect people . . . and as you know, health and social 
services spending have risen 65 per cent since 1982, and that’s 
well ahead of inflation. And somebody could argue, well no, 
because social services is down, that’s not the facts. I mean, 
education, health, and social services are up and up significantly. 
 
I suppose we could argue about, you know, where we’re spending 
the money and you’d say, well I’d rather spend it on the dental 
program than on this, and so that’s fair enough. We can differ 
there. But no question, expenditures are up a great deal in those 
three areas. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Being 5 o’clock the committee is 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


