


















































June 23, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 23, 1987 
 

663 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I concluded my 
remarks earlier this afternoon, I was talking about the dental 
care program and the way in which the cut-backs to that 
program have impacted on Saskatchewan people, especially 
some of the constituents that I’ve talked to in Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
I think when it comes to the dental care program, we see the 
clear agenda of the Devine PCs, to abandon the whole of the 
health care system to the private sector. In the first term of 
office, it was four-year-olds that were dropped from the dental 
care program. And now with a renewed mandate, we see yet 
another group of people, young people, dropped from the 
program — those 13 years of age and older. And the rest of the 
dental plan program will likely be going in the next weeks and 
months and years of this government as well. 
 
As they can’t manage the economy, they’ll be forced to make 
more cuts to the program to fulfil the real agenda that they have 
when it comes to health care — continued cuts in royalty rates 
to the oil companies, so that funding for human priorities such 
as the dental care program get abandoned to the private sector. 
The transfer of health care back to private individuals and 
families — this is what we’re seeing in this budget. The real 
Conservative agenda, the privatization of health care, shifting 
the burden from the public arena to individual people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, some of us in this Assembly and some of 
the public of Saskatchewan no doubt have heard of the 
award-winning Canadian author, W.P. Kinsella, the author of 
The Iowa Baseball Conspiracy. In that book, Kinsella tells the 
story of the backwards plague that settled into rural Iowa some 
100 years ago in that part of the country. 
 
The backwards plague was a very strange and eerie sickness 
that settled on rural Iowa. It’s strange and eerie in that it struck 
only young people and children. It saw them grow young again. 
In other words, there was a regression. They literally shrank in 
size physically; their mental capacities went backwards. And in 
15 or 20 years then, we had people who were young adults 
reverting back into infancy. And in fact Kinsella said there were 
documented records of this happening in Iowa, in Onomanna, 
and Sioux Falls and other cities like that. Parents who raise 
children only to have to turn around and raise them a second 
time. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is precisely what we have here in  

Saskatchewan, a backwards plague. People who worked for 
medicare to establish a caring and compassionate vision of 
society are now seeing that vision of society rolled backwards 
by this Conservative government, and they too will have to 
fight again to re-establish medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — It’s a backwards plague and it’s perpetrated 
by this government and the Premier of this province. A 
government hell-bent and determined to roll back the clock on 
medicare. Not just to stop it, but to roll it back — to roll back 
our Saskatchewan traditions of caring and compassion, to take 
us back to the days when the accumulation of capital was the 
determining factor in whether individuals got medical care. The 
person who didn’t have capital went sick or didn’t go to the 
hospital in those days, and we’re rapidly reverting to those days 
here in Saskatchewan. And with that sort of vision of health 
care, Mr. Speaker, that abandonment of our collective social 
responsibility to each other to be our brother or our sister’s 
keeper, what we have is a backwards plague. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now from health care and focus a bit 
on another arena of government expenditure where we can see 
very, very clearly in the budget documentation itself how the 
backwards plague has settled into the Department of Science 
and Technology. Five million, four hundred and ninety-five 
hundred dollars is what the Finance minister’s estimate for 1987 
expenditures is for the Department of Science and technology. 
That’s the figure for the year 1988. What was the figure for 
1987? The figure for this coming year is half of that. Two 
million, seven hundred and eight-three hundred dollars — a 50 
per cent cut-back in expenditures to the Department of Science 
and technology. Now also for some people they might say this 
is fair enough. After all, other government departments are 
having to cut back as well. Health and education and social 
services are being cut back, and what can we expect from 
science and technology with those kinds of cut-backs. 
 
But in fact this isn’t what our Premier had said. This isn’t what 
our Premier committed himself to doing during the election 
campaign eight months ago. Categorically not. 
 
No, the Premier himself stood in Saskatoon on Friday, October 
10, during the election, and pledged $10 million a year for the 
next five years for science and technology. Seed money for 
high-tech firms in Saskatchewan; the opportunity for 
Saskatchewan businesses to become part of another Ottawa 
Valley high-tech centre here in Saskatchewan. He promised $50 
million over five years to Saskatchewan firms, many of them in 
Saskatoon. And now his government has walked away from 
that commitment just as it’s walked away from the commitment 
to the Sherbrooke nursing home in Saskatoon. Just as it’s 
walked away from its commitments not to increase the personal 
income taxes or the sales tax. 
 
This government has buried this commitment under a verbal 
barrage of hype found in the Premier’s trip to Japan trying to 
promote things like Joytec and other products. 
 
Yes, $50 million promised for Saskatchewan high tech in  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

664 
 

October — $10 million each for the next five years, but 2.5 
million in this year’s budget for science and technology. Clearly 
duplicity. Clearly a deception of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
What we have, Mr. Speaker, is a Premier who goes back on his 
word, who plays with numbers, who plays with the public 
purse, and does this for his own personal, political advantage. 
And that is precisely why we face the kind of scandalous deficit 
that we do today, and the slash-backs that we do, because the 
boy from Estevan simply can’t manage the store; he can’t be 
trusted with the public welfare. Now again I’ll say that some 
might argue the can be trusted, that he has honourable 
intentions, and that the Premier meant what he said when he 
pledged money to science and technology during the election 
campaign. Perhaps. Perhaps that was the case. 
 
But then we have to go back to what his government said in this 
Assembly as recently as December 3, two months later, when it 
presented the Speech from the Throne. And then there was talk 
about high tech, talk about Saskatchewan’s high-tech future 
with a new bio-tech institute for research in the province, a new 
grains research institute, a new potash institute, a new research 
institute for uranium. 
 
But lo and behold, in this Conservative budget we find no 
mention whatsoever of any of these promised research 
initiatives; no allocation of funding for that, that we can 
determine. All very easy talk about in a Speech from the 
Throne, but much more difficult for the government that 
practised deception to deliver on. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I look at these plans, or perhaps I should 
say these lack of plans, and I say that the people of 
Saskatchewan are not going to accept this kind of duplicity — 
especially those people in Saskatoon who are concerned with 
research and development that goes on there, in the university 
and in the high-tech sector. They’re disappointed that there are 
no plans, that there’s a cut-back in the amount of money for this 
department, that there’s a cut-back for research. And people are 
beginning to feel duped by their own government. 
 
Words, words, words — further words from the Minister of 
Finance in his budget address. 
 

This Government recognizes that excellence in education 
is crucial to the future prosperity of the people of 
Saskatchewan. A well-educated populace is more 
adaptable and better equipped to deal with the rapid 
technological changes that shape our social and economic 
environment. Mr. Speaker, it is for these reasons that 
education is a priority of this government. 

 
Well the people of Saskatoon Sutherland recognize these as 
words and verbiage I can say for sure, because the people of 
Saskatoon Sutherland aren’t getting a new public school in 
Erindale from this budget and from this same Minister of 
Finance, a school that they were promised for Erindale. Keep 
on building Saskatchewan, we were told. 
 
But there’s no commitment in this budget to build a new  

public school in Erindale. A verbal commitment to excellence 
in education, but no allocation of funds for such a school — no 
fiscal commitment from this government. And the people of 
Sutherland see that they’re deceived, yes, again, by this 
government, just as they were deceived by the announcement of 
the building of a new addition to Sherbrooke nursing home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on to comment on the misplaced 
priorities of this government, the way in which they have 
deceived people with their tax increases and the like; how 
they’ve said one thing and done the opposite. But I won’t. 
 
Times are not the best here in Saskatchewan and in the prairies. 
We all know that. Farmers are troubled by low commodity 
prices. Working people are troubled by lack of employment and 
financial pressures. But the land here in Saskatchewan is good, 
and the people of Saskatchewan are good. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — One thing, one thing is not so good, and that 
is the government of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — The PC government of this province has 
mismanaged the people’s affairs. It has misplaced priorities. It 
has betrayed the trust of Saskatchewan people. And the Premier 
himself has been part of this betrayal and the backwards plague. 
Clearly what Saskatchewan people need is a government as 
good as its people. 
 
And it’s for this reason that I will rise to support the 
amendment, and to vote against the main motion, namely this 
budget. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it is my honour and my privilege through you 
to speak to the people of Saskatchewan and to the people of 
Canora through this budget debate. It is with confidence that I 
offer my support and indeed my congratulation so the Minister 
of Finance who has done a tremendous job under very difficult 
circumstances. 
 
The people of Canora are very aware of the need for restraint in 
government, and they expect me to support that restraint as they 
do. They are aware of and supportive of the reduction in the 
size of government and the public sector. Canora people know 
that these things are necessary in the Saskatchewan of today 
with the difficult times we all face. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, much ado has been made over a display in 
front of the legislature on Saturday. I had the privilege of being 
home in my constituency over the weekend, and I want to 
assure the members of the  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

665 
 

opposition that not everyone in Saskatchewan is in favour of 
that type of demonstration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was very surprised 
to walk down the street of Canora and find solid support for the 
government. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they told me three things. 
Number one, they told us that we’re doing the right thing. 
Secondly, they told me to challenge the opposition to make 
more discussion and more debate on agricultural issues in this 
budget debate. And they also told me that, yes, they noticed the 
display by the opposition during the budget speech. 
 
It is the government’s mandate and obligation to bring this 
province’s fiscal situation into line with current realities while 
maintaining programs which protect people and seeking every 
opportunity to diversity our economy. 
 
Before I go into detailed remarks about why we face the 
situation we do and why this budget indeed is a historic one, I 
would like you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to know something of the 
commitment this government has made to my people in Canora. 
In the village of Lintlaw, for example, our government is 
providing almost $400,000 for a six-unit seniors apartment 
complex. Now before our government came to power, seniors 
in that area either had to go to one of the major cities and be 
separated from their families or they had to make do with 
inappropriate housing. A PC government willingly made the 
resources available to end that state of affairs and it is an 
example of genuine caring for our seniors as opposed to the 
rhetoric we so often hear in some quarters. 
 
Many areas of my riding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have had 
problems with flooding, but I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that it is important to the people of the Canora constituency. 
This government will provide assistance for seven flood-control 
projects in Canora in the near future, and the total project cost is 
in excess of $1.5 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is real 
commitment to real problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — I also want to point out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that this budget provides for the completion 
resurfacing of Highway No. 5 in our riding at a cost of over 
$2.3 million. 
 
We also see the government’s plan for diversification including 
the development of tourism at work in Canora. The government 
will invest the necessary funds to construct change houses and 
water treatment facilities in Good Spirit provincial park, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This will enable us to deliver a higher quality 
of service to our tourists. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when that 
is combined with the good will and warm hospitality of the 
people of my riding, I am sure you will see our tourist business 
increase more than you might expect. 
 
One final project that I’m particularly proud of, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is also costly and clear proof that this government will 
not allow all health initiatives to be  

focused in the big cities, that this government cares about my 
riding. I am extremely happy to announce to the people of 
Theodore and surrounding district that a new integrated health 
facility will be constructed in their community this year. This 
facility will cost the province $2.6 million. That is the kind of 
commitment we are talking about in this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this debate is 
indeed an important one. It is important because it sets the 
foundation upon which our province will build a future that is 
strong and fair and prosperous. 
 
There was a time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when Saskatchewan 
people were led to believe that we would always have 
prosperity, that by using borrowed money from bankers in New 
York we could buy up existing potash mines and uranium 
mines, and even the land out from under farm families in 
desperate circumstances — that we could borrow money to do 
these things and the revenues would continue for ever. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was just not true. I remember, in 
fact, the Leader of the NDP saying that by borrowing money to 
buy these things we would assure indefinite prosperity for the 
government. 
 
In fact, when he was pressed on what would happen if the price 
for potash, uranium, oil, and grain all declined at the same time, 
he thought it was a ridiculous idea. But if it happened, he said 
— if this highly unlikely thing happened — it would be a 
disaster. 
 
Well, it has happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it is causing 
serious challenges for the government. Had we had a 
responsible government in the good times, some of these 
difficult decisions would not have to be made. But we did not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — And I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that I am glad that the faces on the NDP benches haven’t 
changed much since they mismanaged the province, because 
they cannot escape their own responsibility by crying, it wasn’t 
us; it was someone else. It was the very group of members who 
sit across the way right now. 
 
What did their vision of Saskatchewan leave us, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. All members get an 
opportunity to enter into the debate, and I would ask that all 
members show the courtesy to the member from Canora to give 
his feelings on this budget debate. 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — What did their vision of Saskatchewan 
leave us, Mr. Deputy Speaker? If you look on page 41 of the 
budget address, you will see some of their legacy. The potash 
corporation they bought us is estimated to be $781 million in 
debt. The Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation is 
looking at $522 million in debt. And if you look at the total for 
the family of Crown corporations, the  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

666 
 

people of this province are responsible for in excess of $7 
billion in Crown corporation debts — $7 billion of debt, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what happens when you buy up what other 
people have built and borrow from New York to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Now I see the NDP, now I see the NDP 
like to cry out from their seats because they cannot stand the 
truth. But I would like to see a little more of the truth put into 
this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
For example, the members over there like to talk about health 
care. They like to look back to history and to pretend that all 
caring people have to be socialists. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
ask where were they when doctors were extra billing families in 
this province. Where were they, Mr. Speaker, when families 
had to take money out of their pocket to pay for basic health 
care? You know where they were. They were sitting on the 
government benches doing nothing about the problem. It took 
my leader . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it took my leader and 
our Premier to put a stop to extra billing in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — The NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like to 
pretend that they care about senior citizens, and that is all fine 
and good to talk a line. But what did they do when they were in 
office, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well, first they cared of the elderly 
by turning them out into the streets. They did this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when they put a moratorium on the construction of 
nursing homes. Because as the NDP’s new president wrote to 
the former member from Moosomin, you can’t have a nursing 
home in every community. Well we weren’t asking for one in 
every community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were just asking for 
a commitment for the elderly that any decent human being 
would make. And that kind of commitment we got, as you well 
know, was a moratorium on nursing homes. 
 
And for our young people, I want to explain that word, 
moratorium. It means that the government of the NDP refused 
point blank to even build one nursing home, not one. They have 
the cash; they had the money to build the nursing homes, but 
no. No, they were too busy buying up private companies to 
build nursing homes. 
 
And what about hospitals, Mr. Speaker? The NDP say they 
care. Was there any hospital construction going on anywhere? 
Precious little, and I’ll let the Leader of the NDP tell you why. 
He said on the CFQC open line show in Saskatoon, and I quote: 
 

The Heritage Fund was to take money and to invest it like 
Saskoil in potash, in uranium mines. It was not the belief 
that the money would be there in cash to build hospitals or 
nursing homes. 

You bet it wasn’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is the most 
bizarre about these people over there, these NDP? Is it that they 
borrow a great deal of money to take away the uranium mines 
from private people? 
 
They refused to build a health care system; they say the money 
is for investing in uranium mines. And once they have them, 
what do they do? They say they want to close them down. They 
want to close the very mines that they borrowed to take over. 
They don’t want to sell them back to the private sector and so 
perhaps get a few dollars that could be used to build hospitals; 
they just want to outright close them. That is the kind of caring 
the socialists have demonstrated since that bunch over there 
have been around. Their solution to problems in the economy 
was to ignore them. 
 
For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what did the NDP do about 
high interest rates? What did they do when people were losing 
their homes and farms, and farms were going under and small 
businesses were being bankrupted all by sky-high interest rates? 
What did the NDP do? Well they did do something. First they 
took over the farms. They said, sure we’ll help you if you want 
to be a tenant of the government, so they took away the farm 
land from farm families, and like carpet-baggers in the 
depression, the only way those families could get their land 
back was to pay twice and three times and four times what the 
socialists bought it for. And that was the caring face the NDP 
showed farm families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here is what the Leader of the NDP had to say to farm families 
and farm businesses and just families who stood to lose their 
homes, and again I quote, this time from the Leader-Post of 
October 11, 1979: 
 

Blakeney rules out the province supplying low-interest 
money to all farmers and small businesses because that 
would get the government into the banking business, 
which would not be appropriate. 

 
So it was okay to get into land-banking business, but it wasn’t 
okay to provide interest rate protection. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
how the NDP cared. 
 
The members on the other side are also opposing welfare 
reform, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Reform that gives social 
assistance clients an opportunity to work and to develop work 
experience and work skills. It is interesting that they are 
opposing this because they also oppose not letting people work. 
 
Here’s what the Leader of the Opposition said on October 26, 
1982: “People are getting paid not to work. That doesn’t make 
any economic sense, no matter what your political philosophy.” 
We agree, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and welfare clients agree. 
 
But where were the NDP when these people wanted a chance to 
work, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They were building bureaucracies 
and buying potash mines. Bureaucracies  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

667 
 

represent the extent of NDP caring, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
represent it well. 
 
Through you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask those NDP over there 
to remember their greatest hallmark, the department of northern 
Saskatchewan. We are building this bureaucracy, they said, 
because we care about people in the North, and the people in 
the North said, God save us from such caring. 
 
Millions of dollars down the drain — to do what? According to 
the Northerners, what DNS (department of northern 
Saskatchewan) accomplished was to turn them into a colonial 
people — a people that had become wards of the state. And that 
is NDP caring, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could bring out what students had 
to say about that bunch over there. I could bring forward 
statistics and facts that would remind you how thoroughly those 
people mismanaged this province, but it is plain just from the 
few examples I have cited. 
 
What we are about here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to 
recover from that past, to overcome the damage done by the 
NDP. And I ask you to remember, it was those same NDP we 
look across at today. 
 
Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are making history and 
planning the future, and that means we are rebuilding our health 
care system with programs directed to today’s priorities and a 
system that is responsive to the changing demands of our 
changing times. 
 
It means a budget for health care that is greater than ever before 
in the history of this province and greater than all others, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
It means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, bringing medicine to our rural 
communities instead of forcing our rural communities to go to 
the cities. And, yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it does mean some 
difficult decisions, including the decision to ask those who can 
afford it to make some contributions to their drug costs. 
 
And if this is so awful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is such a 
terrible thing, then I challenge the members on that other side of 
the House to stand up and condemn their brothers in Manitoba 
who have a program that is much less comprehensive than ours. 
I challenge them to condemn the Liberals in Ontario who only 
cover psychiatric patients and few select groups. 
 
They cannot have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. We have the most 
comprehensive, richest drug plan in Canada. So if it is so bad, I 
want them to stand in their place and say to Howard Pawley, 
Howard, you are worse than the Tories in Saskatchewan. You 
are worse than a Tory and we disown you. 
 
(1930) 
 
They won’t do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of course an 
NDP premier is worse than a PC premier. It is the nature of 
things. And these people across the way do not really have the 
courage of their convictions. They are simply out to score cheap 
political points through scaring  

people. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while they work to score 
political points, this government has proven that it will address 
the real needs of this province and we’ll act responsibly to 
protect our people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud to be a part of this process, a 
part of this government, and a part of a party that knows how to 
act on a caring rather than just talk about caring. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ll be voting against the amendment and for the main 
motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before beginning my 
address to the budget, I beg leave to make an introduction of a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. 
members for that leave. The person I wish to introduce is sitting 
opposite you, Mr. Speaker, in the Speaker’s gallery. The 
gentleman I’m referring to is 91 years young. He happens also 
be my grandfather, a fact which I am very proud of. Albert 
Trew comes . . . is now a resident of Regina, but spent virtually 
all of his lifetime in the Maple Creek constituency, in the 
Lemsford and Sceptre areas. So please join me in welcoming 
my grandfather to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Addressing the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
Before I get started, it’s interesting to note The Edmonton 
Journal, June 18, gives the budget the right amount of attention, 
as it has most of the article covered in red ink — which seems 
to me to be an appropriate colour — but additionally it makes 
the article incredibly difficult to read. And I think The 
Edmonton Journal understands what the budget is really worth. 
 
I also want to make a few remarks that I sincerely hope the 
Premier hears after his remarks earlier today about people 
leaving Saskatchewan for health care. He was saying that 
people are coming to Saskatchewan for cancer care, and I 
submit through you, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, that indeed 
people re leaving Saskatchewan for health care. The numbers 
don’t lie. People are leaving Saskatchewan for cancer treatment, 
and I have someone that is a good friend of mine, happens also 
to be a constituent, who happens also to be travelling on a 
regular basis out of province for cancer treatment that is 
unavailable here in  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

668 
 

Saskatchewan. So I suggest that the Premier get his facts a little 
bit straighter when he talks about cancer victims. 
 
I’d like to just make a brief mention about the former speaker. It 
was interesting that there wasn’t a great deal said about the 
budget — very little mention about the budget. There seemed to 
be an awful lot of anti-New Democrat and anti-socialist 
rhetoric, but very little . . . The speaker seemed unable to stand 
up and say, yes, I am indeed proud of the budget. It just wasn’t 
there. 
 
I am indeed happy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be able to address 
some of the issues today, and I’m pleased for the opportunity to 
stand up and to speak out for the people of Regina North and 
the people of the province that have been so callously and so 
cruelly hurt by the Conservative cuts. The real issues that I will 
be speaking about today include health care, education, 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, co-operatives, 
Saskatchewan transportation, justice, and a few other areas. 
Believe me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after waiting for so long for 
the government to call and recall this legislature, there is indeed 
an awful lot more to say than what time will allow me to say 
today. 
 
Let me start with an area that is very near and dear to a caring 
Saskatchewan people. This Lane Liberal budget of betrayal 
attacks the sick and the elderly in a way that has absolutely no 
precedence since the free-enterprise right-wing parties of 25 
years ago were attacking our medicare system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — The right-wing Conservatives and Liberals were 
predicting doom and gloom and certainly doom for a the health 
care. They were saying we could not afford it then. They’re 
saying the same things now. The difference is now they form 
the government and now they are doing everything they can to 
see that their predictions of doom and gloom indeed come true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — To start with, a portion of a letter that I received 
just recently. It was a copy of a letter sent to our Premier. “Dear 
Mr. Grant Devine:” and parts of the letter read: 
 

After being in an AV accident last April ’86, I have seen 
several physicians, tried prescriptions, and attended 
physiotherapy without success. 
 
In August of ’86 after my family physician told me that I 
should quit my job, and if I didn’t, then I would probably 
have to eventually anyway, I decided to try a chiropractor. 
After going for a few treatments, I finally found some 
relief for the first time which enables me to keep working. 
All doctors involved believe this to be a chronic condition. 
 
I found that a few weeks of chiropractic therapy did help. 
If this cut-back had been in effect last August, I would not 
have been able to afford those services, and you would be 
paying me  

unemployment insurance as well as more -s Government 
Insurance for more pain and suffering, as well as for a loss 
of my job in the only trade I know. 

 
I’m sure that would cost a lot more than paying for my 
appointments as well as cost me a lot of extra undue pain 
and suffering as well as my job. I’m only one example. 
How many more are there like me that would cost you 
more in the long run? 

 
The letter concludes: 
 

I think you should seriously re-consider this limitation 
before it is passed. 

 
That was a letter sent to our Premier. 
 
I have another letter I’d like to read parts of. This one to the 
Minister of Health. 
 

Dear Mr. McLeod: We wish to object most strongly to 
your government’s proposal to limit chiropractic 
treatments to 12 visits per year. It was our understanding 
during the past two provincial election campaigns that 
with Progressive Conservatives in office our 
Saskatchewan health-care systems would be protected and 
maintained at the level in existence and, in fact, improved 
upon to remain the best health-care system in Canada. Are 
we to assume (the letter goes on) are we to assume that all 
future claims and promises by your government and/or 
party will be suspect? 

 
It continues: 
 

Our daughter recently informed us that medication for her 
8-year-old son’s allergies has been removed from the drug 
plan, and henceforth they must pay the full cost of this 
medication required on a daily basis (Mr. Deputy 
Speaker). We ask you and your government to give 
serious consideration to maintaining our health care 
systems so all residents — all residents of Saskatchewan 
have a right to equal access of all forms of health care. 

 
One last real short letter that really sums up the health care 
thing in a nub. And this is the most concise letter that I have 
received on the subject. 
 

Mr. Kim Trew, Regina North. I say no to any health cuts 
in any way and no to any cut in our chiropractics. I wish 
this government would leave things as it was before they 
came into power. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And I thank my constituent for sending me that 
very crisp and clear letter. These are just a tiny sample of the 
letters that I’ve received. 
 
The changes to the dental plan are typical of the arrogance of 
this government. Yes, arrogance. You heard it. More than 400 
people, mostly dental therapists,  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

669 
 

have been fired. This government continues, by that action it 
continues to blame the working women and the working men of 
Saskatchewan for the deficit. 
 
The government looks for ways to cut service. And where does 
it look? Health care. The Saskatchewan dental plan for young 
people used to cover young people for 11 years of their lives — 
the formative years of their dental habits and the formative 
years of their permanent teeth. In this budget the coverage has 
gone from 11 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from kindergarten to 
age 16, down to eight years, kindergarten to 13. 
 
The total reported expense — and this is interesting — that the 
total reported expense of the dental plan were according to the 
most recent dental plan annual report, $11.4 million. Or stated 
another way, there's 11 years worth of student population. Each 
year of the student coverage cost $1.036 million. The new 
reduced program using dentists instead of dental therapy will 
cost, according to the Minister of health, no more than $9.7 
million; or broken down on a per-year basis for student 
population, $1.212 million. 
 
Using the new coverage of eight years, the additional cost to 
taxpayers by using dentists instead of dental therapists . . . 
Remember now, this is an additional cost to the taxpayers that 
you’re perpetuating on using the name of saving money. And 
it’s completely false. It is not true; simply that. It is not saving 
any money. The additional cost to taxpayers using dentists is 
$1.408 million. If you were to maintain the coverage for 11 
years, the additional cost would be just under $2 million. And 
I’d like to just hear somebody deny that, because it’s 
undeniable. The numbers come from your own statements, the 
government’s statements, the government’s records. It’s totally 
undeniable. It’s not, the cutting of the dental program is not in 
any way, shape or form designed to save one thin dime. In fact 
it’s costing the taxpayers money. 
 
This budget of betrayal certainly does not deliver efficiency in 
the children’s dental program, and it does not deliver efficiency 
to the more than 400 dedicated people who delivered dental 
correction and dental education to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Let me read a portion of a letter in yesterday’s 
Regina Leader-Post. It too is from a constituent of mine, and 
it’s a very, very well-written letter. I wish time would permit 
me to read it all: 
 

I understand how my daughter is feeling. I know that she 
is sad, disappointed, and frustrated. So am I. 
 
When we came from Chile more than nine years ago, 
fleeing from a cruel dictatorship, she was only a Grade 11 
high school student . . . 
 
I remember how happy I was when she decided to apply to 
the Wascana Institute and to become a dental therapist. 
She was accepted and started to work hard, very hard . . . 

. . . She became a dental therapist after two years of 
exhausting work. And how proud her mother and I were. 
 
. . . I remember her telling me how wonderful this plan 
was, taking care of thousands and thousands of children 
across the province in places where dentists never went 
and never would go. 

 
The letter goes on: 
 

. . . The, rumours began to circulate that the dental plan 
would be abolished . . . I advised her to relax, because I 
never believed that a progressive government would do 
something like that. Medicare is sacrosanct in 
Saskatchewan. But rumours become reality (all) too often 
in this province. 
 
Finally, she and all the staff of the dental plan were 
assembled at the Regina Inn . . . she and her colleagues 
were separated in little groups; each group had to go to 
different rooms; the doors were locked and she was told 
that the Saskatchewan Dental Plan was almost totally 
cancelled . . . She was laid off. A psychiatrist was on hand. 

 
That’s the only kindness there has been so far. The letter goes 
on: 
 

She called me by telephone . . . I could not believe it, but it 
was sadly true. I wanted to be with her, to embrace her and 
to say something. I understand how she was feeling, 
because the very same thing happened to me in Chile, 
when I was fired from my position as principal of a school 
for mentally retarded children, the victim of a military 
dictatorship. 

 
Concluding, the letter states: 
 

I understand my daughter, (and) her colleagues and their 
parents. I understand their sadness, their frustration and 
their indignation. I know that it does not only mean the 
end of a job, the but the end of a career in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the most damning indictment of 
this government that I have seen in a long, long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Turning to the prescription drug plan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this budget destroys what was the best 
prescription drug program in Canada, and it attacks people with 
chronic health problems. 
 
The government says people are using too many drugs. It 
conveniently ignores the fact that it’s the medical doctors that 
prescribe the drugs. What the government appears to be saying 
is that it has absolutely no faith in the doctors of Saskatchewan. 
The reason given for the change in the drug plan indicate that 
the Devine Conservative  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

670 
 

government thinks that it understand medicine better than the 
medical doctors. 
 
Are we to start greeting the members opposite as Dr. Devine, 
Dr. McLeod and Dr. Lane? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask members not to 
use other members’ names during debate. You can refer to them 
as their position or as their constituency. 
 
I can read the chapter to you if you want me to — page 104, 
paragraph 319 — but I would ask members to refrain from 
using members’ names. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I apologize to the members opposite and to you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. What I really should have said is, are we 
to start referring to the members opposite as Dr. Estevan, Dr. 
Meadow Lake, Dr. Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, and so on? And I 
submit, no. Dr. Doom and Dr. Death is more appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I recently spoke to the 
parents of a nursing student. This family resides in the riding of 
the Minister of Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives. 
The young woman has colitis, which is a serious intestinal 
problem that requires constant use of medication. When I was 
speaking to her mother, her mother said, yes, my daughter just 
had a prescription filled and the druggist said, after July 1 that 
will be $400. I said, my goodness, $400 a month? And she said, 
no, it could last as little as two weeks — Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as little as two weeks. 
 
That, using simple mathematics, based on this young lady’s past 
year of history with her health problem, she’s going to be 
spending up front between 5 and $10,000 per year just to live. 
This is a nursing student, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Where is she 
going to come up with 5 to $10,000? After the rebate, after the 
generous rebate that the Finance minister and the Health 
minister tell us so grandly about, after the rebate, this student is 
going to be spending between 1 and $2,000 a year on drugs for 
a problem that is none of her . . . it’s not any fault of her own. It 
is a health problem that she is inflicted with. And what’s the 
government do? It just charges her money. I say it’s a shame. 
 
Yet the Minister of Health would have us believe that she is 
somehow abusing our drug plan. She has this strange need — 
she wants to live, she wants to live an ordinary life. I say, bless 
her, good for her; we should be helping her, not putting up 
road-blocks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Another woman that I spoke to recently, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, happens to be a resident of my constituency. 
And I’d like to recite just a few of the things that this woman 
has had happen to her since the October 20 election. 
 
First, the government abolished her civil service job, so she 
was, is unemployed. Then she looked around and decided, well, 
here’s maybe an opportunity; maybe  

there’s a silver lining somewhere; maybe I can improve my 
education. So she applied to the Wascana Institute to take 
business administration. The rest is history. That program was 
cancelled along with many others and so she cannot go there. 
That program was cancelled. 
 
This woman also has a health problem, Mr. Deputy speaker. 
And also and behold, if the specialist that she sees isn’t one of 
the 19 that was fired from the Plains Health Centre here in 
Regina. That means that when she has to go and see a specialist, 
the nearest specialist in that field is now in University Hospital 
in Saskatoon. That is a shame. That is causing undue hardship 
for this woman. 
 
Then the story goes on. The litany goes on and on. It’s almost 
as if the members opposite took this woman and decided, heh, 
how can we make life just as absolutely miserable as we 
possibly can for her. 
 
Then they introduce the drug plan. And this woman tells me 
that last year in the prescription fees alone — and remember the 
doctors issue the prescriptions — in prescription fees alone she 
spent more than $140 just in the dispensing fees alone. I have 
no idea what that’s going to translate into in terms of cost for 
her drugs this year, but you can bet it will be many times the 
$140. And that’s a shame. 
 
This budget of betrayal betrays young people through the 
elimination of the dental plan; it betrays the sick an the elderly 
through the elimination of the drug plan; and it betrays nursing 
home residents and elderly through a $73 per month increase in 
the rent, in nursing home residents, and a 66 per cent increase in 
home care fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget changes health programs from an 
investment to a cost. It used to be that health was an investment 
in good health. Often, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to treat somebody 
in a timely manner with some drugs or perhaps some 
chiropractic treatment would prevent a hospital stay, or perhaps 
in the case of elderly people, it would prevent them from having 
to go to a nursing home simply because they can’t get around 
— they aren’t as mobile. 
 
So this budget clearly changes health from — what are the 
words I was using? — from an investment, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, changes it from an investment to a cost. 
 
I would like to turn to education for a moment, and I want to 
start with a portion of a letter that I received. This is from a 
Wascana Institute — actually from two students: 
 

Dear Mr. Trew: We were pleased to see you show an 
interest in our situation at Wascana Institute. Your 
attendance at our meeting was appreciated. We regret that 
you were asked to leave before the meeting. The reason 
you were asked to leave was that (and there are two people 
named here that I will not name), but Mr. And Ms. 
(So-and-so) refused to attend if anyone other than students 
were present. 
 
It seemed to be their purpose to keep everyone as much in 
the dark as possible. They both made empty statements, 
spouting meaningless rhetoric,  

  



 
June 23, 1987 

671 
 

and they refused to field any open questions from the 
floor. This attitude left the students uninformed and 
frustrated. 

 
The letter goes on: 
 

Mr. Trew, we at Telecom have been told that we will have 
adequate time to complete our program. Adequate time 
has been open to interpretation and every time the question 
has been asked — what is adequate time? — we get a 
different answer. 
 
Due to the nature of our course, we at Telecom are certain 
that some of our students, especially those just entered, 
will not be able to complete the program. 

 
To reiterate, we have only verbal . . . pardon me, we have only 
heard verbal promises and have not seen anything in writing. 
Shame. 
 
One of the corner-stones, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
Conservative election platform just eight months ago, was 
education. And let’s look at some of the things that they’ve 
done, that members opposite have done in education. More than 
130 instructors have been fired from Saskatchewan’s technical 
institutes. More than 1,100 student positions have been 
absolutely eliminated from the technical institutes. Learning 
experience and opportunities in areas like nursing, business 
administration, dental programs and even farm safety related to 
the use of pesticide application, have been lost to more than 
1,100 students and many, many more farmers and pesticide 
applicators. 
 
The education development fund has been clashed from $35 
million last year to a measly $14.5 million this year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This is what the Conservatives do in their lame 
liberal budget of betrayal. This is what they do to one of their 
Conservative election corner-stones. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pillar. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Pillar. It’s a pillar. They’re going to somehow 
make the province go. 
 
I just want to read a letter from a business administration 
student. This one is also a constituent of mine: 
 

Dear Mr. Trew: I’m currently a first-year student attending 
the business administration course at Wascana Institute. 
Since you are the MLA in my constituency, I feel you 
would be the best person to hear my appeal. 
 
The recent cut-back by the government is of great concern 
to me, because I fail to see how it will improve the 
education in Saskatchewan. I feel the main problem is 
enrolment, because last year when I signed up for the first 
year, there was a long waiting list, and I was placed into 
the night class. 
 
This means that there will be that many more people 
enrolling in the second year at STI in Moose Jaw. This 
will cause many problems for me  

and other students taking the second year of this 
supposedly two-year course. 
 
Since we were informed of this cut-back only two weeks 
ago, it is quite late to be accepted in STI. This mean that 
students here at Wascana will not be able to go to Moose 
Jaw for at least another year. 

 
I think I’m making the point. 
 
Education is absolutely decimated by the members opposite. 
The government with its budget of cuts, its budget of betrayal, 
is abandoning all hope for the future. It is cutting in the area 
that we need the most. Our very future is with the educated and 
educated population, a population, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is 
able to help lead us out of the quagmire that I am sure we are 
going to be inheriting in about three years or less. 
 
Leaving education, there is at least one area that the government 
has never pretended was a corner-stone, and that’s justice. 
That’s never stopped the cuts. 
 
I want to read to you a letter that I got . . . Actually I didn’t get 
it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was addressed to the Hon. Gary 
Lane: 
 

Dear Mr. Lane: Non-government organization workers are 
not responsible for creating the provincial deficit and 
should not be expected to assist in its reduction. On behalf 
of our thousands of clients across the province, we’re 
informing you that our services cannot be cut back any 
further. There is no fat to trim. 
 
The people we serve are the most powerless in society: 
abused and assaulted women and children, the 
unemployed, the hungry, and the disabled. For many 
reasons it is difficult for our clients to speak out. Often 
they have already been silenced by a system that isolates 
and excludes them. Many fear they will lose what little 
they have if they publicly question injustice. 
 
That is why we are telling you that their services cannot be 
cut back any further without incurring a great deal more 
human suffering. 

 
I think that’s pretty clear. The letter goes on: 
 

May we remind you that NGOs exist because 
Saskatchewan communities identified a need for our 
services. As non-governmental organizations, we are run 
by community boards made up of individuals who 
volunteer their time and energy to support the work we do. 
 
Now you are telling communities across the province that 
their priorities are not your priorities, that your 
government is prepared to sacrifice the needs of the most 
powerless in society in order to chisel away at the deficit. 
NGO workers cannot help reduce the deficit because we 
cannot afford to cut our services any more. 

  



 
June 23, 1987 

672 
 

We have been consistent practitioners of fiscal restraint; 
we have always run on shoe-string budgets; we have been 
forced to hold bake sales and bingos to earn additional 
funds we desperately need. We believe we have done 
more than our share of work within the confines of the 
meagre budgets we receive. We have accepted minimal 
budget increases in the past few years; we have worked 
with wages substantially lower than our counterparts in 
other jurisdictions and have handled large and unwieldy 
client case-loads. 

 
(2000) 
 

You attempt to appeal our sense of obligation to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. We in turn appeal to your 
responsibility to the public. Why does your government 
not consider the most obvious solution, reducing the 
deficit at the expense of those who can actually afford it? 
Tax incentives, subsidies to large and profitable 
corporations, should surely be the first to be cut back. 
Government hand-outs to the corporate sector cost 
taxpayers millions of dollars a year. 
 
The growing list of patronage appointments for 
high-profile Conservative supporters and defeated cabinet 
ministers calls into question your sincerity when you 
embark on an austerity campaign. It is time to re-evaluate 
your priorities. We urge you to stop the attack on those 
who can least afford it. 

 
Organizations like the John Howard Society, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’d like to speak about them for a little while. This is a 
group that has a half century of history servicing Saskatchewan 
people. The John Howard Society has long worked to prevent 
crime. I’ll come back to that — crime prevention — in a 
minute. But there are some other services provided by that 
group of intensely dedicated people. One service is to keep 
incarcerated people in contact and in touch with the outside 
world. They carried messages between the outside families and 
incarcerated people. Then, on completion of the sentence, the 
John Howard Society works directly with the person to help 
that person adjust back into our society. 
 
This is just a part of the crime prevention work done on our 
behalf. To keep people from crime they often need a caring 
hand to find shelter, food, and even to help in a job search. This 
is in grave danger, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s in grave danger of 
disappearing because of the lack of commitment to justice. 
Seems strange when you realize that the former minister of 
Justice is now the Minister of Finance, and the former minister 
of Finance is now the Minister of Justice — the destructive duo. 
 
I point out to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the annual report of the 
Saskatchewan Farm Ownership board. This ended for the year 
ended March 31st, 1986, well over 12 months ago. And yet here 
we have a picture of what we think is the minister, and it 
happens to be the current Attorney General, the member from 
Kindersley. And his picture is there. Looks like it may be taken 
a couple of years ago before he got quite as grey, but his 
picture’s there. 

Inside in the organizational chart, what do we have? It names 
the minister. I’m not sure if it’s proper to read it, so I’ll just say 
the minister is the Hon. Minister from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
It’s funny after more than a year the Bobbsey twins are still 
totally interchangeable even in the eyes of the government. 
 
But changing the seats on the Titanic most certainly would not 
have prevented it from sinking, and changing the seats in the 
Conservative cabinet will not prevent the conservative 
government from sinking. It is going down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I want to look at Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance for a few moments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Rumours of 
a sale, or should I say give-away, are persistent. The Devine 
Conservatives have split the SGI property insurance fund from 
the auto fund. Then it slowed the SGI advertising and allowed 
the property insurance share that SGI enjoys, to go from 58.4 
per cent in 1983, all the way down to 43.9 per cent in ’84, and a 
further drop to 41.7 per cent in 1985. That’s good Tory 
management that did that. 
 
It’s the same Conservative management that cost Prince Albert 
Pulp Company to lose money every year under Conservative 
rule despite the undeniable profits that PAPCO (Prince Albert 
Pulp Company) made under Allan Blakeney’s New Democrats. 
And surprise, surprise, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in its very first 
quarter of operation the giant American firm, Weyerhaeuser, 
declared an earning of $5 million on that very same mill that the 
members opposite couldn’t turn a nickel from. 
 
The incompetent managers are sitting in the seats opposite. The 
public records show that, and it is impossible for this 
government to deny it any longer. 
 
Continuing with SGI, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me read a 
paragraph from a speech given by Tom Johnston in 1944. For 
the education of some of the members opposite, Tom Johnston 
was the newly elected Speaker of this very legislature in 1944, 
and he says: 
 

When enterprises that should be properly recognized as 
public utilities are being operated by private interests to 
the detriment of the general welfare of the people of the 
province, then it becomes the duty of the government to 
act on behalf of the people to make sure that these 
enterprises are conducted in such a way as to yield the 
maximum benefit to the entire community. 

 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that during the 
same session of the legislature the CCF were to introduce a 
number of pieces of legislation that endure until today. 
 
The Department of Social Welfare endures today — somewhat 
reduced by the members opposite, but it endures. Unfortunately 
I can’t say the same for the department of co-operatives and 
co-operative development that was introduced in 1944. That 
department has been decimated, and I’ll have more on that later. 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

673 
 

But, as well, there was industrial development as Saskatchewan 
got its first collective bargaining legislation, and 
vacation-with-pay legislation was introduced in 1944. Those are 
just a few of the initiatives taken by the CCF in 1944. Those are 
some of the things that I am very proud of. 
 
All of these actions were as a result of the way in which the 
CCF viewed the role of the government. This view was most 
vividly expressed by Tommy Douglas’s words in his throne 
speech of 1944, and I quote from Mr. Douglas. My apologies, I 
don’t have Tommy’s speaking voice but I will use his quote 
anyway: 
 

It is the feeling of my government that the day is past 
when it can be left to the forces of private enterprise 
exclusively to develop the resources of the community and 
to organize the business activity. The modern economy is 
a complex one that demands control and direction if 
disaster and chaos are to be averted. 

 
That, from Tommy Douglas. 
 
With SGI, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to give a brief history 
lesson. In its first year of operation, SGIO showed a modest 
surplus — and I’m sure you’ll recognize it’s pretty modest — 
$6,388. This government spills more than that on a good day. 
SGIO grew steadily. By 1950 the insurance office was 
managing a $770,000 surplus while still offering reasonable 
rates. Coverage was extended to include collision and property 
damage, as well as injury, death and liability. SGIO, that 
quickly, had become a leader in the industry. 
 
SGI had succeeded to ensure that fair pricing for insurance 
within the province of Saskatchewan was attained. In 1945, 
prior to the formation of SGIO, fire and supplemental insurance 
cost an average of $8.40 per $1,000 of coverage right here in 
Regina. The reason for this reduction is clearly stated in SGIO’s 
1955 Annual Report where it states: 
 

The competition of the Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance Office has forced other companies to look over 
their rates, and it is impossible to calculate, except in very 
approximate figures, how much SGIO has saved not only 
its own policy holders, but those who continue to insure 
with line companies and independents. 

 
Direct government invention in the industry produced the 
desired result. That is reinsurance that met the needs of 
Saskatchewan people and at a reasonable price. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, despite SGI’s success over 43 years, 
this government wants to give it away. Why? Does the fact that 
socialists brought in government insurance, does that blind you 
so much to the obvious truth? You know, socialists also brought 
in medicare, rural electrification, the best road and highway 
system in North America. And indeed, the government is 
attacking those areas also. Medicare cuts were outlined earlier 
in my  

address to the budget speech. 
 
Sask Power has seen its long-term debt under the Conservative 
government go from $1.1 billion to more than $2.7 billion. 
That’s well over double in about five years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and this doubling of debt, or more than doubling of 
debt for Saskatchewan Power Corporation, is a millstone 
around its neck. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the roads and the highways in this 
province have all been redesigned for active tourists. Let me 
elaborate a little bit. Now when tourists are tired of bouncing 
along like they’re on a trampoline, all they have to do is stop 
their vehicle, get out the golf clubs, and lo and behold, they can 
enjoy a ready made golf course, 18 holes to the kilometre 
almost anywhere in the province you care to go. 
 
The Minister of Tourism may want to start promoting 
Saskatchewan’s roads as the largest roller-coaster system in the 
world. Many highways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, bear very little 
resemblance to the highway system that this government 
inherited from a socialist party five years ago. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, co-operatives are an integral party of 
Saskatchewan’s social and economic fabric. The Conservatives 
opposite just went through the same election we did. My 
question is: how many voters heard any Conservative candidate 
say, we will abolish the department of co-operation and 
co-operative development? How many voters heard any 
candidates say that? I suggest none. 
 
And not once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did I see that in writing. I 
don’t think we should have seen it. And why not? It’s simple. 
The Conservatives knew that they would not get elected if they 
told the people of the province, if they came clean and if they 
told the people of the province what their real intentions are. 
And now we’re seeing those intentions unfolding, and now we 
are desperately fighting an unfair, deceitful budget. It is a sad 
day for Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Pardon me, Mr. 
Deputy Deputy Speaker. It’s a sad day for Saskatchewan when 
co-operatives disappear. And they knew they wouldn’t get 
elected. 
 
I invite the minister responsible for the now department of 
tourism, consumer affairs, and co-operatives, and note where 
co-operatives is, right at the very end — tourism, consumer 
affairs, and co-operatives. It isn’t even alphabetical if you look 
at it. They really show their commitment to co-operatives. I 
invite the minister to explain how co-operatives will benefit by 
the elimination of the department of co-operatives. Just tell me 
how, how is service is improved? Who will advocate co-op 
housing? Who is going to advocate soil conservation co-ops, 
worker co-ops, production and consumer co-ops? Who is going 
to do it? 
 
The minister may not realize but co-ops are a distinct part of 
Saskatchewan. Co-ops are big employers, when you add up all 
of the co-op stores in our great province; when you add up all of 
the pool elevators and the other operations that the pool has; 
when you add up the co-op day care and the co-op farms and 
the machinery co-ops, and the soil conservation co-ops and the 
worker co-ops. 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

674 
 

The co-operative sector, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, the 
co-operative sector placed 26 businesses in the top 100 in 
Saskatchewan last year, yet this government ignores the reality. 
It talks of diversifying and building, but I submit that in tough 
economic times co-operatives are needed more now than at any 
other time in our history. They’re more needed now than ever 
before What’s the government done? It virtually abandons 
co-operatives. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s terrible. 
 
Mr. Trew: — It is terrible, as the member for North West 
points out, and it’s particularly terrible when you realize that the 
government is just falling all over itself trying to give away 
literally hundreds of millions of dollars to the oil industry and 
Weyerhaeuser and people like Peter Pocklington. 
 
I want to touch briefly on Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company briefly. There are rumours of it being sold. And I just 
want to protest. I’m being told, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, 
that I’ve taken quite enough time. But I’d like to ask the 
member responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, that when he’s talking to any company that’s 
interested in purchasing STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company), that he talk and tell them about a resolution passed 
at the New Democratic Party annual convention this past 
weekend. And the resolution is fairly short, so I’m going to read 
it. 
 
(2015) 
 
It goes: 
 

Whereas the Saskatchewan Transportation company 
serves all residents of Saskatchewan in all areas of our 
large province, and whereas the high cost on profitable 
remote lines that provide passenger and freight service to 
people would not be maintained by a privatized 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, whereas the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company is persistently and 
widely reported to be for sale, be it resolved that if sold, 
the next Saskatchewan New Democratic government will 
regain ownership of the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, being sure that any interim private owner does 
not profit one dime in the ownership transfer. 

 
That was passed unanimously at our convention this past 
weekend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, I was going to talk 
about the oil revenues. The member for Saskatoon South 
pointed out yesterday that here was more than $1.7 billion of 
revenue foregone by this government in that important area. 
 
I’ll have more to say on that another day. But just before 
closing, I have one short letter — and I want to thank the 
Premier and the members opposite for me getting this letter. 

Dear Mr. Trew: I have just finished writing a letter to our 
Premier. The recent actions of his government are completely 
insensitive to the people of this province. I feel especially 
sorry for the poor and unemployed. I have always voted NDP 
in this province, and after watching the actions of this 
government in the last five years, I have come to appreciate 
the NDP even more. I feel sorry for the government that will 
have to pick up the pieces after the regressive Conservatives 
have finished and been sent packing. Please keep up the 
struggle to make this government answerable for their 
actions. 

 
Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, because of these reasons, I will be 
voting for the amendment and against the motion on the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to speak on behalf of the government with respect to a 
budget that has been prepared very carefully over a long period 
of time, a period that was not easy. And we are in a period of 
Saskatchewan history that is not easy. But it gives me an 
honour to explain some of the aspects of the budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be reading any letters. Since the 
friends of the NDP are on strike, I no longer get any letters, so I 
won’t be reading any letters today. 
 
But mostly what I want to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
where Saskatchewan is now, and why it is there, and how we’re 
going to get out of this. And where we are now is in a difficult 
financial situation. There are several reasons. Some of them the 
fault of the members opposite, and some of them no one’s fault, 
but strictly world conditions. But for the most part, the 
problems that this province faces financially are based on 
commodity prices and the fact that we export 75 per cent of 
what we produce in this province, and as a result of the world 
trade situation being the way it is, not very free, we are 
suffering, and therefore we are suffering financially in many, 
many ways. 
 
But why did Saskatchewan get into this position? Partly 
because of world trade problems and partly because of the 
actions of the former government when commodity prices were 
high. Their view of diversification is to buy more resources 
when you already rely on resource industries, and therefore they 
made an unfortunate mistake of buying holes in the ground — 
holes for potash and holes for uranium. And these holes are 
now a bottomless pit into which the treasury of Saskatchewan 
has to add our hard-earned tax dollars. 
 
As comparison, during that period of time, 1974-1981, what 
should have been seven fat years in Saskatchewan where we 
should have saved and invested for the future, we were buying 
holes in the ground and the government of Alberta was building 
petrochemical plants, not through the government, but through 
encouragement of private enterprise. They were building 
processing plants, and Alberta now has a diversified economy 
as compared to Saskatchewan. 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

675 
 

But in the situation we’re in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have not 
seen fit in the past . . . And to the members opposite who aren’t 
listening now, don’t care to listen, aren’t interested in anything 
except a planned economy, that is the mentality of the members 
opposite, that they never learn. They don’t even learn from their 
mistakes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The members opposite don’t 
learn from their mistakes, and that'’ why they were defeated in 
the 1986 election, and that’s why they’re such a danger to the 
future of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there must be solutions. There must 
be short-term and long-term solutions. And they are three-fold. 
The first solution we have to look at is the fiscal management of 
Saskatchewan. Now it is agreed and acknowledged that this 
province has a deficit. And there is much discussion over what 
caused it and how we got it, but we have a deficit for many 
reasons. First of all, as we know, the farm economy has been 
very, very poor in the last few years, and now the members 
opposite somehow would like to relate that to our government. 
But certainly we as a government who are in favour of free 
trade cannot be responsible for the restrictive trade practices 
that the members opposite promote. So therefore we were in a 
position where our Premier said he would stake the province’s 
treasury on agriculture. And he did, and we have a deficit. And 
we do not apologize for helping our friends, 70,000 farmers. 
We don’t apologize for that. You suggest we help our friends; 
we are pleased to help our friends. There are thousands of them 
out there and they needed help and they’ve received it from this 
government. So therefore part of the treasury has been used to 
keep agriculture surviving through a difficult period of time. 
 
Part of the deficit is due to low taxes. Now does anyone say that 
our taxes were too low, therefore we have a deficit? No, it’s not 
a criticism you hear, but our taxes have been low in comparison 
to other provinces. And therefore part of that deficit is actually 
in the pockets of the taxpayers or it’s money that taxpayers had 
to spend over the last five years. 
 
Another factor in the deficit is declining revenues. I can recall 
in the inflationary times of the 1970s when inflation was 
running as high as 12 per cent. The social planners opposite 
planned and spent 17 per cent per annum. So that when we had 
high inflation and revenue coming in, the social planners 
always spent more than was coming in. So there was hidden 
deficits and a plan whereby the government continuously spent 
more and more money. And therefore this province got into a 
habit of having more and more revenue. 
 
But the facts are that since we introduced income tax in this 
province, and I wouldn’t say we introduced it although it maybe 
necessary, but since the income tax has been introduced to this 
province, the revenue has constantly gone up to the 
government, except till we get to 1985. This is the first year in 
the history of this province that income tax revenue actually 
went down. That has to tell you some things. That has to tell 
you that the income of some people is going down in 1985 and 
1986. 
 
Now when you look at the statistics, the reason the  

income tax revenue went down in 1985 and 1986 is because 
farmers had no income to pay tax on. So it doesn’t pay for us to 
stand here and point fingers at each other and accuse each other 
of blame. These are the realities. This is where we are in 
Saskatchewan, and it has to be dealt with. 
 
In addition, there’s other things that lead to a deficit. You have 
to either raise your low taxes or reduce your spending. 
 
And so we have these so-called free services, like free dental, 
and free drugs, and free medical, and free everything, and the 
members opposite try to think of new other free services, except 
they don’t ever point out that there is nothing free, and that 
sooner or later this has to be paid for. 
 
As a result of a lot of things being free, taxes being low, world 
commodity prices being difficult, we have a deficit. We’re at 
the stage now where we have to deal with it. 
 
First of all, as a government over the last four years, this is 
nothing new to us. We pointed this out, that there was difficult 
times in agriculture. 
 
We took way the PIG, the property improvement grant, because 
it wasn’t just that. It gave everybody tax refunds which they 
could spent in Florida, Hawaii or anywhere they wanted to. 
They didn’t have to invest in their house, they didn’t have to 
improve their property. So we removed the PIG. 
 
We replaced it with a property improvement grant, or the type 
of . . . the home owner’s program, whereby you have to match 
the spending 50-50. And that has caused a boom in building in 
Saskatchewan and created many, many jobs. 
 
But we recognized that this province had a deficit and we took 
some actions, and they weren’t very popular. As a matter of 
fact, there was such a hue and cry about a small, used-car tax, 
that we removed it. 
 
We’ve looked at the situation but the people haven’t brought 
themselves to the position of facing reality, that you cannot 
borrow for ever. And this government borrowed for a period of 
time to cushion this province through what we believed would 
be a short cycle of low commodity prices. But that cycle has 
stretched out into quite a long period of years. We’re now at the 
stage where even a government that tries to cushion the people 
cannot cushion the people cannot cushion the people for ever. 
 
And we now have to face the reality. And we have to face the 
reality of the past and the present. The reality of the past is that 
when there was money, it was squandered, and in the present 
there is no money. So we have to live within our means. 
 
The second print that this government is trying to accomplish in 
a difficult fiscal situation is the protection of our people. And so 
therefore we have struggled very hard to protect people in 
health care, to protect people in education, to protect people in 
social services, justice, and so on. And I can tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

676 
 

hasn’t been easy trying to balance the interests of protecting 
people with the limits as to how much we can borrow and how 
much of the burden we can pass on to our children. In this 
province, we think there has to be a balance between how much 
the deficit should be and how much we should pay today. 
 
We don’t operate on the same principles as the socialists in the 
province of Manitoba who have decided that they don’t have a 
spending problem, they have a revenue problem. So they 
increased their taxes, and they still have, after $500 million of 
equalization money from Ottawa, a deficit that is greater than 
ours. And the deficit of Manitoba is helped very much by an 
equalization formula, to which the former premier, as he then 
was and many of the members opposite when they were in 
government, agreed to, whereby commodities such as oil would 
be imbalanced in the calculations. So that when we raise taxes 
or revenue in this province by $1, 95 cents comes off our 
equalization and goes to the balance of Canada, a large chunk of 
that going to the province of Manitoba. So when the people of 
Saskatchewan pay an extra dollar in taxes, they should know 
because of the formula established by the former premier of 
Saskatchewan, they are actually benefiting the province of 
Manitoba with their taxes. 
 
And we are working hard to change this formula, but it’s not 
easy because the province of Manitoba has a habit of crying for 
more money from Ottawa rather than working to solve their 
problems. So therefore we are in a competition with the crying 
of the province of Manitoba and the hard work of our people 
trying to be self-sufficient. 
 
A third element of what this government is trying to do in this 
budget is diversification. And this is a very nasty word to the 
members opposite. It is something that they don’t like because 
diversification goes against the grain of socialism, and 
socialism only allows for one kind of business and that is 
government business. So therefore they don’t like upgraders, 
they don’t like electric cable plants in Moose Jaw, and they 
don’t like bacon plants, they don’t like paper plants, they don’t 
like recreational vehicle plants, because none of these are 
owned by the government. But this government is working hard 
towards diversification and you have to have some degree of 
balance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I suggest that most of 
balance is on this side of the House. But you have to have some 
degree of balance between how much you can tax, how much 
you can borrow, and how much you can protect people, and 
how much you have left over to build the economy for the 
future. 
 
(2030) 
 
So we’ve been working towards a balanced budget. We’ve 
reduced spending, we’ve reduced the number of employees by 
10 per cent — a difficult decision, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I 
want you to take note that we’ve tried to do this in the most 
humane way possible. But 75 per cent of the people either left 
the government through early retirement or through vacancies 
not being filled. But the solution that the members opposite 
would have would be to raise taxes even more. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have raised taxes, and for that I am sorry. I 
do  

not like to raise taxes but here are few choices, and there are no 
alternate solutions raised by the opposition or the independent 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I mean, would the 
members opposite say, raise taxes even more? Would they say, 
cut government spending even more? Would they say, borrow 
even more? They say all of those. Well which should we do, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
So it is not a simple process to govern. It is very complex. It is a 
great responsibility and it takes an awful lot more thought than 
being a critic in opposition. 
 
So in addition to reducing spending, we have tried to improve 
government efficiency. One example would be in the Workers’ 
Advocate office which I have had as minister now for a year 
and a half. And when I took over as minister they had a backlog 
of 125 cases, which I am pleased to say has now been reduced 
to 37 cases the day we are in this debate. And that has been 
done with no extra people but with efficiency and good 
management. 
 
Those are the kind of things that this government is doing to 
bring the government under control, and we probably should 
have been a little more firm in the last few years but . . . I mean, 
we were trying to be gentle about weaning the people of 
Saskatchewan from socialism and the ways of an easy life 
based on commodities. 
 
We have raised taxes and I’ve brought that out, and I said I’m 
sorry that that had to be done. No Conservative ever raises taxes 
with pleasure. No free enterprise capitalist likes taxes at all 
because we believe that the people should be allowed to go 
about their business. 
 
On the contrary, the members opposite hoot and holler because 
they don’t believe that the people should have any business. 
The people should all be slaves to the state, working in their 
little positions, all for the benefit of the ruling elite. That’s the 
theory of the members opposite. It is the modern theory of 
slavery called socialism. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased with the budget. It has been 
difficult. I am saddened that taxes had to be raised. We would 
not want to have to do some of the things that have to be done, 
but I am pleased with the budget because we have done the 
right thing. We have done what is proper, not what is popular, 
and that is responsible government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now some examples in the Department 
of Social Services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the Department of 
Social Services we have looked at providing as much service as 
is possible under the circumstances, and every time the 
members opposite ask for a new service, they should be 
required to point out how the money would be raised. 
 
As the minister, I’ve had to deal with a constant budget, a 
budget that has not been cut, but a budget that is approximately 
the same as last year. And what we’ve tried to do is continue 
with welfare reform in order to help those who were needy, and 
in particular to help them make themselves self-sufficient where 
possible. 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

677 
 

Welfare reform to prevent abuse, welfare reform to simplify the 
system — and we are now in the process of reducing the 
welfare application form from 16 pages to five pages. We think 
this will be more efficient, it will be easier for the clients to help 
themselves in filling out the form. 
 
We will make other changes in the Department of Social 
Services with a view to freeing social workers to do social 
work. Over the years, social workers have become financial 
control officers, they have become bureaucrats, and they 
haven’t been able to do social work for which they are trained. 
And we will take some action to remedy this situation and make 
it possible for social workers to concentrate on social work. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, social services is a costly 
expenditure in the province of Saskatchewan. We spend in 
excess of $1 million per day, and that is a large amount of 
money, $375 million. And in order to do that efficiently, we’ve 
made some management changes. 
 
We are trying our best to become more efficient, and my deputy 
minister has been transferred to Manitoba, where he now is the 
deputy minister for the Manitoba government, and I’m sure he 
will be an asset to that government. Since the Government of 
Manitoba has the lowest welfare rates in western Canada, I’m 
sure that my former deputy can help them try to get their rates 
in line with the balance of western Canada. 
 
As a matter of fact, in Saskatchewan, while I would like to raise 
our rates — and I will do so as soon as possible — we, with 
respect to families, are number two in Canadian what we pay to 
families on social services, and I am optimistic and targeting 
that before the end of the year that we would be number one in 
the amount of money we pay to families. 
 
With respect to single employables, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
believe in a different form of strategy from the members 
opposite. They talk about a guaranteed income, and we tend to 
lean more towards a guaranteed job. 
 
And it’s the view of this government that everybody should 
have sufficient money to live on, but that they should do 
something to help in society, whatever they are capable of 
doing. And therefore we do not think that community service 
work is demeaning; we do not think that work training is 
demeaning; we believe that most people wish to do the most 
they can in accordance with their ability; and we will continue 
on projects and reform leading in that direction. 
 
In the Department of Social Services the members opposite like 
to go through their usual exercise in fearmongering where they 
say there is cuts, cuts, cuts, cuts, cuts, cuts — they’re like a 
stuck record. And they go on and on with their song of cuts, 
cuts, cuts. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has been necessary to pick 
priorities in the Department of Social Services as in all other 
elements of government, and therefore one of the priorities we 
have picked is a community living plan, whereby at the request 
of the Saskatchewan Association for the Mentally Retarded and 
the Canadian community  

living association, they have asked that we move adult retarded 
people into the community wherever possible. And we’ve taken 
what I consider to be a bold initiative because someone had to 
do the act that may be unpopular, the phasing out of North Park 
in Prince Albert, an institution. 
 
Now if you’re going to take people out of institutions and put 
them into communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’re eventually 
going to have to close an institution. And that task has fallen on 
me as Minister of Social Services to do what has to be done. 
And if it is right, which the Saskatchewan Association for the 
Mentally Retarded tells me it is right to have handicapped 
people live in the community, then I’m prepared to do the right 
thing even if it is not popular with the members opposite, even 
if it is not popular with those people who have vested interests 
in keeping these people in institutions. 
 
This government is prepared to do the right thing, and we’re 
prepared to go about it in a very fair manner. And what we’re 
doing at North Park in Prince Albert is that we are consulting 
with the relatives and parents of these individuals, and we are 
going through a lengthy process to have people moved into the 
community in whatever way they can live in the community. 
Some of the people who are senior citizens we will attempt to 
locate in nursing homes and special care homes for senior 
citizens. Other people will go into group homes. Other people 
will go into special group homes that are not built yet, and when 
they are ready, they will be available to move there. And we 
will do everything possible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 
realize this particular institution is in your constituency. We 
will do everything possible to keep people in Prince Albert, 
because if they come from that area, that’s their community, 
and we will take all measures possible. 
 
This is not a matter of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a 
matter of doing what’s right, and we intend to transfer the costs 
of running the institution over to keeping people in their 
communities. And I think you will see over a period of months, 
maybe a year, however long it takes, that this will be good for 
the individuals, and this will be good for the community 
because we will have all types of people living in the 
community, and that we will accept them as part of the way 
God made people, and it will be good for society and it will be 
good for the individuals. 
 
But we talk about what is actually happening in the Department 
of Social Services, and what we have heard is an awful lot of 
rhetoric, and this is not a time for rhetoric in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This is a time for firm and fair action. It’s a 
time for people to look at really what is happening, and I’d like 
the members on the government side — I don’t think the 
members opposite will listen or pay attention or understand — 
but I would like the members on the government side to listen 
closely so that the majority, the government, will clearly 
understand what we are doing with respect to third party grants. 
I want you to look at what isn’t cut. 
 
There is a shifting of priorities, but I’m going to go through a 
lengthy situation here, an exercise in showing you what exists 
for services in this province with respect only to  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

678 
 

third parties, and not the other 350-some million dollars of 
expenditure in my department. We have the early childhood 
intervention program. This is a preventive service with respect 
to young children from birth to age five. It’s under the 
sponsorship of community boards to provide staff and assist 
parents and to provide facilities. 
 
And we have the Alvin Buckwold Centre in Saskatoon which 
receives $193,000; the Prince Albert early childhood 
intervention program which receives $93,000; the parkland 
early childhood intervention program in Yorkton which 
receives $81,000; the Lloydminster Association for the 
Mentally Retarded which receives $56,000; the north-east early 
childhood intervention program in Tisdale, $69,000; Regina 
infant stimulation program, $106,000; the Battlefords early 
childhood prevention program, $64,000; the west central early 
childhood intervention program, $54,000; the Meadow Lake 
area early childhood program, $53,000; the Weyburn program, 
$36,000; Swift Current, $53,000; Redvers, $60,000; Moose 
Jaw, $53,000; La Ronge, $41,000; Ile-a-la-Crosse and Buffalo 
Narrows, $42,000; and the Alvin Buckwold research laboratory 
in Saskatoon, $505,000; for a total of $1.1 million for early 
childhood intervention. And that is not a cut. These services are 
still there at a cost of $1.1 million dollars. 
 
The we have sheltered workshops. And in sheltered workshops 
we provide adult day programs with specialized employment 
opportunities for adults who exhibit fair motor development or 
who have minimal sensory limitations. Training and production 
are both components of this service. And I think many people in 
Saskatchewan are familiar with the sheltered workshops. Now 
we have these workshops in North Battleford at a cost of 
$126,000; Estevan, $69,000; Humboldt, $57,000; Lloydminster, 
$62,000; Meadow Lake, $62,000; Moose Jaw, $156,000; prince 
Albert, $160,000; Rosetown, $65,000; Rosthern, $67,000; the 
Saskatchewan Abilities Council, in Regina, $272,000 and 
Saskatoon, $248,000; Swift Current, $111,000; and in Yorkton, 
$132,000. As a matter of fact, those are all increased as are 
most of the other ones increased slightly. Some are down a little 
bit, depending on the usage, depending on the need. The 
majority are up a little bit. Now where are the massive cuts? 
 
In Weyburn we have the same facility for $76,000; in Nipawin, 
$83,000; in Moosomin, $60,000; in Melville, my constituency, 
$59,000, a reduction of $10,000. However, the members 
opposite would probably jump up and declare instantly, look, 
you’ve cut the Melville workshop $10,000. Well, that is the 
magic of paper. You can make it say what you want it to say, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And Melville has been reduced $10,000 
on its sheltered workshop but has received funding for an 
activity centre of $10,000 for a net increase of $10,000. Now 
what looked like a cut is actually an increase. 
 
Now it depends on whether a fearmonger is telling you that 
there is a cut or on whether the government is showing you the 
actual figure. And that is what is disappointing about the 
members opposite, is that they are trying to scare the people of 
Saskatchewan needlessly. I said earlier that we have to live 
within our means, but there are no massive cuts in this province. 

There are a few adjustments that I submit are necessary. But 
this goes on: in Shaunavon, $72,000; in Outlook, $59,000; in 
Langenburg, $69,000; in Porcupine Plain, $76,000; in 
Cudworth, $78,000; in Preeceville, $79,000; in Kronau, 
$48,000; in Meadow Lake is under construction and is a partial 
year, $67,000; Gravelbourg is partly under construction, will be 
coming on stream, $82,000 — a total of $2.5 million. And I 
might say that there is a reduction there on that table of $74,000 
on 2.5 million; however, as I indicated it’s made up as in the 
case of Melville and other places. 
 
(2045) 
 
So you have activity centres. Activity centres provide adult day 
care programs designed for individuals who have limited motor 
and sensory development. The programs stress basic living 
skills, socialization, and recreation, and we have these programs 
in Battlefords, at $152,000; in Regina, at $314,000. 
 
Now, for example, Battlefords is down $48,000 and Regina is 
up $10,000. And there’s always an explanation for this. Regina 
has eight new spaces. Battlefords had a construction grant in 
‘86-87 and an operating grant in ‘87-88, which means that they 
included in last year’s budget construction costs which aren’t 
there in this year’s budget. Now it looks like a massive cut of 
$48,000. However, I’ve just explained that construction is done, 
one-time capital and thereafter the operating comes into a 
normal cycle. So, if you were a fearmonger, you could look at 
that and say there was a massive cut. In actual truth there is no 
reduction at all; construction has been completed. 
 
In Saskatoon the cost for the activity centre is $964,000 and that 
is up $58,000. Now would you say that is a massive increase? 
No, it is not a massive increase. It is 20 new spaces in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Now, the members opposite suggest that they are bored. And I 
would ask them to pay close attention and learn something 
about how this province actually operates, and where the needy 
are, and what money is being spent, and stop constantly going 
around trying to scare the province. Pay attention, members 
opposite. I know that if you’re not in your political rhetoric that 
you find it boring, but the people have to know what is actually 
being done. 
 
In Humboldt the same amount is being spent, $59,000; in 
Kindersley the same, $65,000; in Melfort, $112,000, which is a 
slight increase; in Moose Jaw, $202,000. 
 
Now, in Moose Jaw . . . I believe that is in the constituency of 
two of the members opposite, and they will be pleased to know 
that that has increased $21,000 and there are eight new spaces 
in Moose Jaw. And I would expect that they would send me a 
letter and thank me for providing eight new spaces in Moose 
Jaw. And I do acknowledge that the member from Moose Jaw 
North does thank me on occasion when I do something that 
pleases him and I give him credit for that. And maybe, you 
know, he hasn’t been here long enough to follow the antics of 
his colleagues there, but I do give him credit for giving me 
credit when we do something good. 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

679 
 

The costs in Prince Albert are $60,000 and that’s also an 
increase. Now, I won’t go into all the details of what is up or 
what is down, but I think you get the general pattern that some 
things are increased, some are decreased. And there’s always a 
reason for these things. Would one think that a government 
would never review a particular program or would one think 
that government would pay for spaces that are not needed? We 
have to be flexible and from year to year adjust to the changes 
in society. 
 
The Redvers program cost $112,000; Swift Current, $58,000; 
Wadena, $117,000; Waldheim, $21,000; Wynyard, $22,000 — 
now they have a reduction of seven spaces, they don’t have the 
need. 
 
So would you say there’s a massive cut in Wynyard when they 
haven’t had a need for the seven spaces? But the reality is that 
Wynyard is down while others are up. Yorkton is $64,000; 
Estevan, $48,000, with four new spaces; Weyburn, $42,000; 
Lloydminster, $22,000 . . . I might say that in Lloydminster 
we’re developing a problem there, workshop and activity centre 
was very self-sufficient when the oil industry was booming, and 
they provided services to the oil industry. Now that the oil 
industry is in a slump, they are finding it difficult to be so 
self-sufficient. They are the most -self-sufficient activity centre 
and workshop in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I will probably have to find extra money to tide them over 
until the oil recovers. But the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster appreciates what the oil industry . . . I mean 
whose cut-backs are those? I suppose they’re cut-backs that you 
might blame on the world markets or that you might blame on 
the Iranians or whoever you want to blame, but that’s the 
reality, and so we will have to . . . And I give a commitment to 
the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, that we’ll have to 
keep his workshop going. They are very much a free enterprise 
workshop and they don’t even want to come to the government 
to ask for more money. They are pleased to be self-sufficient, 
but if they are in need we will help them. 
 
In Rosetown the cost is $23,000, and that’s an increase from 
zero last year to $23,000 this year, and it’s one — a partial year. 
And Elbow I already referred to. A total of $2.5 million for 
activity centres in the third-party grants. 
 
Now we have community resource homes and outreach. Now 
resource homes are in Saskatoon and Regina. They provide 
short-term residential care for mentally handicapped persons 
who are temporarily unable to remain in their natural or foster 
home. 
 
The outreach program is an extension of the resource home 
program designed to accommodate families throughout 
Saskatchewan who do not have access to the program in Regina 
and Saskatoon. In these instances funding can be made 
available to accommodate the handicapped person in his own 
home. 
 
In Regina we spend $78,000; Saskatoon, $88,000; the outreach 
program for the balance of the province is $132,000; and the 
Regina residences is $38,000; for a total of $336,000. That is a 
reduction in spending. However, what we have said is that the 
fees will be increased from $5 to $7 per day. Now this is 
something  

that we don’t like to do but we feel that the service is well 
worth the $7 per day, and people will accept that respite type 
care at the cost of $7 per day. 
 

We have community holiday relief program, which is similar to 
the one I just referred to and that costs $176,000. Then we have 
a supportive living program. This is to help people with 
handicapped children who are moderately or mildly retarded, 
keep them at home and keep them in their families, and these 
programs operate in various cities. 
 

In Regina it’s $83,000; in The Battlefords, $13,000; in 
Lloydminster, $27,000; and Prince Albert it is $27,000; in 
Yorkton it’s $32,000; Swift Current, $26,000; Estevan, 
$26,000; Moose Jaw, $41,000; Saskatoon, 45,000; Humboldt, 
5,000; Watrous-Davidson, 5,000; Wadena, 7,000; Huston 
Heights, Regina, 26,000; Rosetown, 16,000; Melfort, 13,000; 
Rosetown . . . The member from Melfort wanted to know that 
figure. It’s $13,000 in Melfort. 
 

In Rosthern it’s $13,000; in Shaunavon, $8,000, for a partial 
year; for a total of $421,000, an increase of $10,000 over last 
year. 
 

So I don’t think that’s a massive increase, but on the other hand 
it certainly is not cut, and we have picked our priorities as to 
where the greatest the need is. 
 

Now, we have consumer advocacy organizations, and in this 
category we have three. 
 

We have the Canadian Paraplegic Association, which assists in 
vocational, educational, and professional training of 
paraplegics, and they’re receiving $65,000, the same as last 
year. 
 

We have the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres, which is the provincial organization for activity 
centres, sheltered workshops, and subsidized industries, the 
ones I have just referred to. 
 

And they have received an extra amount of money for a 
marketing position so that they can sell the products that the 
handicapped people produce. And they will have an increase 
from $56,000 to $82,000. 
 

In the case of the Voice of the Handicapped, they are an 
advocacy group that doesn’t represent specific handicapped 
organizations, which have their own organizations, such as the 
Canadian Paraplegic Association, and others, the Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council, and so forth. These are organizations that we 
fund to provide services. 
 

In the case of the Voice of the Handicapped, they are an 
advocacy group that doesn’t represent specific handicapped 
organizations, which have their own organizations, such as the 
Canadian Paraplegic Association, and others, the Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council, and so forth. These are organizations that we 
fund to provide services. 
 

In the case of the Voice of the Handicapped, for their advocacy 
we’ve reduced their advocacy funding by half, and they will 
receive $57,000 this year as compared to their $91,000 last 
year. 
 

Now I’ve had to pick the priorities, and we have picked as a 
government the provision of services to people rather than 
advocacy. So therefore you can see the pattern developing that 
we’ve had to pick our priorities. Now, it’s not always easy, but 
we have to pick our priorities. 



 
June 23, 1987 

680 
 

Now it’s not always easy, but we have to pick our priorities. 
 
Now, in general services, the Saskatchewan Abilities Council 
has vocational programs and they receive $79,000 for that. 
 
The interlake human resources program receives $50,000 and 
the Saskatchewan Association for the Mentally Retarded 
receives $125,000. This is for the provision for direct services 
to the people that they represent. 
 
The Canadian National Institute for the Blind received an 
increase to $241,000 for expansion of the deaf-blind intervener 
program. This was an increase of about $35,000. 
 
The services for the hearing impaired was budgeted at 
$375,000, and I believe we’ve now made an arrangement with 
SaskTel where SaskTel will take over this service and improve 
it considerably. 
 
Now we also have grants for community services. And we have 
the crisis intervention service which provides after-hours 
information, referrals, crisis intervention, for people in crisis 
including emergency mandated services such as financial 
assistance and child protection, on behalf of the Department of 
Social Services — and I stress after regular working hours on 
weekends and holidays. 
 
And these groups we have reduced their funding to reflect the 
provision of services after working hours and weekends and 
holidays. In any event they will still receive, in Regina, 
$344,000; in Saskatoon, $310,000; and in Prince Albert, 
$194,000; for a total of $849,000. 
 
With respect to sexual assault centres, sexual assault centres 
provide co-ordination and 24-hour crisis telephone lines in 
support for victims of sexual assault, information and referral 
services, and public education programs. With respect to the 
Regina centre, we’ve asked them to reduce by one position with 
respect to our funding, which is in line with the provincial 
standard, and they will receive $88,000. The Saskatoon sexual 
assault centre will receive $39,000, the same as last year, as will 
North Battleford at $22,000, and Lloydminster at $22,000; for a 
total of $171,000. The reduction there being one position in 
Regina, but as you will see, Regina receives $88,000 and 
Saskatoon receives $39,000, and we thought that there had to be 
some balance because the cities were about the same size. And 
surely the people of Regina are not more sinful or do not cause 
more problems than the people of Saskatoon. So we have tried 
to balance that. 
 
With respect to family violence services, these services 
co-ordinate and provide services to victims of sexual assault, 
wife-battering and other family abuse, including 24-hour crisis 
answering services, information, referrals, and counselling. 
There we have made no change whatsoever, a total of $267,000: 
$36,000 at Kindersley; Melfort, $36,000 for my seat-mate, a 
crisis centre, and $71,000 for a safe house; Swift Current, 
$36,000; Yorkton SIGN (Society for the Involvement of Good 
Neighbours), $36,900; Saskatoon Family Service Bureau  

for battered women support, $25,000; and the Family Service 
Bureau of Regina, $25,000 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Now I don’t know why the members opposite are laughing. 
They used to be fearmongering and now they’re laughing. I 
don’t understand their logic behind all this. What I’m indicating 
is that we have not been able to increase this amount. We have 
been struggling and we have struggled hard and kept it at the 
same amount. 
 
With respect to residential crisis services, the transition houses 
provide short-term crisis counselling and support services to 
assist clients in re-establishing themselves in the community 
after leaving the facility. Transition house services are provided 
in individual residential facilities which are staffed on a 24-hour 
basis. All of the transition houses have received the same 
amount of money with the exception of the Regina transition 
house and the Yorkton transition house. Yorkton’s added an 
increase of two beds, an increased funding. Regina had a 
reduction of funding for one and a half positions, being a 
half-time counsellor and an assistant administrator, the idea 
being that Regina’s cost should be considered along the same 
lines of the balance of the province. So Regina receives 
$230,000 and Saskatoon receives $332,000, the same as last 
year. The Regina Native Women’s Group, $217,000; the 
Association of West Central Native Women in Prince Albert, 
$208,000; The Battlefords Interval House, $225,000; Moose 
Jaw’s transition society, $206,000; and Yorkton, $203,000; for 
a total of $1.6 million, which is about the same as last year and 
is actually a $2,000 increase. 
 
Now I agree, there has been some adjustment in this budget, but 
I certainly have pointed out very clearly that there has been no 
cuts. So now the members opposite are thinking of new angles 
in their fearmongering. 
 
With respect to safe shelters, we have safe shelters that offer 
short-term accommodation, crisis counselling and support 
services to assist battered women, their children, and 
re-establishing themselves in the community. These are similar 
to transition houses. They are operated by the YMCA in Regina 
with identical funding of $104,000. The La Ronge native 
women, $108,000, which is an increase over last year, and in 
this category there is an increase of $5,000, for a total of 
$213,000. 
 
(2100) 
 
With respect to trusteeship services, there is a slight reduction 
from $545,000 to $519,000. Trustees provide money 
management services and budget counselling, counsel liaison, 
direct client support to low-income persons, receive financial 
assistance for the Saskatchewan assistance plan. In this area, the 
welfare rights associations in Regina received $235,000; 
Saskatoon self-help, $117,000; Prince Albert and district 
community services, $91,000; Moose Jaw community action 
society, $74,000, for a total of $519,000 in that category. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I should continue to give the 
total picture of what is actually happening on third party grants 
and how my department is operating  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

681 
 

because I think the members opposite need to know this so that 
they can correct themselves. 
 
With respect to the friendship centres, they provide family 
worker programs. They are native run. They provide direct 
services to natives in counselling, information referrals, 
transportation, housing location, interpretation services to 
multi-problem families of native ancestry. We have centres in 
Yorktown. Most of these are federally funded, but we fund the 
counselling. We’ve standardized the counselling funding at 
$27,000 per position: being one position in Yorkton, 27,000; 
Meadow Lake, $27,000; North Battleford — there’s a separate 
group in North Battleford — $54,000 for two positions; 
Saskatoon and Métis friendship centre, $54,000; Regina 
Friendship Centre, $54,000; the Carlyle friendship centre, 
$27,000; and the La Ronge friendship centre, $27,000, for a 
total of $324,000 towards native and Indian counselling. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re repeating yourself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now the member opposite is saying I’m 
repeating myself. No, I am not. These are the services we 
provide, and I do not repeat the services. These are how they 
exist. Now if the member is suggesting that there are too many 
of these, then she could send me a list of those she thinks are 
too extravagant, but this is what we are providing. 
 
Native family services is another group of organizations funded 
by my department. And native family services are run by . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The members opposite are shouting 
so loud that I can’t be heard here. The native family services 
programs are run by natives for natives, such as counselling, 
information referrals, transportation, similar to the ones I have 
just indicated, and the Métis Society of Saskatoon receives for 
this service, $320,000; Regina Native Women’s Association, 
$118,000; the Lestock Women’s Centre, $79,000, and that is a 
reduction of one staff person from four to three, and I think that 
is reasonable under the circumstances; the Native Coordinating 
Council in Prince Albert, $158,000; the Buffalo Narrows Native 
Women’s Local, $30,000; the Dene Kwan self help counselling 
group in LaLoche, $63,000; LaRonge Native Women, $33,000; 
the Fort Qu’Appelle Ka-Pa-Chee Centre, $51,000; the 
Association of Métis and non-status Indians in Regina, 
$118,000; and my Cree is not too good, but the Peyakowak 
(They are Alone Working) community group in Regina, 
$130,000. That’s for a total of $1.1 million of native family 
service organizations in that category. 
 
The family service bureaus provide professional counselling to 
individuals and a teen parent program. And I won’t give you the 
individual figures, but they are situated in Regina. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I think we should have the figures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Some of the members on this side of the 
House would like the details. They want to learn exactly what 
. . . I will accommodate my colleagues and give them the 
details. 

The Family Service Bureau of Regina receives $105,000 for 
counselling, and teen counselling, $24,000. They have received 
a reduction of $3,000, but they had an increase of 10 per cent 
last year, so we felt that it had to be balanced a little bit; the 
Catholic Family Services society teen counselling, $78,000 in 
Saskatoon, teen parent, $24,000 for a total of $103,000; the 
Saskatoon Family Service Bureau, $106,000, and teen 
counselling, $24,000, for a total of $131,000. 
 
If the members opposite would want to suggest, you know, 
tomorrow in Hansard that I’m misleading the House, I might 
say that I am rounding these figures off, and if I round them off, 
they could be out a thousand here or there. But I’m trying to 
give them, you know, the picture of what happens here. 
 
Minto Family Life Education Centre in Moose Jaw, $66,000, 
plus teen parent counselling of $30,900, for a total of $97,000. 
The total for counselling is $435,000; the total for the teen 
parent program is $129,000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, can you hear me there, or need I shout 
because the members opposite are making such noise I’m not 
sure if you can hear me at that stage. Is it possible? Good, I am 
pleased that you can hear me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll 
continue. 
 
The total being $565,000 and that is for the Family Service 
Bureau. 
 
With respect to family support, family support services provide 
a range of direct support services to individuals and families 
including individual and family counsel, information referrals, 
assessment therapy and crisis nursery program. We provided a 
program in Humboldt last year, and we are continuing it under 
review. We’ll see what happens when we continue our review. 
 
The Saskatoon Society for Protection of Children crisis nursery 
receives $101,000 plus $3,500 for co-ordination of education. 
The Cornwall Street Tutoring Project in Regina receives 
$127,000; the SCEP Centre Society in Regina, $131,000; the 
Merici Centre in Regina, $200,000; Christian Counselling 
Services in Saskatoon, $10,000. And the Regina crisis nursery 
was a program that was budgeted but never got started last year, 
so they received no money this year because they didn’t get it 
implemented. The Friendship Inn in Saskatoon received 
$30,000, and there was no allocation last year because we’ve 
moved this from the senior services centre; we’ve moved this 
from the senior services grants. And the total there is $522,000 
for family support services. 
 
Now I understand the members opposite are losing their 
patience, but they should really check out these organizations. 
They are all throughout the province. They are very worthwhile. 
My colleagues here are pleased to hear about these services and 
the members opposite should go out into the world and see that 
these services still exist. And the members opposite should take 
this more seriously. I don’t think they should be laughing and 
giggling, and I don’t ‘think they should be behaving in the 
manner they are. 
 
I mean, actually I prefer them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

682 
 

they are fearmongering rather than when they were mocking 
programs that are important to people. 
 
With respect to preventive services, we receive help from Big 
Brothers and Big Sisters, and we appreciate it very much. And 
we do not fund them for all of their activities, but we help out. 
And what we do is we have a contractual arrangement with Big 
Brothers and Big Sisters where we pay so much per match with 
the little sisters and little brothers and the matching. And the 
total there is $162,000; and we are very pleased that they 
provide these services, and I won’t go into the details. 
 
With respect to youth services, these provide positive leisure 
time activities and services for youth who are at risk of 
becoming involved with the law. And there we contract to the 
John Howard Society of moose Jaw for $30,000, and the Prince 
Albert John Howard Society for $46,000, for a total of $76,000. 
And contrary to what the members opposite might have tried to 
lead you to believe, we have not terminated out the services of 
the John Howard Society with respect to my department. 
 
The local provincial co-ordination is provided by S.M.I.L.E. 
(The Society for Maintaining and Improving Life in Estevan) in 
Estevan for $32,000 and SIGN (The Society for the 
Involvement of Good Neighbours) in Yorkton. We are 
reviewing the situation with SIGN in Yorkton; whether this 
administrative function can be afforded by our department or 
not. And I have indicated to them that we probably won’t 
continue this but we will study it a little further. 
 
With respect to other provincial co-ordination, the 
Saskatchewan Human Services Association receives $83,000 to 
co-ordinate the services of the various social service agencies 
and the foster parents. The Saskatchewan Foster Parents 
Association has an increase to $144,000 which provides an 
insurance plan for foster parents. And there will be other 
improvements in the foster care area which I have announced in 
Saskatoon. The end result will be about $1 million extra 
spending on foster parents because we consider this a priority. 
 
Now I admit we have had to reduce some spending in some 
areas, but we have also increased things to balance where the 
greatest need is. And I’m very pleased with what the foster 
parents are doing. We are going to give them additional 
training; we are going to give them the respect they deserve, 
and we are going to come up with some new services in the 
foster parents area. And what we’re going to do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is we are working them out with the foster parents 
association. 
 
For example, the rates to foster parents, we have budgeted an 
increase of 6.5 per cent. And then we went to the foster parents 
association and we said . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
the member opposite says we’ve done nothing for native foster 
children, and I will inform her that the department, under the 
former deputy which I transferred to the province of Manitoba, 
did not ask the federal government for assistance in this regard. 
I spoke to the federal minister, and I said, why don’t we have an 
agreement for native child care in this province? He said, 
because the province hasn’t asked for one. I said, well, I’m 
asking, and we are now finalizing that agreement. 

Now in all the years you were government, you didn’t ask. In 
all the time that I had my former deputy, who is now the deputy 
in Manitoba — which should tell you something — he didn’t 
ask. And that is why I’m very pleased to see that he’ll be 
helping Manitoba. So there’s the explanation. I’m very pleased 
you asked the question. I’m very pleased you raised it from 
your seat because we will have a native child care program 
because we have asked the federal government and they have 
given us the funding, and we are now working out the details 
with the bands. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — With respect to the foster care situation, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, where I was when I was interrupted . . . 
And I thank you very much for the interruption. Please ask 
more question so that nature, because you don’t ask any 
questions in question period, and this is a good time for you to 
ask them. 
 
But what I’m saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we went to a 
foster parent and we said, is 6.5 per cent . . . We know it should 
be more, but we just don’t have more right now. And they 
appreciate that we’re trying our best and have come up with the 
6.5 per cent. 
 
And we said, will you work with our department to work out 
the allocation — where it would be fairest to put the increases 
on the age groups of certain children? And we have sat down 
with the foster parents association and have worked that out. 
 
And I’m sure that they will be harassed by the members 
opposite for co-operating with our government, but I thank 
them very much for the courage of co-operating with us in 
trying to improve foster care. And I dissuade the members 
opposite from harassing the foster parents association for their 
own political purposes, because these people have co-operated 
very much, and we will assist them, and together we will 
improve the child care system in this province in a way that it 
has never been changed since we went away from orphanages 
and went to foster homes. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have group homes for 
mentally retarded adults. And I don’t have to give a lengthy 
explanation of group homes, because I think even the members 
opposite understand them. The public understands them. 
Everyone understands them. But we have these group homes in 
cities and towns throughout Saskatchewan, and if any of the 
members would be interested in the specific sums spent in their 
community, they could let me know. But the total expenditure 
on group homes is $4.4 million, which is a slight increase of 
about $300,000 from last year, from $4.1 million. 
 
So the main reason for this is because there is greater need, and 
more spaces have been provided. With respect to group homes 
for physically disabled adults, which is a special category again, 
there’s another $994,000 and there’s no reduction in any of 
these areas, and these homes are in Saskatoon, in Regina, and 
Prince Albert. 
 
We also have group homes for emotionally disturbed  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

683 
 

adults. These are residential treatment homes providing 
counselling, life skills, vocational rehabilitation training for 
emotionally disturbed adults, rehabilitative homes that provide 
supervision, and these are: the McKerracher House in Swift 
Current, $119,000; Phoenix Residential Society, $197,000 for 
Phoenix House; Lefave house, $59,000; the Thunder Creek 
Rehabilitation Services in Moose Jaw, $106,000; the Saskatoon 
Special Needs Housing Coalition, the Renaissance House, 
$158,000; the Weber House, $110,000; the Lakeland Council in 
Prince Albert, $127,000; SIGN in Yorkton, $63,000; Weyburn 
Group Homes, $72,000; the Edwards Residential Centre, North 
Battleford, $129,000; and the Libby Young Centre in 
Lloydminster, $144,000; and there we have not a large increase, 
but $8,000 more, for a total of $1.2 million in the group homes 
for emotionally disturbed adults — no cut at all. 
 
(2115) 
 
Now, I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there may be some 
adjustments here and there, but I don’t believe that you have 
seen any massive cuts as yet. 
 
And Hansard can be read, and people can examine it, and I’m 
prepared to give all this information to all the people in 
Saskatchewan. We are pleased to show that these services are 
being provided, so anyone who wants this information can 
receive it from my office. 
 
I do not see — unless we don’t know what’s going on or we 
can’t add — I don’t see where these massive cuts are in third 
party groups. 
 
Rehabilitation services, group homes for children — these 
provide family style homes that provide care, supervision, and 
training to mentally retarded children. They’re located in 
Saskatoon, Regina, another one in Regina, Prince Albert, North 
Battleford, and in Shaunavon. And they receive a total of 
$546,000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can see that it costs a lot of money to 
provide services to people. We are pleased to do this, and this is 
why, as I indicated earlier, it was necessary to raise taxes, 
because we have to continue providing these services. I don’t 
know of any alternatives. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan is not allowed to print money; 
there’s a limit to how much we can borrow, so I don’t know 
where the members opposite believe that we could get money 
with out working. So we have to work, and we have to pay 
taxes, and we have to help each other and provide these 
services. 
 
We have group homes. These are straight group homes to 
provide care to youth in care who cannot be maintained in 
foster care. there are four fully funded staffed homes, and 10 
live-in parent-model homes. And of those, there are a total of 
14, which cost $1.8 million to operate. They have had a 
reduction of $7,000 on their contracts on a budget of $1.8 
million. So there is a slight adjustment there. 
 
I could go into the details of which one was reduced. Some 
were increased, some were reduced, and it’s based on 
anticipated payments from the federal government. So  

even that reduction of $7,000 is really only a paper reduction, 
because there’s a budget reduction. Because in Macnab House 
in Saskatoon the reduction is based on anticipated payments 
from the federal government, so they also contract out services. 
 
And in some cases we provide services to treaty Indian people 
and then are reimbursed from the federal government. Other 
cases, the services are provided by the federal government. So 
there is adjustment depending on the balance and the mix of the 
people in need there. And if there are more treaty Indians, then 
they get less from the provincial government and more from the 
federal government. At least, that’s theoretically how it works. 
However, the federal government doesn’t always pay their fair 
share with respect to treaty Indians, and I’m taking that matter 
up with the federal minister as well. 
 
There’s child care centres, two in northern Saskatchewan, at 
Pinehouse, a child care centre for $118,000, and the Sandy Bay 
child care centre for $116,000. And I think we should look . . . 
they provide preventative support respite and child care to 
prevent family breakdown in these communities of Pinehouse 
and Sandy Bay, for a total cost of $234,000. 
 
In addition, we have private treatment . . . Now I don’t want the 
members opposite to get up in arms about the word private. The 
private treatment is a treatment to youth with severe 
behavioural problems who are referred to private non-profit 
organizations. Ranch Ehrlo receives on contract from our 
department a sum depending on the usage that we made of that 
. . . Between one and a half million and 1.9 million a year to 
Ranch Ehrlo, depending on the usage. Bosco Homes in Regina 
receives approximately 832,000 to 865,000, depending on the 
usage. That is because these are private contracts. This is very 
expensive treatment, but we feel that it is essential, and are 
continuing this type of specialized treatment. 
 
There’s also the William Roper Hull Centre in Calgary, to 
which we send individuals. And one of the individuals, I don’t 
want to mention names, one of the individuals is from Moose 
Jaw, and the member and I worked it out an we are now 
sending an individual to Calgary for special treatment, and it 
costs a lot of money and the member and I and the family saw 
the need and we agreed on it. And I encourage the other 
members opposite to co-operate where there is need and contact 
me in cases like that, and we’ll try to work out solutions for 
people and try to help these families. I am pleased to help these 
people and pleased to help the MLA from Moose Jaw. I won’t 
mention the constituents because we don’t want to zero in on 
the individuals. So I’m grateful for those kind of co-operation 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it wasn’t you, so stop 
waving your hand. 
 
The alternative measures program is alternate measures to try to 
keep young people out of courts, and these operate in various 
communities at a cost of $446,000, in order to keep young 
offenders out of the young offenders’ facilities. 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the House, this Assembly, 
now has quite a clear picture of how third party grants are spent 
in this province, the need for the  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

684 
 

services. What I’ve tried to do this evening is to take the 
political rhetoric out of this and show that this government is 
doing as much as possible to help people and that there is no 
need for fearmongering with respect to services. You can see 
these are a lot of services, and I’m convinced, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that as a government we are doing the right thing. 
 
I want to touch briefly, before I conclude, on another area of my 
jurisdiction. That is senior citizens. And with respect to the 
senior citizens, you have to take everything in balance. Senior 
citizens have been here longer than most of us and are probably 
wiser than most of us, except maybe one or two senior citizens 
understand there has to be some balance. 
 
Now with respect to senior citizens, the SIP program — the 
seniors income program — was increased, and the new budget 
is, in this budget, $12.7 million; last year a budget of $9.3 
million. We actually overspent it last year because more seniors 
qualified. And we made an increase in benefits, and the increase 
in benefits level over the past while has been up about 30 per 
cent. 
 
There are now 26,800 senior citizens in Saskatchewan out of 
129,000, or one in five, that qualify for senior citizens 
supplementary pension from the province of Saskatchewan. 
And that has to, taken in balance with the home program which 
senior citizens qualify for $1,500 . . . 
 
And then I heard criticism today that we had cut-off the senior 
citizen’s plan for where they got $1,000 to fix their house 
without any matching amount of money. Well, that was a 
five-year program which had gone through four years and 92 
per cent of senior citizens had qualified under that program. 
And the only senior citizens who would not be able to get that 
program because of its termination after four years rather than 
five are those that have turned 65 recently. And we find that 
most of those senior citizens have made some pension 
provisions and are not the 26,000 that are on the Saskatchewan 
income plan. 
 
In addition, these people qualify for the $1,500 home 
improvement grant — the SHIP program, the Saskatchewan 
home plan — and are treated the same as all other citizens. And 
we do not consider that harsh, taking into account that we have 
spent on seniors’ supplementary pensions an extra 2 to $3 
million. In addition, the senior citizens will receive, under the 
special program — the seniors heritage program — $39.5 
million, a considerable sum of money for which 76,500 
applications were sent out last week, and we anticipate that we 
will . . . in this budget, we have budgeted $39.5 million. And I 
would think that for senior citizens, some may have increased 
drug costs, others may have decreased drug costs, that $39.5 
million they can use either for their drugs, if necessary, or for 
their home improvement, or for their taxes. They are free to 
spend this $39.5 million as they see fit. I don’t see where the 
members opposite have any reason to complain with respect to 
the budgeting for senior citizens, which is a substantial sum of 
money and, as a matter of fact, is a record sum of money. We 
have covered a situation here  

where we have covered senior citizens and the neediest people 
in Saskatchewan, those people who are served by third parties. 
 
In addition, my department covers many, many areas. We cover 
day care which we have made an increase of 4 per cent. We 
cover the Saskatchewan employment development program. 
This is a program which we operate jointly with the federal 
government where we try to have people working rather than 
collecting welfare, and it gives them an opportunity to have a 
subsidized job. Some of the jobs are full time; some of them are 
part time, depending on the circumstances and the location. And 
what we have been able to do there is, we have been able to 
budget $13 million, which is money that would have been paid 
out in any event on welfare payments, and given people a 
chance to do something to the community service or to learn on 
the job, and we’re quite pleased with how this pilot project is 
working. 
 
We have examples in Prince Albert, where in your constituency 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have Par Industries, who is 
training people in forestry, and this is a pilot project. And you 
and I, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have looked at this project, have 
tramped around there on the site, and are optimistic that they 
will get into actual forestry in the Nesbitt forests, and I give you 
a commitment that we will work in every way possible to have 
this industry, Par Industries, become an actual lumber company, 
and we will see what can be done in that regard. 
 
So therefore taking into account the funding for senior citizens, 
taking into account the funding in social services, taking into 
account that we are helping people who are needy; that we are 
cutting government expenditures wherever possible; that we are 
trying to implement deficiencies; that unfortunately we’ve had 
to raise taxes. We have done the right thing. It has not been 
popular. I can assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has not been 
easy. It has not been easy. There is a great weight to governing. 
There is a great responsibility, and all of these decision, 
whether they involve $10,000 or $10 million, were taken very, 
very seriously. And because we are doing the right thing, I 
definitely and without doubt am against the amendment. I am 
for the amendment because it is the right thing to do, and I will 
be voting in favour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am convinced; I have been convinced tonight. I have 
been convinced of something that I have often heard, given my 
line of work before coming into this House. It has often been 
said to me that ministers have the ability to put people to sleep. 
I am convinced tonight after listening to the minister for half 
hour . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, hour and a half. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Hour and a half, Mr. Speaker, before I bring 
some remarks to the budget, I wish to respond to a few remarks 
made by members opposite in the course of this debate over the 
past couple of days. In particular, I would like to refer to 
remarks made by the member for Moosomin. After reading the 
prepared speech, he made  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

685 
 

one or two remarks which I noted with much interest. The 
member from Moosomin said to us in this House: 
 

. . . isn’t there a possibility that all parties could co-operate 
in resolving serious challenges? 

 
He said: 
 

I challenge the members opposite that we, as a 
government, and as representatives of this province, could 
work together to better the conditions of this province — 
to better the government of this province. 

 
On that we agree, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
By that, I take it the member from Moosomin means that what’s 
required is a full and free discussion of these serious challenges 
and the issues that face us. What I take from his remarks is to 
say that this is the forum where it should be done. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, on this side of the House we were ready to 
engage in that debate in February. 
 
(2130) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — But there was no legislature. And we on this 
side of the House were ready for this debate, full and frank 
discussion in March, but there was no legislature. We were 
ready for this debate in April, but there was no legislature. We 
were ready for it in May; we were ready for it June 1. No 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the darkest spring in Saskatchewan history, 
the kind of debate that the member from Moosomin calls for 
has been denied the people of this province, not by we in 
opposition, but by the government of which he is a part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this debate I heard the Minister for 
Tourism and Small Business turn his attention to the important 
role of tourism in our province. He spoke of its importance. He 
spoke of the warm hospitality of Saskatchewan people. And no 
member in this House will disagree. 
 
But from the perspective of the community I represent, surely I 
sincerely question the minister’s rhetoric. While he waxes on 
eloquently about tourism in our province, this is the same 
minister, the same government that proposed to cut all of the 
provincial government funding to the Saskatchewan air show. 
Proposed to cut all of this government’s funding and support to 
the Saskatchewan air show. That’s a major event in 
Saskatchewan’s summer; it’s a major tourist attraction, and I 
find that a peculiar way to support tourism. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while the minister talks about the importance 
of tourism, another minister in his cabinet and officials in his 
department are out trying to sell the Moose Jaw Wild Animal 
Park. And they tell us if they can’t find a buyer by this fall, they 
will dispose of all the animals. And animal park without 
animals — that’s a real tourist attraction, a real tourist 
attraction, Mr. Deputy  

Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite say they would like 
some positive alternatives. I can propose some positive 
alternatives for tourism. I ask this government to support and 
enhance the facilities and the events that we have in this 
province. They want a positive alternative to encourage tourism 
in this province; then reduce the fees in the provincial parks, 
make them attractive again. If they want the way to encourage 
tourists in our province, then restore the roads so that driving in 
Saskatchewan is a pleasure again and not a challenge. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to turn to some remarks 
surrounding this budget. Mr. Speaker, in my opinion the people 
of Saskatchewan don’t expect their government to be perfect. 
They don’t expect their governments to go without making 
mistakes. And they don’t expect their governments to have all 
the answers. But they do expect, and they have the right to 
expect, honesty. They have the right to expect to be able to trust 
this government, to be able to trust the men and women they 
elect. They have the right to expect that commitments made 
ought to be binding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And secondly, Mr. Speaker, they have another 
right, the right to expect that their government will act in the 
best interests of all — not just in the interests of a few, and not 
just in the interests of political expediency, but that their 
government will act in the best interests of all, and by their 
actions to give form and substance to the hope and the dreams 
of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on both counts, by this 
budget, the government has failed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — They have betrayed in this budget both the 
trust and the dreams of Saskatchewan people. 
 
We haven’t had a letter for a few minutes, about an hour . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A lot of numbers. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — A lot of numbers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this letter came to the Premier and a 
variety of us, a variety of members in this House. It is a letter 
members opposite may want to listen to with some care. It 
comes from a constituency represented by a member of this 
government, and the writer places this in the letter: 
 

I feel this is the biggest display of governmental 
incompetence I have ever seen in my life. Mr. Premier, I 
feel you have lied about many of your campaign promises. 
It will be a long time before I will ever be able to vote 
Progressive Conservative again, because what I have seen 
here is that a Progressive Conservative vote is a vote for 
lying, deceit, incompetence, and lack of human  

  



 
June 23, 1987 

686 
 

compassion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The letter concludes: 
 

I really think that it’s a shame when the innocent have to 
pay the price when there are better ways to try and 
straighten out our economy. 

 
People, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will forgive mistakes; they may 
even forgive incompetence; but they will not forgive betrayal. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the betrayal that is contained in this 
budget, the betrayal of promises, the betrayal of trust — has 
already been clearly identified by our Finance critic and 
member son this side of the House. 
 
Let me just raise, in my remarks, two examples of this 
government’s betrayal of both the trust of the people of 
Saskatchewan and commitments made to the people of 
Saskatchewan, one of those betrayals from a department that I 
have some particular interest in, the department that is 
responsible for culture and recreation, and another one that 
affects very nearly the constituency I represent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I turn up the estimates for the 
newly-formed Department of Parks, Recreation and Culture, I 
am left with many questions, Mr. Speaker, about these 
estimates, question about this government’s commitment to 
multiculturalism, this government’s commitment to sport and 
recreation and the arts, and particularly the arts board. And I 
look forward the time to estimates when we can explore these 
questions. 
 
But for now I want to look at just one vote from this 
department, that being the vote for grants under the provincial 
cultural and recreational facilities program — the provincial 
cultural and recreational facilities program. Mr. Speaker, this is 
a good program. It was a good program when we introduced it 
in the budget of 1982. It was a good program when this 
government reintroduced it in 1983, albeit with a smaller 
budget. It’s a good program, Mr. Speaker. It provides for 
R.M.’s and villages and towns and cities across the province. It 
provides rinks, swimming pools, cultural centres, senior 
citizens’ centres. It’s a good program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
While it provides facilities for the long-term, it provides jobs 
for today. It’s a good program. For every dollar that this 
program has placed in the economy of Saskatchewan, another 
four has been accompanied locally. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a 
good program. 
 
I have here the news release of March 30, 1983, when this 
program was announced. It reads, and here is the commitment: 
 

This program, effective April 1, 1983, to March 31, 1988, 
will provide $32 million to assist with the construction, 
acquisition, or renovation of cultural and recreational 
facilities in communities across Saskatchewan. 

 
That’s the commitment made to this program in 1983 — a 
five-year commitment for $32 million. 
 
What that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that in this  

year’s estimates, to fulfill that commitment made to R.M.s and 
villages and towns and cities across this province, to fulfill that 
commitment this year’s estimate for the program should read 
$11 million. It should read $11 million. 
 
I read the estimates, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I read the 
estimates of this department, and somehow I am reminded, I’m 
reminded of an old song by John Lennon and Paul McCartney 
— and some members opposite will be young enough to 
remember this. I’m reminded, Mr. Deputy speaker, of their 
song, Maxwell’s Silver Hammer. Maxwell’s Silver Hammer. 
Bang, Bang. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does the estimate read this year 
when it should read $11 million? It reads $2 million — $2 
million. Well, the hammer did come down, Mr. Speaker, and it 
came down on this program. And what that means, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that every community across Saskatchewan, every 
R.M., every town, and every city that has not yet accessed, or 
has not yet fully accessed this program, has been hammered. 
They have been betrayed. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that members opposite 
ought to get to their constituencies and get to their town 
councils and their mayors and their reeves and tell them the bad 
news, that the program is gone. They’ve been betrayed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they’ve been betrayed by this budget. 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now to a betrayal that’s 
contained in this budget that affects my family, and the 
constituency I represent, very personally. And I speak of a 
commitment that was made to the people of Moose Jaw and 
district that in this fiscal year we would see the beginnings of 
construction of a new St. Anthony’s Home in Moose Jaw to 
replace the existing level 4 facility. 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say to this House, it was a good 
commitment. Even though we had hoped and wished and asked 
for an expanded facility, it was a good commitment. 
 
Over and over again, the commitment was made in our city. It 
was made by the former minister of Health; it was made by the 
former members of this legislature for Moose Jaw. Over and 
over again in the campaign, it was made. 
 
I’m told by members of the St. Anthony’s board that the 
Premier himself made the commitment. Departmental officials, 
over and over again, assured us that the project would be under 
way by now. And then on May 21, the betrayal came. We were 
told the project has been put on hold, perhaps not only for this 
year, but perhaps for next year, perhaps for the year after that. 
 
The Sisters of Providence, Mr. Deputy Speaker — they match 
their share of the commitment. The people and the district 
around Moose Jaw — we matched our share. We raised the 1.1 
or $2 million that we were required to raise. We kept our share 
of the commitment. The government betrayed us. 
 
This very week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this very week, members 
of the Royal Canadian Legion in Moose Jaw  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

687 
 

instructed their president to write the Premier concerning this 
betrayal of St. Anthony’s Home. This to the Premier from the 
president of the Royal Canadian Legion in Moose Jaw. He 
writes: 
 

The Sisters of Providence and the community at large have 
honoured their commitments, and we cannot be convinced 
in any way that the leaders of our provincial government 
will not honour theirs. 

 
We have been betrayed. Like the people in the Sherbrooke 
nursing home in Saskatoon, like the people of Imperial, we 
have been betrayed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Moose Jaw and across the province, 
when we observe that there is money around to hire every 
defeated PC member who happens to come through the front 
door looking for a job, when we observe that there is money 
around to purchase assets in Alberta, when we observe that 
there is money around to continue funding the labour intensive 
swimming pools that the Minister of Urban Affairs talked about 
last night, we ask, why is there no money for a nursing home 
we so desperately need? Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a betrayal of 
the worst kind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And the news of that betrayal was announced 
in Moose Jaw when the editor of the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, 
I think, caught the mood of the Moose Jaw community. And in 
some ways, the editor has caught the mood of this province. He 
said in his editorial of May 22, 1987: “A dream has been 
demolished in Moose Jaw, and the Grant Devine government is 
the cause of it all.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Dreams have been destroyed across this 
province, and the Grant Devine government is the cause of it 
all. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could not support this budget simply 
because it is a budget that destroys dreams. This budget has 
destroyed the dream of a friend of mine who lives in St. 
Anthony’s Home and had hoped to live to se the day when she 
would be in a new home. 
 
It has destroyed the dreams of young women who wanted to 
make a career out of treating children in the school system, 
treating the dental care needs of children in the school system. 
It has destroyed the dreams of individuals who wanted to give 
their life as educators in this province. It has destroyed the 
dreams out of three out of every four students who will apply to 
a technical school. 
 
(2145) 
 
It takes the further step, the further step in destroying the 
dreams of the young people who want to begin farming in this 
province. It has gone a long way to destroy the vision that made 
this province at one time a pioneer and a leader in health care. 
 
But perhaps worst of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget goes 
a long way to destroy the fundamental principle that  

we can trust the people we elect. And that, perhaps, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is worst of all. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the amendment. I could 
never support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 
to join with my colleagues today in support of the budget put 
forth by the Minister of Finance. 
 
The budget was developed through responsible and sound 
judgement, through fairness and compassion, sharing, and 
caring. Sharing and caring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by a 
government that believes in consulting with the people, 
listening to the people, and giving the people the fair and honest 
answers that they deserve. 
 
With current economic realities that we now face, along with 
every other country, we must come to terms with the challenges 
that government faces in providing effective, efficient services 
to this changing world. 
 
It is our duty as a government to scrutinize all areas of spending 
to determine where savings can be made, where duplication can 
be eliminated, and what programs have escalated to the point of 
being unacceptable in their current state. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, changes are necessary. Change is the essence 
of progress. We must progress. We must keep up. We must 
move ahead. And to ignore this fact, as some would do, would 
be a tragedy for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some areas of health care were in need of 
necessary changes. The cost to repair and maintain our health 
care system has reached the point where it outstrips our ability 
to provide needed services efficiently and effectively. The 
magnitude of the annual costs of the Saskatchewan prescription 
drug plan alone are staggering. Over the past 11 years these 
costs hat I speak of in regard to the drug plan have risen from 
16 million to 83 million; that’s an increase of more than 400 per 
cent. At this rate, Mr. Speaker, the program’s cost would rise to 
125 million by 1990, 700 per cent more than its initial year. 
 
Obviously this government has faced some difficult decisions 
— choices that were made in consultation with the people, and 
the people know we are right. It takes courage to make these 
tough decisions. Let me assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
let me assure the members opposite that each decision regarding 
the drug plan has been made with a deep concern to protect 
those most in need, in a way that will not place them under 
undue financial stress. This concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
foremost in our minds. 
 
Another area of this province’s health care in need of serious 
revision was the Saskatchewan dental plan. Even so, children 
ages five to 13 will receive free dental care from dentists, from 
the professionals — the best care possible. And the program 
continues in total in the North. The government has made 
difficult decision, but has made decision to protect those most 
in need. 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

688 
 

We, as a government, have to remain able to meet our youth’s 
health needs. Our government chose to re-direct resources to 
meet head-on the threat of alcohol and drug abuse — the threat, 
Mr. Speaker, that has been described as the number one 
problem facing adolescents today. I for one have seen what 
alcohol and drug abuse can do to teenagers on the sports field, 
in the class-rooms, in the homes, and on the streets. There’s no 
way that this government or any other fair-minded individual 
would choose to ignore a program that is threatening our 
children’s future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government devotes one-third of its 
total budget to health care. It is a priority of the people. It is a 
priority of this government, and it will be a constant that the 
people of Saskatchewan can rely on. 
 
Education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is yet another priority with this 
province. We, as a government, feel that education is a right 
rather than a privilege for all Saskatchewan residents. Access to 
educational opportunities have been developed through this 
government with the needs of all in mind, to keep pace with the 
rapidly changing world — access, yes, but with the emphasis on 
excellence. 
 
Increases in education funding have outpaced inflation since 
this government has come to office, and that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is a record this government is proud of. This 
government has responded to the province’s needs by creating 
1,700 more openings for the students in technical institution — 
1,700, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has increased, by 38 per cent, operating and 
capital grants to universities. The share of the provincial budget 
directed to university funding is up by 20 per cent from 1982 to 
1986. An interesting comparison, Mr. Speaker, to the previous 
NDP government’s response to university funding: during their 
last term of office there was a 30 per cent decrease in funding to 
universities. That’s how they respond to the educational future 
of our children. 
 
In keeping with the subject of students, Mr. Speaker, there are 
three times more student aid available now than in 1982, three 
times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of everything — loans, 
bursaries, etc. And the people of my constituency, Wascana, tell 
me that every student should be eligible for student aid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me be more specific about education 
initiatives. We introduced a core curriculum which teachers in 
my constituency tell me will maintain excellence in education. 
This new core curriculum will prepare our children for the 21st 
century and the challenges ahead. 
 
Our government has introduced Preparing for the Year 2000, a 
document that outlines our policy objectives for the future. For 
instance, opportunities for the young, Mr. Speaker, 
opportunities for seniors, for women, for natives, for individuals 
on social assistance, for single parents, for people in all regions 
of the province. This government will establish a new 3.2 
million education outreach fund to provide the resources needed 
to offer  

university and institute courses in smaller centres at regional 
colleges. The community college will be reconstructed into nine 
regional colleges, with a new mandate concentrating on skills 
training and university extension courses. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan has begun 
to provide the first two years of Arts and Science requirements 
in Prince Albert, and will soon offer courses in Yorkton and 
North Battleford through regional colleges. 
 
Now what this means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that individuals 
such as women with families, living in smaller cities, will be 
able to achieve their educational goals closer to home. The 
expense of their time, travel and, of course, the irreplaceable 
commitment to their families will not have to be sacrificed. No 
longer will they have to choose one or the other. 
 
A major problem for women has been the financial difficulty of 
single mothers who wish to upgrade or continue their education. 
To assist this group, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has 
assured that single parents are now eligible for additional 
financial assistance under the new special incentive component 
of student aid. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, this government has made a concerted effort 
to improve educational opportunities for Saskatchewan natives. 
Funding has been provided to native controlled institutions to 
set up separate programs. Gabriel Dumont Institute is one 
example. The Saskatchewan Federated College at the 
University of Regina, and the Saskatchewan Indian community 
College are examples of treaty Indian controlled institutions. 
 
The province will propose that there be joint native ownership 
and management of the new Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology. This province will not be left behind, 
because to sit back and disregard the changes taking place 
would be robbing our people of the one thing the pioneers of 
this province endeavoured so painfully to achieve — to feel the 
pride in knowing there is no end to what we can accomplish as 
individuals because the opportunities are there. This 
government recognizes the value of these opportunities and is 
committed to helping to ensure all people of Saskatchewan 
succeed to become the best that they can be. 
 
It is a responsible vision that provides opportunities for 
self-sufficiency; self-sufficiency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
improve the employment of those such as welfare recipients 
through enhanced employment in training opportunities. Single 
parents receiving welfare will be allotted special allowances to 
cover child care costs and incidental expenses related to their 
participation in training and employment opportunities. 
Investment in these families will pay future dividends in terms 
of both dollars and in quality of life. 
 
Another area this government has focused on through 
opportunities is women in business. This year, a series of five, 
one-day conferences for women in business were held in La 
Ronge, Prince Albert, Yorkton, Estevan, and  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

689 
 

Swift Current. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see more women day 
after day entering into the work place. Women are pursuing 
non-traditional professions in trades and are proving to be some 
of the most successful in business anywhere. It is through 
education, workshops, seminars, and similar opportunities that 
we will continue to see the development of equal opportunity 
for all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
I recently had the opportunity to attend the minister’s 
conference concerning women’s issues, and while I believe that 
day care is by no means solely a women’s issue, I’d like to 
comment on day care. Statistics show that more than half the 
number of women with pre-school children are now working 
outside the home. So in reality, Mr. Speaker, the question of 
day care cannot be ignored. Mr. Speaker, our government has 
responded to day care in a realistic and positive way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition made 
reference to what he suggested was an uncaring government to 
social issues. Mind you, it’s not surprising — it’s the old NDP 
tactic, scare and threaten, peddling the politics of fear, but we 
expect that of them. Let me straighten him out on at least one of 
many examples, and it relates specifically with the critical issue 
of day care, how the NDP ignored day care and how the 
Progressive Conservative government responded to the needs of 
day care. For instance, the government has increased the 
number of spaces available in day care centres by nearly 2,000. 
Now that’s performance, that’s responding to the needs of the 
people. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province know we 
care because the evidence is clear — caring and sharing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, through the 1970s, those 
concerned with day care lobbied the previous administration, 
the NDP, for help. Time and again they asked for help from the 
NDP but they were ignored by the NDP. They’re ignored in day 
care, as they were in so many other areas of social need. But the 
Grant Devine government responded. In 1986 the government 
of Grant Devine introduced operating grants for day-care 
centres — we responded to their needs. Grants, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to help cover the cost of operating day-care centres. 
The NDP ignored this critical and important issue. We 
responded and we delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when one looks back over the history of this 
province during the years of the NDP government, it is 
absolutely outstanding to see how the NDP callously ignored 
the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. Mind you, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a government, this was a government that 
stumbled through the 1970s without a clear policy, without a 
grand plan with which to face the future. And even today, after 
two rejections by the people of this province, they still don’t 
have a clear policy on anything. Just the same old line, the same 
repressive NDP dogma that the state knows best. 
 
But it’s not surprising, really, because they have a leader who 
can’t decide if he’s staying or leaving. A potential leadership 
candidate from Saskatoon Riverside who can’t decide if he 
wants to go federal or stay provincial. The financial critic from 
Regina North East who can barely get his foot in the door to 
have a chance at the leadership.  

And a potential leadership candidate from The Battlefords who 
doesn’t believe in free enterprise in a city that is now thriving 
with new businesses. It’s not surprising, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s the same old NDP stuff. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Being near 10 o’clock, 
this House stands adjourned until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 
 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS

