













































August 6, 1987 Hansard Evening


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 6, 1987 

 

1595 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, as we are approximately 

half-way through our Education estimates, I would like to take 

some time at the beginning of tonight’s session just to draw 

together the overall theme that my colleagues and I have been 

emphasizing. We’ve received repeated calls, Mr. Chairman, 

from people involved in education, and from parents and from 

students, and all the calls and the concerns that we’ve heard 

have a common theme. People feel that the youth of 

Saskatchewan are being betrayed. There’s a betrayal of 

education in Saskatchewan. They feel that what’s happening is 

that this government is cutting back in education to pay for its 

mismanagement in other fields. 

 

Now when I talk about mismanagement, Mr. Chairman, I refer, 

of course, to the $3.4 billion deficit. If there was no deficit, I 

don’t think that we would have to even start to be concerned 

about cuts in education and health. But as we see this deficit 

here, the government is asking everybody to participate in it. 

 

Now I want to make the point that the members on this side do 

not believe that the deficit was caused by the health field or 

people in the education field or by the social services. It’s when 

we look at the way the government has been spending its 

money, the money that they’ve not collected, money that 

they’ve given away to the oil companies, $1.5 billion, $248 

million not collected from Weyerhaeuser, $20 million given 

away to Peter Pocklington, money spent on patronage 

appointments such as the $30,000 to Gordon Dirks, and of 

course it comes right down to small details like air plane trips 

for their cabinet minister to a family wedding. 

 

I want to give a brief overview of the record in education that 

we’ve heard of over the last seven months. The first and 

perhaps the most devastating and longest — the cut that’s going 

to cut the deepest over the long run — was quite likely the cuts 

to the school boards — that is the 1 per cent decrease in funding 

to school board grants and the broken promise of the five-year 

educational development fund which has now been taken back 

and replaced with a 10-year plan. The 1 per cent cut in school 

board grants has resulted in loss of staff by some school boards, 

and other boards had a loss of programming, other cases the 

increase in mill rates. Of course, the loss of staff results in 

higher student ratio which of course transfers right down and 

has a bad effect on the students that we are trying to serve. 

 

Many boards have had to make sudden adjustments to plans as 

a result of the broken promise of the five-year EDF (educational 

development fund) program. They had responded very 

positively to the program; the boards liked the program as it 

was set up. They are wondering  

now if they — because they have to abandon ship on the 

five-year program — they are wondering what’s going to 

happen to the 10-year program, and they want continued 

assurances that the 10-year program will stay in place and not 

be cut altogether or moved or changed to a 20-year program or 

something like that. 

 

Boards have found that they have had to abandon ship, as I 

mentioned; they have had to cut programs midway in some 

cases. In order to overcome some of the difficulties, some 

boards have had to borrow money, others have cut personnel 

that they have hired specifically for EDF, and some have just 

gone into a bookkeeping system where they’ve gone ahead with 

the program and just labelled the budgeted items as accounts 

receivable, which means that they would be in extreme 

difficulty should this program be cut again or should the 

promise be broken again. 

 

Now you might ordinarily say, well we promise, we promise 

you. The government has promised that there is a 10-year 

program, and you’re asking everybody to understand that there 

are difficulties, but it’s not completely and easily . . . easy to 

believe that promise. See, you also promised to make health 

care number one in Canada, and now what is happening to it? 

 

I could list promises, Mr. Chairman, and I will a few for the 

record. In the case of health care, the drug plan has been 

decimated, the children’s dental plan has been cut, and we 

know that there are thousands of people on the hospital waiting 

list. There was a promise to cut personal income taxes. Instead, 

what do we see? Flat tax from 1 per cent and raised again this 

year. They promised to eliminate the sales tax, and what did we 

get this year? We got a 2 per cent hike — a 2 per cent hike in 

the provincial sales tax. There was a promise to eliminate the 

gas tax. Well we had that for a while, but now we’ve got a 7 

cent a litre tax added on with the promise of repayment. There 

is a promise . . . We did have an original promise of a balanced 

budget. Well everybody knows what kind of a farce that 

particular promise has resulted in. 

 

So the theme that we’re showing, the members on this side are 

showing, Mr. Chairman, is that the youth are being betrayed by 

having to take from education what should be taken from other 

places. And I mentioned earlier the 1 per cent cuts to the school 

boards and the extension of the EDF fund, the cut-back in the 

EDF fund, the promise, a five-year promise extended now to a 

10-year promise. 

 

School boards have also had difficulty by having had promises 

of capital funding withdrawn, and to name two schools in 

Saskatoon, the Erindale school was a promised school, and in 

Prince Albert, the Riverside school was promised, those things 

have now been cut back. 

 

The department itself and the management of the department 

itself is of concern to educators because they’ve seen that 

there’s been a break in the continuity of the department staff. 

And when we look at the break in the continuity of the 

department staff, it also reflects the direction, the total direction 

and the change in direction of the entire Department of 

Education. The shift in  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1596 

 

emphasis is from having people with education experience in 

the Department of Education to people with fiscal experience in 

the Department of Education. Three out of the top four 

administrative aides, administrators with the Department of 

Education, are without Saskatchewan educational experience. 

 

Here is what a letter says from an individual, a school principal 

in Lloydminster. This is what a principal says about this 

particular change. He says: 

 

Surely your department needs a historical prospective in 

order to have a good sense of where it is going, and also 

the manner in which they (meaning the department 

employees) were released shows that there is a large 

measure of either insecurity or arrogance on the part of the 

decision makers. 

 

The concern extends beyond just the people in the department 

because there is a great concern about what could possibly 

happen to the core curriculum. I mentioned this earlier in the 

estimates debate, the seven years of development that is gone, 

the team confidence that’s been built up, and people are now 

asking the question, with new people and with new direction, 

we want reassurances that what has been developed so far will 

not be lost. 

 

We spent considerable time, Mr. Chairman, talking about the 

cuts to the technical institutes, the 142 tech staff laid off, the 

1,100 student seats that have been cut. I will be dealing a little 

later this evening with other problems at the technical schools 

specifically, in this case, with the Northern Institute of 

Technology. 

 

There’s been considerable talk and concern raised regarding 

what’s happening at our universities, Mr. Chairman. A two-year 

budget freeze — that amounts to being 10 per cent behind the 

cost of living over two years. This is the first time ever that I 

can recollect that there’s been a limited enrolment in the 

College of Arts and Science — the first time. 

 

Our students are being asked to pay more. There’s been a 10 per 

cent hike in tuition fees. This increase in tuition fees and the 

possibility of increased tuition fees in other post-secondary 

institutions amount to a deterrent fee on education. We now 

have a deterrent fee on prescription drugs; we have a deterrent 

fee on education. 

 

Universities, of course, being faced with the lack of funds . . . In 

my city, we find that the school of human justice and social 

work is being chopped. This is also happening in the city of 

Saskatoon. Now those personnel are needed, Mr. Chairman. 

Prince Albert is a centre of incarceration; we have five prisons 

in Prince Albert, and the people, the training, is needed. The 

people need the professional training to be able to do an 

excellent job and to continue improving in their qualifications. 

 

Of course, one of the most devastating things that happened, 

Mr. Chairman, was the cuts that took place to the community 

college programs. The whole thing was disguised as a 

re-organization, but the result is really a loss of educational 

opportunities and educational  

experiences. 

 

There is an exception by the people of Saskatchewan, across 

this province, to keep education as a pillar of the overall 

provincial program. Now we have heard a lot of rhetoric about 

expansion of the technical system, and we’ve heard a lot about 

positioning for the 21st century. But the trouble is, Mr. 

Chairman, the words and the language does not square with the 

action. 

 

Now I want to bring to the minister’s attention an item from his 

own publication, and it talks about “Principles of a New 

Agenda” in his own document, Preparing for the Year 2000. 

And I kind of like what is written in some of this, Mr. Minister. 

But what I would really like to see is that there was a good 

follow-up on it because there are some things that are 

happening that just don’t jibe with what’s written in here. 

 

Now right from page 5 of this document, and I quote, says: 

 

An adult education and retraining become more of a 

necessity for future employment, access must be provided 

more equitably to all groups and regions in the province. 

 

And, secondly, it says: 

 

Adult education is one of the main bulwarks against 

erosion of our social and cultural heritage. We must 

reinforce this role . . . highest priority must be given by all 

adult education institutions to reinforce analytical, 

conceptual and reasoning skills. 

 

Nobody’s going to argue with that or the previous two 

statements; and: 

 

There must be an expanded focus on the needs of older 

workers for retraining. 

 

And then, there’s telling sentence: 

 

Education must become a lifelong endeavour. 

 

Now I ask the minister, how can you square what is said there, 

what is quoted there, how can you square that with the 

programming cut-backs in the community colleges and with the 

programming cut-backs in the technical schools? How can you 

promise to do one thing, and then at the same time, do another? 

 

Yes, “Education must become a lifelong endeavour.” But what 

they do then is they cut back in the person enrichment courses, 

and I think if you’re saying that and cutting back on the 

personal enrichment courses, that’s deception of the lowest and 

the worst kind. 

 

When it comes to the technical school budgets, all you have to 

do is look at the dollars. You used to spend in the vicinity of 

$80 million annually on technical schools; now it’s down to $60 

million annually. 

 

(1915) 

 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1597 

 

Now I know we’ve heard some arguments: well, we’re going to 

redesign the curriculum or . . . and we’re going to be talking 

about retraining initiatives, alternate training methods. But all in 

all still what happens is we’re withdrawing funding from it. 

 

Now let me just itemize a little more, in a little more detail, 

about the cuts to community colleges and the community 

college program. 

 

How does it not relate to lifelong learning to have cut all of 

these courses, a list of about 50 long . . . but I would like to 

mention some of them. Courses in small animal care, culinary 

skills, building programs, gardening, miscellaneous courses, 

courses in painting and photography, in pottery and ceramics, in 

drama, in needlework, spinning, and in sports. Now are these 

regarded as not being valuable? 

 

They were implemented, Mr. Chairman, first of all, by 

community demand. They were paid for largely by tuition. All 

the community colleges had to do was to provide the delivery 

service. That was the big part of it — provide the delivery 

service. Now that mandate is gone. I ask the minister, how can 

he explain that you cut those courses and at the same time you 

believe in lifelong learning? 

 

These courses were instrumented and instigated on the values of 

. . . First of all, they were community based. People asked for 

them and they only asked for them if they figured they needed 

them and if they wanted to participate in them. They captured 

the interest of the people involved at that time. And when a 

course is asked for by an individual, that individual has 

ownership in it, you know that that person is much more likely 

to successfully achieve in that particular course. 

 

Many of these courses formed the basis for development of 

some small businesses. In some cases, cottage businesses, 

one-third time, a quarter time, but it all added to the economy of 

the country; particularly it added to the tourism value of our 

province. When people come into the province and they come 

into a small village or a town or city like the one I live in, they 

often look for something authentic that was made right here in 

Saskatchewan. The skills to make those things were largely 

developed through the community college. 

 

Now that is gone. Of course there are many people who have 

expressed that this was an outlet for them — a very positive, 

therapeutic outlet — particularly people in the rural areas. 

 

And last of all, Mr. Speaker, it was a way of helping us develop 

our culture. Now it may get a little philosophical to say that the 

culture is what people do with their spare time here in 

Saskatchewan, but when we found that a program like this was 

helping develop something very positive . . . People were 

developing skills which they would then pass on to their 

neighbours, pass on to their children. Ethnic groups were 

finding that they had a outlet here to develop their cultures, 

often through these programs which they could have sponsored 

through the community colleges. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, what I’ve done then is outlined in general 

terms some of the concerns of the people of Saskatchewan 

regarding education. People are feeling very strongly that 

what’s happening is that we are taking from Saskatchewan 

education, taking from Saskatchewan children to pay for 

government mismanagement. And I had mentioned earlier the 

source of the mismanagement, and the proof of the 

mismanagement. The proof of the mismanagement is the $3.4 

billion deficit, the deficit that needn’t be as large if the 1.5 

billion had been collected from the oil industry; if people like 

Weyerhaeuser were asked to pay up the $248 million for the 

pulp mill; if 20 million hadn’t been given to Peter Pocklington; 

if people like George Hill weren’t earning the excessive 

amounts of over 100,000, and patronage appointments like 

Gordon Dirks at $30,000; or flying cabinet ministers to 

weddings. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to deal now very briefly with an item 

regarding the take-over and the loss of local control at the 

community college in Prince Albert. The minister himself has 

stated that the community college was doing a good job, and 

even though he and people in his department have 

acknowledged that repeatedly, he still insisted on taking control 

of the community college and insisted on ensuring that there 

was loss of local decision-making in Prince Albert, as there was 

in other places where there were appointed boards. 

 

I want to repeat what a former board chairman of the Prince 

Albert Community College said — board member and a former 

PC supporter. And when he was speaking to a meeting of close 

to 100 people who were gathered to hear and listen to the board, 

and he mentioned his very deep concern as to what was 

happening. And here’s the way he described the college: 

 

This college was one of the best administered educational 

institutions in our province. We received an annual grant 

this year from the government of just over $500,000, yet 

the budget was over 7 million. 

 

So the board was managing to generate money far in excess — 

14 times the amount of seed money that it was getting from the 

government. 

 

And he goes on to mention that over 1,700 student enrolments 

in university classes were conducted in Prince Albert last year, 

Prince Albert and district. And he says: 

 

They did not received one red cent of direct government 

money or assistance to mount these programs. In fact the 

Department of Supply and Services charged us (meaning 

the Prince Albert Regional Community College) . . . 

 

They charged them $70,000 rent for the space that those classes 

occupied in the building. 

 

Now this is the board that was taken over by the Department of 

Education, whose responsibilities were taken over by the 

Department of Education for, as I now would quote the 

minister, because he wishes to position for the 21st century. 

Well it’s needless to say that there  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1598 

 

was considerable bitterness as a result of this, Mr. Chairman, 

and this particular board member went on to say in his remarks: 

 

I cannot remain a part of this great organization and 

continue to try and reason with the deaf, dumb, and blind 

government — a government bent on a misguided course 

of destruction of an important aspect of our 

post-secondary education system. 

 

Later on he said in his delivery: 

 

They are destroying our system of ending 

locally-controlled boards and supplanting centralized 

government control, all so they can get their hands on that 

federal money. That is what this issue is all about. This 

issue is about a bankrupt, impoverished provincial 

government prostituting itself for money. They are 

stepping on this college, on our community, on our 

principles, and our success in order to get at these federal 

funds. At the same time they are trying to sell us on a new 

concept of a better system of adult education, a concept 

(he says) we know amounts to nothing but a bunch of 

crap. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it was with a lot of sadness that we went through 

when we were dealing with this and it was with a lot of 

frustration, and I along with my colleague, the member from 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake, spent many hours trying to be 

supportive to the board and encourage them to make contact 

with the minister. And this particular board member went so far 

as to not only make repeated, repeated contacts with the 

community . . . with the department, but he went directly to his 

party people who he knows personally. And he said in his 

address, he says: 

 

I had requested and had personal meetings in Regina with 

the Progressive Conservative party’s policy committee and 

its chairman, the executive director of the PC party and the 

president of the party and as well as the Minister of 

Education. I know that serious reservations exist within 

the PC party over the centralization policy being forced on 

us by this stubborn and ill-informed minister. 

 

I was told that the party had recommended that autonomy 

be retained but the minister overrode the recommendation. 

They wouldn’t listen to the community; they wouldn’t 

listen to the MLAs; they wouldn’t listen to the board; they 

wouldn’t even listen to their own party. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Chairman, whether we’re fit to govern, whether 

this government is fit to govern. 

 

The response we got, Mr. Minister, when we asked the question 

in the House here, was that this entire thing was called an 

unfortunate glitch. Mr. Minister, and further it says . . . And 

once again the rationalization was where to position. We have 

to do it because otherwise we won’t be able to position 

ourselves for the 21st century. I wonder, Mr. Minister, with an 

unbending approach like that, and the minister’s positioning for 

the 21st century, it’s a good  

thing, and it’s fortunate that he’s not positioning us for the 22nd 

century. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to talk briefly now about governance at 

the technical schools. There was some discussion in educational 

circles earlier this year about looking at different forms of 

governance. And in response to that, the minister had a series of 

discussions. I’m not sure if that was the primary focus of his 

meetings and his discussions. But the members on this side of 

the House also asked the question: is this a good time to look at 

reorganization of our technical institutes and reorganization of 

. . . and particularly our technical institutes? 

 

In Prince Albert the timing of this was right this particular 

spring, because any time prior to that the school was still very 

much in the start-up stage. It would have been simply too 

disruptive to talk about a change in administrative structure and 

in governance prior to that. So at the time . . . come this spring 

then, we decided that we were going to undertake a study. We 

asked the question, we asked whether there was . . . a question 

whether there was a desire of the people in the Prince Albert 

community, in the Saskatoon educational communities, whether 

there was any desire to change the form of governments. And 

we put out a survey and as a result of the survey we came up 

with this type of a result. 

 

There were three responses that dominated, Mr. Chairman. By 

far, the most single benefit that the people who answered the 

questionnaire saw was that it would allow the technical . . . that 

if we went to local autonomy, that they would . . . it would 

allow technical institutes the flexibility they needed to design 

and implement programs to meet the very specific needs of a 

local area. 

 

Secondly, they felt that local control was important because it 

would enable technical schools to distance themselves from 

partisan politics at the provincial level. And there’s not much 

wonder as to why that particular statement, result, came about. 

One of the respondents, and I would like to quote him, stated 

this: 

 

The institutions may become learning institutions instead 

of arenas for political gains. Programs could be designed 

around the needs of people in the province, not designed to 

buy votes for the least amount of money. 

 

And the third advantage that they saw for local autonomy was 

that it would substantially reduce the time element involved in 

getting decisions made. 

 

(1930) 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, we went through that procedure at the 

same time the minister was having his consultations. The 

consultations that he was having were closed-door 

consultations. We asked people in the community to participate 

in this particular exercise, and we directed it, we targeted it at 

the audiences of school board members, selected school board 

members, people working at the community colleges, people 

working and administering in the technical institutes, the people 

from the business community, particularly with the chamber of 

commerce. 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1599 

 

And these are the results, the results that I showed you, and they 

were all indicating a very strong preference for local control — 

local governance, independent governance, and local control. 

Prior to us having completed our results, we found that the 

minister had made an announcement, and the announcement 

came out that there was going to be a new super board that was 

going to be instituted for the purpose of overseeing the 

workings of the community colleges and the technical institutes 

in Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and Regina. 

 

We still have concerns about that, Mr. Minister. We have had 

repeated concerns about that, and I have made repeated 

representations. So have people in the . . . the school board 

members prior to the . . . pardon me, the community college 

board members prior to resigning. And at this stage, we’ve 

found that because of the uncertainty created in this particular 

case . . . One example that I’d give you is where we’re used to 

having 50 to 60 classes fully enrolled by this time, university 

classes enrolled through the community college, we’re only at 

about half the enrolment — things being very uncertain. 

 

Now that has been a record of what we have done, Mr. 

Chairman, in these estimates — once again, I repeat, showing 

the mismanagement that has resulted in the Department of 

Education as a spin-off of the mismanagement of the entire 

provincial fiscal scene . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — . . . $3.4 billion in debt. And who’s being 

asked to pay for it? Taking money from education; taking 

money from health; taking money from the children so that . . . 

so that we can pay Peter Pocklington; so that we can pay for the 

$248 million that Weyerhaeuser should be paying; so that the 

oil companies can go scot-free with $1.5 billion — not the least 

of which to mention is the Minister of Finance’s . . . the 

Minister of Justice’s trip to a wedding, courtesy the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I now want to turn, Mr. Chairman, to some 

discussion regarding the Northern Institute of Technology. I 

want to place on record, Mr. Chairman, that there was a 

decision by the former government to build a technical institute 

in Prince Albert. The decision came down in 1981. 

 

This decision was abandoned by the present government, by the 

previous administration, the administration from ‘82 to ‘86. It 

was abandoned for a period of over a year. The projected cost 

of that building at that time was to be 18 million. Later on, a 

year and a half later . . . Oh, I should mention that there were 

architects that had been hired; I should mention that there were 

arrangements made for the purchase of land; and that the 

opening of this school was projected to be ‘84 or ‘85. 

 

This project was abandoned temporarily. And then, due to some 

political heat and . . . The government decided at  

a later time to proceed with this. They decided also to upgrade 

this technical institute to a $22 million building. In order to 

complete this thing, they had to spend quite a considerable 

amount more than 22 million. The record now shows that 

they’re in the 35 to $36 million range — just a minor bit of 

overspending. 

 

Let me tell you what happened. Because of the late start and 

because they saw an election coming in October of 1986, they 

forced the people working on the program to develop programs 

under conditions which I don’t think anybody should be forced 

to work. The people, the workers, responded in a tremendous 

fashion, for which they are to be congratulated, and put some 

programs into place. They had to have it in place because this 

was an attempt, of course, to elect Sid Dutchak and Paul 

Meagher in the city of Prince Albert. 

 

However, because of the attempts and the way the attempts 

were run, we know that that whole thing backfired. It was 

backfired that the school could be used to re-elect Sid Dutchak 

and Paul Meagher. You all know Paul Meagher. He’s the one 

that the Premier looked to for good advice on political strategy. 

 

Now it backfired largely, Mr. Chairman, because of the method 

that was employed. There was a lack of open consultation with 

the people in the community, the people who are to be host to 

the institute, and the people in the community who have been 

used to participating in the planning. 

 

There was a lack of listening, lack of listening to people who 

could provide good advice and responding positively and their 

lack of responding positively. The concern of the community 

was expressed, Mr. Chairman, but the advice was ignored. 

 

Now I refer you to some advice that was given to the principals’ 

advisory committee, a closed committee, but some advice that 

was ignored. This is a closed committee. But a member of that 

committee said this: 

 

Firstly, we and others were promised that priority would 

be given in hiring to local individuals; if the skills and 

abilities were available. To date, I note that of some eight 

senior administrative positions that have been filled — 

only one job has gone to anyone from our region that 

being the resource centre only. The firm promise of at 

least one Vice-principalship from our community has not 

been actualized. 

 

I repeat this. “The firm promise,” he says, “of at least one 

vice-principalship from our community has not been 

actualized.” Now this was advice given in 1985 — November 

of 1985. And to this date, that advice has been ignored. And 

you wonder why there may be some types of problems at the 

Northern Institute of Technology. 

 

I bring this to your attention, Mr. Minister, because I think the 

bad experiences of the past should not be repeated. And I think 

that after having spent $36 million, which is a very high 

expenditure, the public of Saskatchewan and the people of 

Prince Albert and the students of Saskatchewan want high 

performance. 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1600 

 

Now I desperately want success for that school, and I think you 

want success for that school. And I’m asking you to set up a 

monitoring system that can be effective. The difficulty has been 

that all the advice that was given was all filtered through 

department only; no local advocates with power to give good 

advice. Not like on an ordinary school boards where if a child 

gets into difficulty with the teacher or the principal or the 

system gets locked into it, he can go to the school board. But 

this doesn’t happen here. You’ve only got one way to go, and 

that’s up the pipe through the system, and it gets filtered, and 

that’s why we are ending up with difficulty. 

 

Now if you are saying that a school board — a super board — 

run out of Regina will be the answer, I’m afraid it won’t be. Our 

experience tells us that administration out of Regina to a distant 

port like Prince Albert, even Saskatoon, simply doesn’t work. 

And we’ve got ample experience telling us that. Students and 

the members of the community just have no advocate to go to. 

 

So I ask you the question, Mr. Minister, will you give 

consideration of some sort to establish some type of meaningful 

monitoring agency? I ask you that question. Will you establish 

some type of meaningful monitoring agency and some agency 

with an authority, with some authority so that the difficulties of 

the NIT (Northern Institute of Technology) can be overcome 

and can be dealt with? 

 

Now you might say, “What are the difficulties?” Mr. Minister, I 

don’t know if you’ve had an opportunity to look at the record of 

the Northern Institute of Technology and compare it to the 

community college record, and then I don’t know if you’ve 

looked at ways of making adjustments, but I would ask you to 

do so. 

 

I refer to, Mr. Minister, some statistics that I’ve got from the 

Northern Institute of Technology and some statistics which I’ve 

gotten from the Prince Albert Regional Community College. 

And I want you to listen to these very carefully because it’s 

quite a telling tale — cold hard statistics, as you have used on 

occasion today. Now these statistics are dated June 22, ‘87. I 

think they’ll give us the general picture. There may be one or 

two numbers that are slightly different here, Mr. Chairman, and 

Mr. Minister, as of today. If you have better figures, Mr. 

Minister, if you have more recent figures that are more accurate 

to these, I would appreciate having them and we’ll debate them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — But I want to draw a comparison between 

the courses offered under the present system of the Northern 

Institute of Technology and what the programs are offered by 

the community college. When the community college offered 

these programs, they were all 10-month programs, all 10-month 

programs. The programs that the Northern Institute of 

Technology are offering are, by and large, shorter programs, 

and most of these programs are put in during September and 

October of the previous year. Some of them were brought in, 

perhaps, a little earlier . . . were taken over by the institute a 

little earlier. There may be one or two of them that were taken a 

little later. But take, for example, the  

business program for accounting clerk. Active learners to date, 

eight; number of graduates, none. That’s of June 22 — none. 

 

What did the community college in Prince Albert deliver in its 

last year of operation? They delivered 12 graduates — 12 

graduates. Not eight, not none. 12. Now in this course, this 

course I’m talking about, according to the community college 

calendar, is supposed to be a 29-week course. Not a 10-month 

course, a 29-week course. 

 

Clerk-typist, 13 active learners. How many graduates? None. 

How many graduates did the Prince Albert Regional College 

come up with? Thirteen in its last year of operation. That’s a 

27-week course. 

 

Let’s look at cosmetology. The community college graduated 

13 out of 25 students in its last year of operation. What has the 

Northern Institute of Technology graduated for a 33-week 

course? One student out of 28. One out of 28. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, let’s look at carpentry. The community 

college graduated eight out of 25. The NIT has graduated, so 

far, five out of 31. Electrical, five out of 14. Welding, the 

community college graduated eight out of 17 students for a 

10-month course. These people, the NIT, has graduated eight 

out of 29, so far. That’s a 30-week course. Small vehicle and 

motor repair course, a 31-week course. Graduates how many? 

Four. Out of active learners, 24. That’s of June 22. Now the 

community college was able to graduate 15 out of 24. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Chairman, the total number of graduates to date out of the 

technical school, unfortunately and very sadly, is only 33 as of 

that date. Now I expect by today that they have increased by 

perhaps 10 — that’s my estimate. 

 

Now the difficulties here have to be looked into. I know that the 

staff is sincere in what they want to do, but there is something 

plugging the system. It’s the law of effect that I’m concerned 

with here, Mr. Chairman, not the philosophy. The law of effect. 

And the law of effect tells me that that school is not performing, 

not nearly as good as the Kelsey or the Wascana at this stage, 

and it’s not even performing as well as the Prince Albert 

Regional Community College delivery system is. I think it 

needs to be looked into and I want you to look into it. 

 

I want you to establish some kind of a monitoring system where 

people can go and students who have concerns can go and 

report directly to it and expect something to happen. 

 

I want you to address the question, Mr. Minister. I want you to 

address the question of trying to establish the reasons for this. 

I’m certain that any educator will try to . . . will explain to you 

that the reasons are probably multiply based, and I will accept 

the reason already of this . . . of there being start-up problems. 

 

And I appreciate those, and I’ve gone to you directly with 

concerns that I had. And I think that there is only a certain  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1601 

 

amount of that kind of problem or that kind of excuse that you 

can use. 

 

But it has to go a little further. You’ve got to ask yourself the 

question: to what extent can we remain a competency based 

system exclusively? To what extent? Are there instructors 

available? Are there enough instructors available for students to 

come whenever they need it? Whenever they need help? 

 

There may be other reasons, Mr. Minister. I invite you to stand 

up, and I invite you to give me a commitment. Give me a 

commitment that you will set up some kind of a monitoring 

system that is missing, and some kind of a monitoring system 

that will assure the students that want to enrol there that they 

will have a success rate equal to what was had before, and equal 

to what is available at Kelsey or at Wascana. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Centre 

on his feet? He indicates he will be answering. He indicates he 

will be answering. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

There were a number of points raised by the hon. member over 

the last 50 minutes, and in the next 50 minutes, I think we can 

probably cover most of them off. In fact, I look forward to 

doing it. 

 

Just to reiterate again, the hon. member from Moose Jaw North 

said he’s been sleeping through it and he didn’t realize it was 50 

minutes. Well, it was. And I can see why you slept through it 

because . . . Anyways, all kidding aside, Mr. Chairman, 

although there was a lot put forward, I think much of that has 

been debated in this House probably on a number of occasions 

already. 

 

The only point I want to make . . . And the hon. member opened 

his remarks up with the hobby classes, the personal enrichment 

stuff. I mean, I just repeat again, we expect the communities to 

pick those up. 

 

The reality is, over the last 10, 12 years, the numbers of hours 

devoted to community courses . . . college programming on 

those had gone from like 75 to 80 per cent of their total hours 

down to 4 per cent. So I think the record speaks for itself there. 

 

And so going all the way from what was said there, and a 

number of points he closed with relative to the new institute, the 

Northern Institute of Technology, I suppose I’m somewhat 

disappointed to hear a member from Prince Albert and area 

criticize what many would view as the most modern technical 

institute in North America. It’s been admired and visited by 

many, copied by some. Not that it hasn’t had some start-up 

problems, because it has. But at the same time, much of what 

the hon. member presented was either irrelevant or not factually 

correct. 

 

And I’ll just read one particular point into the record. There’s 

been 1,146 learners, if you like, served by the institute, albeit — 

because it is still in its infancy as an institution — 383 

completed, a goodly number of those  

treaty and non-treaty Indian. 

 

And I think little is served by criticizing what, as I said earlier, 

what many regard as a very very fine, modern, up-to-date 

institution, the competency— based learning system there, and 

one that will serve the people of this province well into the 

future. 

 

The hon. member suggests, and because of what arguments he 

puts forth — that for the most part are not valid at all, Mr. 

Chairman — that we should have some kind of monitoring 

agency, and if there was some hesitation in my getting up to 

respond, it was because I wanted to give that some 

consideration, at least as much as I could in terms of discussion 

with my officials here. Because I’ve said in this House before, 

that if there are some proposals coming from the NDP that 

warrant consideration and merit some consideration, I’m 

prepared to give it to them. And I appreciate them raising this 

point about monitoring agency. 

 

I guess at first blush, the comment I would make is: (a) I have a 

fair degree of faith based on what they’ve been able to do in a 

relatively short time. And based on that, their track record so 

far, I’m not so sure that would justify a monitoring agency. 

Secondly, in the new institute structure, I mean as we give them 

autonomy and rightly so, it seems to me what do you have a 

board of governors for. I mean, do you not trust the board of 

governors that runs the University of Saskatchewan, the 

University of Regina? I don’t know as there’s any useful 

purpose being served by a watch-dog, but I’ll file it away and 

make a mental note of it. But right off the top, I’m not so sure 

that it’s all that relevant. 

 

The hon. member made reference to their survey yet to be 

tabled. I don’t know as we heard any new arguments there 

relative to the governance issue. 

 

But I would like to table something in this legislature, Mr. 

Chairman, because the hon. member referred to it and it hasn’t 

been tabled in this legislature. And I think because the 

formation of the new institute, which is part of the restructuring 

of post-secondary education in this province, and because this 

document will in fact serve as a blueprint for our adult 

education initiatives for the next two decades, and because it 

addresses issues that we have not spent much time on yet in this 

legislature but maybe will in the future, and I think of things 

like literacy and distance education, some of those initiatives as 

we lay out here that we need to do more consultation on. 

 

I want to lay on the table, and the page here, I think I’ve made 

access to another 63 copies so that we can have each member 

receive one of these blueprints, because I think when we pass 

the legislation in this House that this blueprint lays out, it’s 

going to be a red-letter day for all of Saskatchewan. And I think 

all will be served by having a copy of that very, very fine 

document. 

 

And I may have referred to that document in this House earlier, 

but I want to say again to you and to the members of the 

legislature, both on the government side and the opposition 

side, and I want to say this in a non-partisan and sincere way, in 

recognition of the very professional job that was done by many 

of the officials that are seated  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1602 

 

here around me tonight, as well as some 550 associations, 

groups, and individuals that provided the input that later 

became this blueprint, and I want to acknowledge publicly the 

very, very fine work. We could have put out a document, I 

suppose, that was 100 pages long because there was that much 

information came into us, but we distilled it down to the 

document that you’ll have before you shortly. 

 

I want to congratulate all my department officials for the very 

fine job they did, whether they be at the executive level or the 

secretaries who on very many occasions worked overtime to 

type and retype drafts, or the many people who took time out of 

their busy schedules to come to evening meetings and afternoon 

meetings to provide us with their input and guidance. And I 

don’t want to dwell on this, but I’m very, very proud of that 

document and it’s going to serve our province and our adult 

learners over the next two decades. It’s going to serve them 

well. 

 

The final point I would make, and it’s in response to an issue 

that was raised before supper, Mr. Chairman, by the hon. 

member for Regina Lakeview relative to St. Pius X school in 

Regina and a question of asbestos there, and we, at least the 

officials here, had no information on that. We have since 

consulted with other departmental officials, and I would report 

to the hon. member that as a result of concerns from the parent 

teachers association re asbestos fibres in the ceiling finish, the 

occupational health and safety branch did check the school on 

April 27, ‘87, and other than minor cracks in a couple of spots, 

they reported essentially no problems and that no work was 

required other than minor painting in two spots. 

 

I also can tell you that we’ve had subsequent correspondence 

with them in June — late June, June 29 — and we are in 

agreement that the school will be monitored by occupational 

health and safety branch, monitored into the future to make sure 

that the situation doesn’t deteriorate unknowingly. And the last 

line of the letter from our supervisor of facilities planning, the 

last paragraph goes like this, and I think this is the kind of 

assurance the hon. member from Regina Lakeview is looking 

for: 

 

We wish to commend you and your board for your 

concerns with respect to health safety, and we are also 

pleased to advise you that we can concur with 

occupational health that the school does not have an 

asbestos problem at the present time. 

 

And so I think in the interests of health — and I think that’s the 

hon. member’s rationale for the questioning — no problem 

there. And if there was, these two spots that needed painting 

over, that’s been looked after as I understand it. But more than 

that, further monitoring will be undertaken. And I think that 

substantially answers the questions that the hon. member from 

Regina Lakeview raised earlier in estimates today, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

(2000) 

 

Ms. Simard: — I would like to just follow up on that statement 

by the minister. I thank him very much for providing me with 

that information. There’s one . . . The last sentence in the letter, 

the one he quoted to me about,  

“the school does not have an asbestos problem at the present 

time,” causes me some concern because the implication is that it 

might have an asbestos problem in the future. 

 

So that leaves me concerned, and I would like to ask the 

minister a further question, Mr. Chairman, and that is how often 

will the school be monitored? And will the Department of 

Education ensure that the school will be monitored on a regular 

basis — on a frequent basis and on a regular basis? And number 

two, I’m wondering why as a policy we are allowing asbestos in 

our schools anyway, when we’re removing it from places like 

the armouries, and the old SaskTel building, and the provincial 

correctional centre. Why do we leave it in schools where there 

are children? If a problem were to arise unexpectedly in 

between inspections by the occupational health department, the 

damage may already have been done to the health of our 

children. And that causes me some concern. 

 

So I would like an assurance from the minister, number one, 

that the place will be monitored very frequently and regularly; 

and, number two, that the department review their policy with 

respect to allowing asbestos in the schools in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’d like to give the member every 

assurance, and the constituents and their parents involved. The 

occupational health and safety folks from Labour and our own 

people are satisfied that there is not a problem, that it’s not 

likely to be a problem at all. The school board will monitor the 

situation, if you like. Nobody has any reason to suspect it will 

be a problem ever in the future. I mean, I don’t know what more 

I can say, other than it’s had a clean bill of health. 

 

And I know there’s a certain fear associated with asbestos and 

asbestosis. But in this case, there’s no lingering, nagging doubts 

even that it will become some problem in the future, 

particularly. But because of the emotionalism of the asbestos 

issue, the school board’s going to keep a watch on it. And I 

suppose they’re there on a regular basis as anybody. And I 

guess I have no doubt that they will do as they’ve said. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, the time has come to talk about 

libraries, something that I’m very interested in, having been an 

employee of the Saskatchewan Public Library since 1972. 

 

I notice with some interest that you’ve passed out this document 

that you call the blueprint, Preparing For the Year 2000 on 

adult education in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’m sure it’s not much of a red-letter day for my many 

colleagues working in the field of librarianship because there’s 

not very much mentioned in this document about libraries or the 

role that libraries will be playing in the future. 

 

You do mention it under, “Distance Education Council,”  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1603 

 

but there’s no other mention about the role of libraries in this 

blueprint. And that’s a shame because you want to talk a lot 

about moving into the 21st century, about the information age 

and the knowledge-based industries and the knowledge-based 

economy. And we believe very clearly that libraries have a very 

big role to play in the future in this whole area of being 

information centres in many creative ways, and we think that 

they should be centre to any sort of blueprint for the future of 

adult education in Saskatchewan and mentioned much more 

specifically in a document like this than you’ve been able to do. 

 

You’ve mentioned very often in the legislature your interest in 

change and in seeing change take place, and the fact that we 

mustn’t any longer dwell on the past, we must move to the 

future. It seems as if everything that existed in the past 

somehow has lost its value for you, and you want to go on to 

the future out of some kind of a vacuum, or some kind of a 

sense of change that’s been mostly destruction. And for those of 

us who’ve been working in libraries and for whom libraries are 

very important, this kind of approach is almost frightening. I 

think it would be probably quite within the feeling of the library 

community for me to say it is frightening. 

 

I would like to quote Francis Morrison, who has been the chief 

librarian of the Saskatoon Public Library for a long time until 

she retired in 1980. Francis Morrison has said, “We have to 

know the past to plan wisely for the future.” Very important 

words for us when we look at libraries because libraries have 

been the storehouse of knowledge in the past for a long time. 

 

And you give me mixed messages because you talk about 

change, you talk about moving into the information age, then 

you talk about how much you value books, and that books are 

the heart and the soul of libraries. Books go back a long time in 

history. Books have been important in the past in the world 

since almost the time of history beginning. 

 

Valuing books, of course, is not unique to contemporary 

Canada. And I would like to quote from an article that was in 

The Globe and Mail which I found quite moving. And I would 

like to quote it because I would like to take some time to talk 

about libraries being important to me and to many people in 

Saskatchewan over a long period of time. The very first 

libraries date back to at least 3000 B.C.: 

 

. . . the Greek rule of Egypt . . . treasured the written word 

. . . founded the greatest literary collection of antiquity — 

the library of Alexandria . . . for 700 years, one generation 

of scholars after another amassed and recorded the 

knowledge of the ancient world. 

 

Collecting information about the past, however, was only 

one concern . . . Through generous research grants, they 

encouraged the greatest minds of the age to generate new 

knowledge. 

 

. . . the results were astounding . . . (They) wrote a book 

outlining his theory that the earth revolves around the sun 

and is not, as was currently believed, the centre of the 

universe. Archimedes  

 

worked out most of the mathematical laws governing 

levers, pulleys, gears and hydraulics. 

 

There are other theories like: 

 

Eratosthenes proved that the earth is round by accurately 

calculating its circumference . . . (and they) predicted that 

by sailing westward explorers would discover new 

continents. 

 

. . . while the library flourished, so did learning and 

scientific research. The one problem was that 

understanding and knowledge remained the possessions of 

the privileged few. Most people had no idea of the 

discoveries being made in the library. 

 

(And) when the library fell prey to Roman invaders in 48 

BC, the people of Alexandria looked on indifferently as 

Julius Caesar’s troops burned 40,000 volumes. 

 

That was certainly a change. 

 

Partial restitution was eventually made, but the library 

suffered even greater losses during a civil war in the third 

century, when an entire wing was destroyed by fire. 

 

And that was another change. That was another change — a 

very destructive one. 

 

What was left endured until 415 AD when it was razed by 

a mob of overzealous Christians who equated learning and 

science with paganism. The loss was incalculable. Not a 

single scroll was left. 

 

That was change. And the world was left with the library at 

Alexandria . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the minister on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I wonder if I might have the leave of 

the Assembly to introduce some guests, Mr. Chairman. I 

apologize to the hon. member for interrupting her speech, but 

some out-of-town guests I’d like to introduce if I could. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, hon. colleague and other 

members of the legislature. I’d like to introduce through you, 

Mr. Chairman, and to the members of the legislature in the 

gallery opposite myself, a couple of nephews and a niece of 

mine, Ryan and Michael Hall. A couple of nieces of mine, or 

nephews of mine rather, visiting us from B.C., here on some 

holidays and along with some other members of my family, 

Candace Hepworth, another niece of mine, and along with my 

daughter and some others. And I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to welcome them to the proceedings here tonight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1604 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Smart: — In terms of the history of libraries, change has 

not always been creative. And change is something that we 

have to look at as both a negative and a positive force. 

 

In the wake of the destruction (of the library at 

Alexandria) scientific research ebbed and the world was 

plunged into 1,000 years of darkness. The knowledge 

gathered in Alexandria was lost until the Renaissance, 

when scholars again developed an interest in the past. 

European libraries dusted off their copies of Alexandrian 

texts, and scientists began building on the foundation laid 

by Alexandrian researchers. 

 

The information age is not new; the information age has been 

going on for a long time. 

 

It is impossible to say where the world would be had the 

spirit fostered in the library of Alexandria endured. 

However, one thing is certain: the destruction of the 

library did send intellectual curiosity into a coma that set 

back the development of the human race a millenium. 

 

Today, libraries are the custodians of our cultural heritage. 

By supporting them we ensure that our accomplishments 

are passed on to future generations. 

 

It’s very important to reflect on those words as we look and see 

what’s happening in the libraries in Saskatchewan today, with a 

10 per cent cut from the regional budgets. 

 

I just want to share some of the general statements about library 

service in Saskatchewan . . . because the first public libraries 

Act was brought in in this province in 1906, just after the 

province became a province. It was one of the first pieces of 

legislation enacted in this House. They do go back a long time 

in this province, they go back a long time in history. 

 

And they’re based on the principles which have a certain lasting 

value in our society. 

 

Library services, a common good (the trustees say) with 

demonstrated social utility that includes both cultural and 

economic benefits for the community, and public libraries 

are a necessary part of any society’s educational, social, or 

industrial policy. 

 

Library service must be founded on the concept of 

intellectual freedom and equality of opportunity. Library 

policies must work to prevent the stratification of society 

into classes of information rich and information poor. 

And when you talk a lot about the need for this to be an 

information age, I think what’s very important to realize is that 

that information must be available to everyone, and that’s been 

the basis of the public library development. And you, as the 

Minister of Education, are responsible for the university 

libraries, the libraries in the schools, and now the public library 

system. 

 

People listening and watching may not be aware that as a result 

of Bill 5 that was passed last Christmas, the Saskatchewan 

Library, the central library in the province, has been 

disestablished and put under the Department of Education — 

and I want to ask some questions about that in a little while — 

but it’s part of my reason for being quite concerned about 

what’s happening to libraries and my reason for making sure 

that I’ve expressed clearly the policies and the philosophy of 

libraries before we go into the questions specifically about 

what’s happening to libraries in Saskatchewan. 

 

Library service (the library trustees say) is as fundamental 

as social services, universal public education . . . it’s 

provision acceptable standards ought to be required of 

local governments. 

 

And in terms of the set up of libraries in Saskatchewan, we have 

municipal libraries in Regina and Saskatoon, and regional 

libraries with their large city libraries in Moose Jaw and North 

Battleford and other centres in Prince Albert and Yorkton. They 

make up the regional library serving the public. And the 

Saskatchewan Library, which you’ve disestablished, provides 

technical support services and collections of materials with a 

wide but thinly spread population, back-up materials in foreign 

languages, and other materials. 

 

(2015) 

 

That structure was developed over a long period of time in 

Saskatchewan, as I say the first public libraries Act was in 

1906. Other developments occurred in 1967 with the library 

enquiry commission and the setting up of the one-library 

service . . . one-library system. 

 

The Saskatoon Public Library Board in its presentation to the 

Local Government Finance Commission said this about 

libraries — words that are very important to me and to many 

people who have been supportive of library development over 

the years in the province. The board, the Saskatoon Public 

Library Board, was asking the commission to assess large urban 

public libraries in the light of their essential position as 

educational, informational, cultural and recreational forces in 

local communities. They supplement the elementary, the 

secondary, the technical and the university education, and as the 

resources and curricula of educational institutions become more 

sophisticated and diverse, so must those of the public library. 

 

Fundamentally public libraries are a life-long learning 

resource and as such provide important research resources 

for informal and unstructured intellectual pursuits, as well 

as being a backup for all the formal educational 

institutions, they provide the opportunity for life-long 

learning. 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1605 

 

That’s a fairly progressive vision of a library. It’s not a 

backward look at all. 

 

It’s a look of vision for the future and a way in which 

libraries can be developed. Libraries offer a neutral 

ground, free of partisan politics, where a diversity of ideas 

may be explored and studied. 

 

On a practical level, public libraries usually have the 

facilities, including meeting rooms, to bring people 

together. The result is that the library is recognized as a 

vibrant community forum with information or recreational 

reserves immediately at hand. 

 

This transformation of libraries from reading centres to 

community forums is a natural and compelling evolution 

brought about by society’s recognition of its needs to cope 

with a growing and intense barrage of information and 

with the technical changes necessary to access burgeoning 

ideas. 

 

The libraries have been supportive of the development of 

progressive ways of accessing information, and why you would 

not mention them in your adult education blueprint, and why 

you would cut their budgets by 10 per cent for the regional 

libraries and 30 per cent of the provincial grants for the public 

libraries in the cities, in beyond me, when libraries have 

constantly put forward progressive and exciting visions of how 

they can function and be central to the information needs of the 

whole community. 

 

In times of economic hardship such as we’re going through 

right now, the libraries are used even more by people than they 

are in good times. Many people who are unemployed are using 

the libraries to get information, and they serve people in many, 

many ways. Many seniors in Saskatoon and in other centres use 

the libraries constantly, but with the cut-backs that the libraries 

have suffered, library boards have had to reduce the service that 

they’ve been able to provide to people. They’ve had to reduce 

their material budgets; they’ve had cuts in salaries and hiring 

freezes; they’ve had the reduction of maintenance and other 

services, cut-backs of hours of services in libraries, and the 

reduction of interlibrary loans. 

 

So I’d like to turn now to what I’ve already mentioned, and that 

is the disestablishment of the Saskatchewan Library. It’s my 

understanding in the regulations that sections 3, 6, 7, and 8 are 

superseded, and these sections of the library Act, I would like to 

ask you about in more detail. 

 

Section 3 of The Public Libraries Act, 1984, refers to the 

Saskatchewan Library: “A central library for Saskatchewan is 

continued.” That section has been superseded. What is the 

status of the Saskatchewan Library now in your understanding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, it 

was interesting to have the hon. member share some of the 

history as it relates to a library at Alexandria  

— what, some several centuries ago, I think that would be — 

and a useful perspective for all of us. 

 

I suppose I’m particularly heartened when I hear the hon. 

member talk about the implications of the information age 

because I would suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, and all other 

members of that opposition, that this is the first time we’ve had 

a member of the opposition NDP recognize this changed era — 

the knowledge-based economy. The others have tried to cling to 

the past, and I think we’re going to get somewhere here in this 

library examination in our estimates because this hon. member, 

who has experience in a library system, has some sense of the 

information age, and what libraries can be, and what libraries 

have been. 

 

And the hon. member from Saskatoon University maybe would 

do well to pay attention to what this hon. member has said 

because his job could be in jeopardy as critic. 

 

In so far as the status of the library, Saskatchewan Library, I 

can tell the hon. member this, that nothing has changed other 

than the library is, in terms of an administrative sense, if you 

like, comes under the umbrella of this new and strong 

Department of Education. Otherwise it’s, I suppose, business as 

usual, albeit there is some very exciting things that have been 

happening. 

 

And just for the record, the hon. member made reference to the 

blueprint, Preparing For the Year 2000, and she was looking 

for more reference to Saskatchewan libraries and the library 

system across the province in that document. I want to assure 

you and others in the library system that any failure to mention 

the important role of libraries is simply because when that 

document was being put together we were not all one 

department at this point in time. But I can assure you, as I’ve 

told the library board and the Saskatchewan Library Trustees’ 

Association, I’m looking for them to play very much a 

leadership role. And in fact, our Provincial Librarian, who has 

joined us here tonight in estimates, is very much actively 

involved in helping spearhead the literacy campaign. We’re 

going to be looking to people like those who have been 

involved in the library systems who have already some goodly 

amount of experience when it comes to literacy initiatives, to 

help us in that . . . probably be represented on that literacy 

council, and as well to help design and deliver programming in 

that area. 

 

As well in distance education; I think it may well be that we’ll 

see the libraries in a very global sense have to take on some . . . 

have some input and some guidance there as well. 

 

With that bit of background . . . Or I should add one other point, 

and I forget the exact words the hon. member opposite used, but 

I, too . . . I suppose if I had a soft spot in my heart or a pet 

project in this portfolio, it would be to do with libraries and 

books, and the modern equivalent of books, if you like, 

microfiche and microfilm and all those kinds of things, and 

computerized access systems, those sorts of things. I say that 

because, I suppose, if I go back to my childhood, I recall vividly 

how important books were to our home and to my parents, and 

the importance that they stressed upon ourselves as children to 

avail ourselves of books. 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1606 

 

I recall to this day the crates that we used to get these books . . . 

First of all, the excitement of going through the catalogue, or 

the library catalogue, as to what was available and what could 

be shipped out to rural Saskatchewan. Picking out those books, 

and of course, not always the selections that you wanted were 

shipped. Some were; some weren’t. And the excitement of that 

crate . . . I think it was a grey box or a black box — and I’m 

probably going back in time even before our Provincial 

Librarian — and the excitement of that crate arriving. And 

looking through it and seeing what mysteries were in there, and 

the various kinds and categories of books. It was always a very 

exciting time in our house, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

I’m a great advocate of reading and of books. I suppose that’s 

why literacy is as well going to become a theme that you’re 

going to hear more about from this department and this 

government and this minister. And so I, too, agree with the hon. 

member, in so far as her view on the importance of books and 

libraries, and what they mean as we move into this 

knowledge-based economy particularly — and more 

importantly then ever. 

 

To frame the initiatives of our government over the three or 

four or five years as it relates to libraries, for you and for 

members of the Assembly, to give us a starting point for these 

estimates, I would give you this perspective. We have a plan 

and it’s an exciting plan, and much of it has been fulfilled, 

although you never stop, of course. It’s just a dynamic process. 

But let’s pick up the three sorts of areas: libraries or learning 

resource centres in our K to 12 system; the regional library 

system; and then let’s talk a little bit about our universities and 

our university libraries. 

 

Because I think as I put this in perspective for you, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, you will see that, although one never wants to stop 

and rest on one’s laurels, there’s been some very dynamic and 

some very, very exciting things happening throughout those 

three sectors. 

 

First of all, in the K to 12 system, when we put in place the 

excellence fund or the education development fund, as we 

expected, these many school boards and the trustees and the 

teachers across this province, one of the things that they 

recognized as being a high priority in terms of spending those 

dollars was spending them in our learning resource centres — 

re-equipping, or equipping, or rebuilding. And a great deal of 

that education development fund, that excellence fund money, 

has been spent in our school system on that category. I mean, 

certainly it was spent in other areas too, and I outlined some of 

those in a previous session in this examination of estimates in 

the Department of Education. But certainly across this province, 

learning resources, learning resource centres in many, many, 

many of our schools in many, many school divisions use that 

special fund to bring their libraries, as you and I might have 

known them in our day, up to top-notch quality. They were able 

to update their collections and acquire new books and filmstrips 

and videos which are part of that new technology — if you like, 

of the information age. 

 

And as well, of course, they were able to hire, in some 

instances, teacher-librarians, library technical services,  

those sorts of things, establishing computer library services. I 

mean, I myself have visited many schools and in a lot of these 

learning centres, there’s the computer there and these young 

people are there, just clinking away on them, and so at home 

with them. And of course, it’s going to be so important to them 

in the world of the future, these computer library services for 

cataloguing, indexing, and in tracking material, searching out 

material. 

 

And so great strides have been made over the last two, three 

years particularly since my hon. colleague, the member from 

Swift Current, in conjunction with our Premier and this 

government, put in place that excellence fund for our school 

boards to do, among other things, update their, what you and I 

might have called the library. 

 

Moving now to the regional library system, once again if one 

looks at the record of funding there, relative to inflation, those 

kinds of things, I too would like to have always, of course, seen 

more money, but the record is a good one. It’s one we can be 

proud of. And in fact, Saskatchewan’s library system gets high 

marks across Canada when these national meetings are held, for 

our accessibility and for the quality of our services and for the 

speed with which those services are rendered to our public. And 

so we can hold our heads high. 

 

(2030) 

 

But we weren’t about to rest on our laurels, Mr. Chairman. And 

as the hon. member will know and as this blue book shows, this 

year we set up a special one-half million dollar fund to buy, 

specifically, books and library materials for these regional 

libraries across the province. 

 

But we went farther than that, Mr. Chairman. We, in putting 

together this fund, this special fund for books because they are 

the . . . In many ways, as the hon. member, I think, talked about, 

they’re the heart and soul of the library system. But because we 

all too recognize that northern Saskatchewan hasn’t had access 

to the same degree that much of the rest of Saskatchewan has 

had, nor has much of rural Saskatchewan had the same kind of 

accessibility and resources as have the cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon . . . So we put this special fund together, albeit that 

Regina and Saskatoon weren’t eligible for the funding. We put 

the money where it was most needed. And in so doing, we said 

to those libraries in northern Saskatchewan that, you will 

receive double the amount that the rest of rural Saskatchewan 

will. 

 

And I can tell you, because I’ve met with the trustees and the 

library board, that they were very grateful for those moneys. 

Because what had happened, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is over the 

years with all the constraints that we always inevitably seem to 

be facing in the world of budgeting, book budgets sometimes — 

not sometimes; too often — came out on the short end of the 

stick. When budgets were being made, there was always a 

provision made for new acquisitions, but where one might 

normally have liked to have had two or three times the level, 

they were constrained because of priorizing. And that’s why 

this fund is conditional, because we want it to go to library 

materials and books in particular, and I think you’re going to 

see this, as I have been told by many of the  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1607 

 

trustees and board members. They’re particularly grateful for it. 

Certainly a half million . . . I mean you could always use two 

and a half million or three or whatever number, but it’s 

certainly a step in the right direction, very much so, and I think, 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, indicates as it does, I’m sure, to the hon. 

member that we value that regional library system; we have 

even greater plans for it in the future. And it needed a little 

injection here on that side and that’s what we’ve done in this 

budget. 

 

And quite frankly, if I was wanting to, I suppose, be very, very 

political in this debate tonight, I could say to the hon. member 

that as a result of the amalgamation of Saskatchewan Library, 

the K to 12 system, and post-secondary education, is straight 

administrative savings there was something in the order of a 

half a million. And I suppose I could argue it’s that half a 

million that’s being put in place to buy books for people of 

northern Saskatchewan, in fact across the rural areas of this 

province, Mr. Chairman. And we’re extremely proud of that 

fund, albeit that it doesn’t represent mega dollars in the $3 

billion budget. 

 

The third area that I would spend some time on for members is 

the university system — very important obviously in every 

sense of the word, whether you’re a student or a researcher, that 

we have top quality libraries. And significant dollars have been 

expended by ourselves in conjunction with the boards of 

governors and the administration in terms of the 

decision-making at both the universities, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

I draw to the members’ attention in the legislature recent 

headlines that we’ve seen over the last three or four months, in 

fact: “U of R library updates system,” a recent headline in a 

daily newspaper. Another headline: “World-class library U of 

R,”; “Fund benefits U of S library.” Great strides have been 

made and some very innovative strides, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

in terms of funding our university libraries. I myself, along with 

some others, perhaps, in this legislature were at the University 

of Regina when UMI (University Microfilms International), 

along with the University of Regina and ourselves jointly 

co-operated to access this microfiche. Two million dollars 

bought over 200 millions of dollars of microfiche print material, 

Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

And the hon. member referred to the libraries, and back in the 

days of, I guess Caesar, etc. I suppose that he would never have 

imagined that we would have . . . that you could put volumes 

and volumes and tomes and tomes of print material on this 

microfilm and various forms of microfilm, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman. And they’ve shown me over there, the storage 

cabinets. And this is an impressive collection. And I, quite 

frankly, wish I could read more details of it into the record, but 

I might not be using the House’s time wisely. But in some areas 

with this microfiche, Mr. Deputy Chairman, they’ve been able 

to access, to access . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

The hon. member from Saskatoon South might do well to listen 

to this. The hon. member from Saskatoon South has suggested 

that this microfiche acquisition by the University of Regina’s 

garbage . . . and they’ll be happy to hear that. Because I want to 

tell you what it’s all about, if you’ll sit still long enough to 

listen. 

What we have done here is access over $200 million worth. 

And the hon. member referred to the days of Caesar . . . And I 

want to tell you what that bought, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I want 

to tell you what it bought. In some sectors of English literature 

and history and some of those various sorts of fields, it has 

enabled them, and I don’t have the exact fields in front of me 

tonight, but it enabled them to purchase virtually everything 

that’s ever been written in recorded history. What a tremendous 

resource for this university to have — tremendous resource. 

 

And I raise this tonight, Mr. Deputy Chairman, because so 

often, so often what is reported and what is raised by the 

opposition is all this talk of cut-backs, cut-backs, cut-backs. 

And unfortunately the real story never gets told. It never gets 

told about acquisitions like this. 

 

And I’ll tell you, it’s very exciting. I’m very proud of it. The 

university is very proud of it. And Ernie Ingles, that’s the 

librarian, he never stops thinking about new ways and exciting 

ways to acquire literature and resource materials. And I, quite 

frankly, think we’re going to see more exciting initiatives in 

that area. 

 

As well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I look at a headline here, 

“Assiniboia School Division gets electronic encyclopedia”. 

What a far cry from the books I suppose that you and I used to 

page through. Now they’ve got it on these computerized disks 

and that sort of thing. All part of our excellence fund. 

 

And I give hon. members in this House this perspective tonight 

to show you that whether it’s the regional library system, the K 

to 12 library system, or the university system, exciting things 

are happening in this province in terms of having our library 

system as up to date as possible so that our people have access 

to the best. 

 

There’s even been recent announcements in recent days about 

how rural people will be able to access the U of R. Very 

exciting. I mean it strikes right at the heart of the whole 

question of accessibility, and I think we’re going to see more of 

that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I give that background, and it’s maybe not quite as 

thorough and cerebral as the history of Alexandria, but I have 

no doubt our citizens will be just as proud of what we have 

today as they were in seventh century B.C., I suppose. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I have questions to ask 

the minister about many of the items that he’s raised, but I’d 

like to go back to my question about the Saskatchewan Library. 

And the reason I want to go back to that is particularly because 

the Saskatchewan Library was the corner-stone of the public 

library system in Saskatchewan for many years. 

 

And you’re right when you talk about how it got high marks, 

because when I came out here in 1972, there were many, many 

people coming from all over North America to see the 

development of the library system in Saskatchewan — the 

public library system. 

 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1608 

 

Now you have disestablished the Saskatchewan Library, which 

used to be known as the provincial library, and you tell me that 

nothing has changed except administratively. I have worked in 

large institutions, and I know that an administrative change can 

be a very fundamental change. 

 

This section of The Public Library Act has been superseded — 

section 3 referring to the Saskatchewan Library. You tell me 

nothing has changed except administratively. 

 

My question still is: what does it mean when you say that the 

central library has been disestablished and that the 

Saskatchewan Library, which is still in the estimates, it’s 

supposed to act as the central library for Saskatchewan, as one 

of the points? Is it still acting as the central library for the public 

system in Saskatchewan, or has it been disestablished and 

superseded? What is the status? And can you explain to me 

what you mean when you say nothing has changed except 

administratively? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I 

wonder if I could get you to elaborate your question, or to 

restate it. We’re not really clear on exactly what it is you’re 

referring to. 

 

Ms. Smart: — According to Department of Education 

regulations, the Saskatchewan Library has been disestablished, 

and under The Public Libraries Act, 1984, sections 3, 6, 7, and 

8 are superseded. 

 

Section 3 refers to the Saskatchewan Library which is described 

as the central library for Saskatchewan, and among its tasks are 

to act as the central library for Saskatchewan. It was always the 

pivotal focus for the public library system, the regional library 

system in Saskatchewan. 

 

If it’s been disestablished, if it’s been superseded by section 3, 

what is its status now? Isn’t that clear? It’s your regulations that 

have disestablished it. What does that mean? Why did you do 

it? 

 

It was in The Public Libraries Act of 1984, the Saskatchewan 

Library, and you put out regulations that disestablish it. At this 

time when we’re moving into the information age, the 

knowledge-based economy, we’ve disestablished the central 

library in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, we’re 

not — and we’re going to check with other officials — we’re 

not familiar with any regulations that have been forthcoming 

relative to the matter to which you refer, unless there’s 

something that we’re missing here. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if I can, I think the essential question that we’re 

talking about here is with the amalgamation and, etc., etc., is 

Saskatchewan Libraries still alive and well and healthy, etc., 

etc. And in a functional and administrative sense, all I can say 

to you is yes. 

 

And we’ll do some digging ourselves to see if . . . and trying to 

get familiar with what you’ve been referring to. But I think the 

question you’re coming to in terms of disestablishing, to quote 

whatever document you’re  

reading from there, all I can assure you is that functionally, 

administratively — although yes, it’s part of the Department of 

Education — it’s business as usual. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I’ll table the documents tomorrow 

in the House that I’m referring to because they’re very 

important. They concern this whole question of the autonomy 

of the Saskatchewan Library. We’ll leave that question for now. 

 

(2045) 

 

I’d like to go on then to just talk briefly about the Saskatchewan 

Library board, which is established by the same Act, under 

section 9. I understand the appointments of the Saskatchewan 

Library board members are all up this month in August, and my 

question to you is: will they be re-appointed or new 

appointments made? And what role are they going to play now 

that the library’s been amalgamated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m aware, yes, that the 

re-appointments or the appointments are due — are soon to be 

due. Cabinet obviously has not yet considered that. 

 

My expectation would be that we will have a Saskatchewan 

Library board insofar as who it will be, I think, as the hon. 

member probably knows, some of them are appointments from 

some of the various interest groups. And I suspect that too will 

stay the same. 

 

There was some discussion when I met with the library board 

about some duplication, more as it relates to the way it’s 

worked out with some of the current personnel between the 

Library Trustees Association and the library board, where 

we’ve got some members sitting on both. And not that that’s 

necessarily a bad thing, but some of it’s partly by accident and 

partly because of who they represent. And it may well be that, 

because I tendered with them the idea at the library board 

meeting about perhaps consolidating their meetings or, you 

know, anything that we could look at, as well, to maintain our 

efficiencies and not jeopardize their roles — and yet, if there 

was some cost savings to be had, I’d be interested in having 

them. 

 

But I don’t see their role changing. Some of the people, 

perhaps. I can’t comment on that particularly. And I guess the 

final comment I would make is, cabinet has not yet considered 

it, but all of what I’ve given you would be my expectation. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well we’ll get back to that topic again when I 

get the regulations about the disestablishment of the library. 

 

Let’s move then to the book purchase grants for the regional 

libraries — the $500,000 that you made available. I understand 

they’re going to get the money in September, in one payment. 

This grant is available for one year only. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s once only and one year to spend 

it. And I don’t want to raise false hopes and expectations. This 

is meant to be an injection, if you like, to get some of those 

book budgets bounced back up. 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1609 

 

But I don’t want to handcuff myself, nor do I want to leave you 

with the impression that I’m going to back away from and not 

be proactive down the road in subsequent budget years with 

what we’re doing in the regional library system. At the same 

time I . . . Given the weakness in grain prices and oil prices and 

potash and uranium, I don’t want anybody to start going out 

there and planning this as part of a base budget. But don’t draw 

the other conclusion absolutely either, that there might not be 

initiatives in the future. But so everybody plans and plans 

without . . . with no surprises down the road, it’s viewed as a 

one-time grant, and with a year to spend it, and that kind of 

thing. So that’s the perspective I’d like to put on it. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well that’s a perspective that is very worrisome 

to librarians. It reminds us of the libraries in some parts of 

Canada where people were given money for one year and they 

were told: you bought books last year; why do you need them 

again next year. 

 

The book budget for a library must be a continuing amount of 

money that the libraries can count on for buying what you’ve 

described yourself as the heart and soul of libraries — the book 

resources. 

 

I’d just like to question the money around the book purchase 

program. It’s my understanding that the regional libraries are 

getting $1,500 for each branch library, for each bookmobile, 

and for the headquarters. Does that add up to, for example, 

Chinook Regional Library, which I think has 37 branches and 

one bookmobile — and if I’m not right, I’d like to be corrected 

on that — that amount of money would amount to $57,000? Is 

that what Chinook library is going to be getting in the book 

purchase grant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I am advised that that’s the rough 

figure, yes. 

 

Ms. Smart: — The amount of money that Chinook would’ve 

gotten under the formula for funding the libraries, had you not 

cut — the $700,000 — my understanding the amount of money 

Chinook would’ve had was $60,000. So there’s a slight cut 

there. 

 

Lakeland Regional Library, as I figure it, is getting $63,000 

under the book purchase grant and was entitled to $68,000 

under the formula. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m not sure I’ve got the right 

dimension to your question, but I’ll explain how that’s going to 

work. 

 

It’s $1,500 per branch, except for northern Saskatchewan where 

it’s double. And that’s to recognize the larger need there. And 

so depending on the number of branches and bookmobiles . . . if 

you’ve got 30, then it’s 30 times 1,500; if you’ve got 79, it’s 79 

times 1,500. And that’s how it’s arrived at. 

 

The other perspective I’ve been wanting to give you, or else the 

first points you raised, is this was a special fund, a special 

injection if you like, to top up some book budgets that had 

become a little anaemic. I mean, book budgets are there year in 

and year out, but what we were wanting  

to do is play a little catch up here, if we could. 

 

Because as I said before, sometimes when you’re looking at 

budgeting, it’s easier to, for example, cut back on the book 

budget because you don’t want to sort of have to let go of staff 

or some of those other hard decisions. And I don’t disagree with 

that in terms of priorization, I suppose, as they’re always 

difficult. But we made this conditional so that, in fact, it would 

be used for books and those sorts of library materials, and that’s 

the basis for it. 

 

Ms. Smart: — So that the libraries can go ahead then, cutting 

back staff and having to deal with the other questions, and 

you’re not concerned about that. 

 

With Palliser Regional Library, operating out of Moose Jaw, I 

figure that they’re getting $42,000 under this book purchase 

grant and that, under the formula, they would’ve been entitled 

to $50,000. 

 

Now what I’m talking about when I say the formula versus the 

book purchase grant is the amount of money they would’ve got 

if you’d kept it even at zero budgeting, instead of the 10 per 

cent decrease. Palliser Regional would’ve gotten about $50,000 

and, under the book purchase program, only 42,000. 

 

Now you’re saying that Palliser’s getting $42,000 to buy books 

this year. They still have all those other expenses that they have 

to deal with. 

 

I see the librarian consulting with you, so I would like to know 

if my figures are correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Here’s some numbers that I think the 

hon. member may be looking for. We could run through them 

all. I think we’ve picked off the odd one. Chinook . . . And this 

is the premise, as I said earlier, $1,500 per branch and 

bookmobile as of the end of ‘86. So Chinook would come out 

with 58,500; Lakeland will come out with 64,500; Palliser, 

which has 25 that are eligible, works out to 39,000, or maybe 

it’s 26 that are eligible there — one of those two numbers. 

Parkland comes out at 85,500; Southeast, I think the number 

there you might want is 87,000; Wapiti, 82,500; and Wheatland, 

61,500; and that comes to a grant total of 478,500 which is 

obviously very close to our one-half million dollar designation. 

 

The 21,500 that’s still remaining . . . We take then the seven 

northern libraries: Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, LaLoche, 

La Ronge, Montreal Lake, and Pelican Narrows at $3,000 each 

— that’s 21,000. And that’s about as close as you can come to 

arithmetic on a half a million dollars, spreading it over seven 

northern libraries and the very many branch and bookmobiles 

that exist in the rest of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Smart: — So you said 39,000 for Palliser. And under the 

formula for Palliser, had they gotten the regular amount of 

increase under the formula, they would have got 50,000. 

 

I think Palliser region among many is really concerned about 

the cuts, because . . . I would like to just read you the letter that 

you yourself received from Palliser  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1610 

 

region — quite a long letter describing what that cut meant, that 

10 per cent decrease. 

 

All purchases of films, videos, records, microfilms, art 

prints and archival material have been put on hold for 

1987. Two thousand eight hundred and sixty-six staff 

hours have been cut for 1987, reducing access to library 

service. The library’s publicity budget has been cut in half; 

appropriate maintenance procedures have been cut for 

1987; reduced maintenance on our building will result in 

an accelerated deterioration of our major asset. 

 

For the first time the library must consider restricting 

certain types of interlibrary loan requests because of 

increasing postal costs. Staff development and training 

allocations have been reduced by 40 per cent, making it 

difficult for employees to remain current on professional 

and technological developments in the industry. 

Insufficient funds have been reserved for professional and 

legal costs, which will affect our ability to negotiate a 

collective agreement, which expires the 31st of December, 

1985. Inadequately funded reserves will mean that the 

library is unable to replace vehicles, should a replacement 

be needed. And our automation project, which would 

greatly improve efficiency, must be put on hold. 

 

I just wanted to point out the variety of services that make up 

the public library system, or regional library system, and what it 

means when they’re cut back in the amount of money that they 

get. 

 

And I don’t know how you can justify that kind of cut and that 

kind of prescription, that the libraries have to buy books with 

their money instead of leaving the autonomy of the regional 

libraries to decide for themselves how they’re going to spend 

the money. Under the regular formula, when the regional 

libraries get their money, it’s the library board itself, 

functioning in an autonomous way, that decides how that 

money will be spent. 

 

A library is a complex institution. It does involve staff; it 

involves staff hours and buildings and maintenance and 

equipment, as well as the resources that go into it. 

 

And we would like very much to see strong collections in all 

the libraries, of course. But when you rearrange the granting of 

money, and you say a certain amount of money must only be 

spent for books, how do you justify that when the libraries are 

trying to maintain an autonomy and make up their own 

decisions as to how the libraries will spend the money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think the point that the hon. member 

made at the end is the point that bears some elaboration on. And 

the reality is, as I understand it for the reasons that you outlined, 

is that boards are autonomous and they do priorize and they do 

decide how much money will be spent on books this years 

versus buying buses, versus gas, versus salaries, versus 

whatever — the point being, there are no regular formulas. I’m 

not so sure I understand how you can draw conclusions about 

regular or formulas that one might apply when, for the  

reason that you just stated — because they are autonomous — 

there is no regular formula. 

 

(2100) 

 

Now if you’re asking me if I’m denying that there were some 

reductions in the base budget, if you like, I’m not. The rationale 

for that has been stated on more than one occasion in this 

House. But I also want to be very clear that because we do 

consider this regional library system important, and the book 

side particularly, that has, as I said earlier, that tends to be as 

hard hit as any — and I could probably trot forward to you the 

letters that I received in so far as what would happen because of 

the budget — that that seemed like a reasonable place to inject a 

little sunshine, if you like. 

 

And I said earlier . . . I mean, and it doesn’t matter in any area 

of education, whether it be the library part or operating grants to 

school boards or whatever, I mean, I could always use more 

money. And all I can tell you is that I think to a person, I 

suppose, other than the Regina and the Saskatoon boards 

specifically, they’ve been, they were very grateful for the 

additional injection of funds with the book fund. I don’t what 

more I can say on the issue. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well I can appreciate that they’re grateful, after 

they took a 10 per cent cut when the budget came down in 

April, from the regional library budgets, based on the formula. 

You cut the budget by 10 per cent from a public service, a 

universal service across this province, a service that’s providing 

information so that people can go into the information age and 

the knowledge-based industry and all those clichés that you like 

to use. 

 

You cut the budget by 10 per cent. You caused a lot of hardship 

in the regional libraries because they’ve had to cut back on their 

staff hours, they’ve had to cut back on their services, they had 

to do a lot of scrambling to rearrange their finances, and then 

you came forward in June with the $500 book purchase grant — 

a one-time grant for the libraries. And yes, it was a ray of 

sunshine, and yes, they are very delighted to have the money to 

spend on their books. But that was not an extra on top of the 

budget they already had. That was money given to them after 

the budget had been cut by 10 per cent. 

 

Now I have another question that is very important to the 

regional libraries and to the librarians and to the library 

association in this province, and it’s this: is the reduced figure 

. . . is the figure now, minus the 10 per cent, the new figure for 

regional libraries, is that going to become the base for future 

increases? 

 

You’ve decreased the budget by 10 per cent. You’ve given 

them this little extra hand-out on the book purchase grant, yes. 

But that basic formula, that basic amount of money that is 10 

per cent less than they got last year, is that going to become the 

base for any future increases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well this revolves around the 

discussion we had earlier because I can’t predict what next 

year’s budget number will be. As I said earlier, I don’t want to 

handcuff myself or to suggest to them that . . . because I want to 

be fairly proactive on this side for all the  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1611 

 

reasons I outlined earlier. And I think I could probably safely 

say that on the literacy side alone, we are probably going to be 

. . . I see the library system being very proactive, and our adult 

literacy initiatives, we could be spending something in the order 

of half a million dollars there, over and above what you might 

find in any line in the blue book. 

 

So I don’t want to handcuff myself by saying that there might 

not be increases or decrease down the road. But so nobody gets 

into trouble with budgeting, that’s why this special fund was put 

in as a special fund for a year rather than to plop it in on top of a 

base budget where it may or may not be there again for next 

year . . . So rather than sort of lead anybody on and under false 

hopes and pretences that we can’t deliver on, so that they can 

plan and so we can plan, that’s the approach. 

 

So yes, we’ve had to tighten our belts. There is a new base 

budget, if you like, for everybody to work with, and what 

happens down the road, we’ll have to see. As I said before, I see 

exciting times ahead, and I say that even knowing full well that 

we are in a period of fiscal restraint, if you like. But as I’ve said 

to you before, I see a great role here on the literacy side and 

distance education, to mention but two. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, the way you’re treating the 

libraries, I see a great deal of stress down the road for the 

librarians, not a great deal of anything very positive. 

 

You said that you don’t want to be handcuffed, but you’re 

talking about public, universal, provincial-wide institutions that 

have existed in this province for a long time. You may not want 

to be handcuffed in terms of what money they are going to get 

next year versus what money they get this year, but the libraries 

have to know what they are doing in long-term planning. It’s 

that kind of . . . It’s the kind of chaotic change that you’re 

promoting that’s very destructive, and it’s particularly 

destructive to an institution as complicated and as valuable as 

the library system in this province. It’s unacceptable to say that 

you don’t know what’s going to be happening next year with 

something as valuable in terms of giving information to people, 

to being part of your plan for the 21st century, part of your 

vision of the information age. The public library system should 

be crucial and central to that. It should not be treated the way 

you’re treating it, telling me you don’t know whether you want 

to handcuffed for this year or next year. 

 

I would like to share with you a letter that you may or may not 

have read, from the Chinook Regional Library . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, you may answer my question. I’ll share 

the letter after. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, before the hon. member gets 

berating me and my being handcuffed, I would ask you: can 

you predict what next year’s wheat crop will be? Can you 

predict what the price of wheat will be? Can you predict what 

the price of oil will be? The price of uranium? The price of 

potash? I mean, if I could do any of those things, I wouldn’t be 

here. I’d be retired, long gone, and a billionaire. I mean that’s 

what you’re expecting. Why do we have annual budgets? I 

mean, the logic track that you presented there isn’t all that 

sensible, quite  

frankly. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I don’t accept that. I think that you can predict a 

lot more about agriculture than you seem to be wanting to 

predict. You can certainly predict the input costs a lot more 

strongly than you’re doing. It’s not just the price of what you 

get for wheat, but it’s the price of what you have to pay in order 

to farm, period. And you know perfectly well what’s causing 

those input costs to go up. 

 

I want to share with you the Chinook Regional Library letter, 

because it spells out very carefully and very conscientiously the 

problems that the libraries are facing right now. And it was a 

letter written to you: 

 

During its sixteen years of operation, the Chinook 

Regional Library has endeavoured to provide quality 

library service to the resident of Southwest Saskatchewan 

while remaining fiscally responsible to its funding bodies, 

(and you really value fiscal responsibility, so the library is 

doing exactly what you’d like it to do) the Provincial 

Government and the participating municipalities. 

 

The Chinook Regional Library Executive Committee has 

worked hard at establishing an accountable relationship 

with the councils of all participating municipalities. Being 

a sparsely populated, predominantly rural region, with 

little history of library service prior to the organization of 

the Chinook Regional Library, we have had to earn the 

acceptable of funding public library services. Even so, our 

population composition has historically provided us with 

one of the lowest per capita contributions of all the 

provincially established regions and correspondingly, the 

lowest total annual expenditure of all the regional libraries. 

 

Within these financial constraints we have slowly 

developed services. Although we have recognized great 

needs for expenditures in our annual operations, we have 

also considered the necessity to incorporate long range 

development into our planning process. The planning of 

the expenditure of our annual revenue has always included 

consideration for current operations, replacement of 

current assets, and requirements for future development 

such as automation. We are currently in the process of 

automating our catalogue and book control system at our 

headquarters operation. This project has been planned for 

a number of years, and is financially feasible only through 

funds that have been placed in our Automation and Capital 

Trust reserves. Only through careful planning and the 

establishment of reserve funds have such projects been 

feasible. We have always had to balance the immediate 

need for expenditures on annual collection development 

(that’s the books and the resources, materials) branch 

library opening hours and headquarters operational costs 

with the future plans and developments that will improve 

our services and delivery to the residents of Southwest 

Saskatchewan. 

 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1612 

 

The Executive and Board do not welcome the 

announcement of a ten per cent decrease in Provincial 

Government funding. We feel it is imperative to 

continue to deliver the quality library services we have 

developed, if at all possible. Some operational costs will 

be pared but a significant deficit will be incurred for the 

calendar year of 1987. This deficit can be balanced 

through the transfer of funds from our Capital Trust 

reserve but will erode the financial position we have 

developed over many years of responsible planning. 

 

. . . A ten per cent decrease in provincial funding or 

approximately $60,000.00, would mean a municipal 

increase of over twenty-nine per cent. Such a request 

from our municipalities, even in the best of economic 

times, would certainly spell the end of regional library 

participation and operation as we currently know it. 

 

When you tell me that you don’t want to be handcuffed, are you 

telling me that you don’t value the kind of slow development of 

services, the kind of very conscientious development of services 

that a regional library like Chinook represents, where they have 

tried to put money aside for the automatic projects which will 

bring them into the 21st century, and all that stuff, versus 

maintaining their library materials and maintaining their 

system. 

 

You don’t value that long-range planning and that careful 

consideration of funds, that you can toss them about by 

reducing the budget by 10 per cent and not telling them what’s 

going to happen next year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think all I can say, to not rehash 

territory we’ve been over a couple of times, is that the province 

this year finds itself facing probably the most severe economic 

challenges it’s faced in even perhaps in its entire history. 

 

Even facing those challenges, we’re able to find a half a million 

dollars for a special fund for books for our libraries. I’m proud 

of it, and most people are very happy with it. 

 

Yes, we could always use more money, but given the difficult 

circumstances, the fact that we’re able to have some additional 

money there for that book fund, I think it speaks well for our 

government’s view on the importance we place on the library 

system. And I don’t know what more I can say, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well, one of the other problems that the regional 

libraries have had to face because of this 10 per cent cut is that 

they have contracts with rural and urban municipalities which 

have been negotiated for two or three years. And the 1987 

budgets which they set were based on their commitments to 

these contracts. 

 

I’m assuming that you knew that they had those contractual 

commitments that they had to fulfil, and that they needed the 

money as part of their overall grant to meet those commitments. 

Why didn’t you help them to honour those commitments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As far as I’m aware, and all the advice 

I have as a result of this year’s budget, we’re not aware of any 

contractual breakdowns because of the budget. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I want to turn then . . . I am going to make sure 

that the libraries know about that, and if they do have 

contractual commitments that have been messed up for this 

change in the funding, that they can let you know about it. 

 

I would like to turn to the funding for the municipal libraries, 

Regina and Saskatoon public libraries. Their money has been 

cut by 30 per cent, the provincial grant that they got. And as 

you know, and as I know, that is not a very large part of the 

overall budget for the libraries in the cities, but there is a couple 

of questions connected with that cut-back in the provincial 

grant. The Regina Public Library, when it wrote to you, said 

that: 

 

The board considers this action by the government to be 

most inequitable . . . a signal that the government has 

abandoned any effort to achieve a fair sharing of the 

financial resources that are available for public libraries. 

This is particularly indefensible in light of the 

government’s previous statements . . . (when they) wrote 

to the government on April . . . concerning library funding. 

The reply from the then Minister of Finance, Bob 

Andrews (this is in 1985) was that the government was 

waiting for the report of the Local Government Finance 

Commission to allow the government “to assess library 

funding within the broader framework of new directions 

for provincial-municipal financing to reflect the changing 

needs and circumstances of the 1980’s”. 

 

(2115) 

 

The Local Government Finance Commission report: 

 

. . . was unequivocal in saying that the funding proportions 

between municipal and regional libraries were seriously 

out of balance and immediate action was needed to 

achieve equity. 

 

Your government has proceeded in the opposite direction 

with a 30 per cent cut in municipal library funding, and 

now a grant to libraries outside the usual annual grant 

allocation process that omits the municipal libraries 

altogether (because they didn’t get any part of that 

500,000). 

 

The board is very concerned as to what this policy 

direction will mean in 1988 and beyond. It implies that the 

government intends through fiscal measures to destroy the 

intent of the Library Act which creates a province-wide 

co-operative library service. 

 

And I’m referring to the section in The Library Act which 

mandates the municipal libraries, section 25: 

 

. . . to develop specialized resource centres and provide 

advanced reference services and . . . (that they may) 

develop special library collections and  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1613 

 

services not ordinarily provided in one municipality or in 

regional libraries. (And the two city libraries are to) 

co-operate with the Saskatchewan Library in developing 

province-wide services through inter-library loan, 

reciprocal agreements and collection development 

planning; and administer funds received from the 

Government of Saskatchewan . . . for any other purpose 

that the board considers necessary to develop library 

services. 

 

The point that I’m particularly concerned with is that the issue 

of co-operating with the Saskatchewan library in developing 

province-wide services, the two city libraries were set up to be 

specialized resource centres for the total library system in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Your cutting back on the funding to those municipal libraries 

seems to destroy the intent of The Library Act. Why did you do 

it, and what is your intention in terms of the creating one library 

system in Saskatchewan if you’re not going to support the 

municipal libraries in being resource centres as mandated under 

the Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as it relates to the situation at 

Regina and Saskatoon, the basis for what we have done in the 

budgeting here was to try and provide the funding, or the most 

funding, or additional funding, if you like based on where the 

need was the greatest. I don’t think you being a member of a 

socialist party would particularly have any difficulty with that. 

 

As I said earlier, in our view, when it came to a special fund for 

books, the northern part of this province had the greatest need, 

so we allowed those branches to be eligible for double the 

amount that the rest of rural Saskatchewan was eligible for. 

 

Similarly, if you look at the book budgets at Regina and 

Saskatoon libraries in 1986, they spent not quite $1.9 million on 

books and library materials, and they serve about 35 per cent of 

the people. 

 

On the other hand, our regional libraries who serve 64 per cent 

of the public had only 1.383 million to spend on books and 

other materials. 

 

So what I’m saying to you, if you looked at the record and 

made the assessment based on need, which I don’t think you 

have any difficulty with . . . I mean that’s what we always strive 

for in this legislature is to be fair, and divide those who have the 

greatest needs, the extra help if you like. 

 

So what I was faced with, what my officials were faced with, 

was we had a situation here were one-third of the population 

was being served with a book budget of 1.9 million and 

two-thirds of the population were only being served with a book 

budget of 1.383 million. I don’t think that was fair. 

 

So what we’ve decided to do, rather than — not that we want to 

pick on Regina and Saskatoon — but rather than give them 

more money if you like, given that they’re already spending 4 

or 500,000 more than two-thirds of the province has access to, 

we’d concentrate our  

resources on the rest of Saskatchewan and try and have them 

catch up a little bit; and secondly, particularly in the North, 

double it. 

 

But at the same time, having said all that, I want to reiterate — I 

mean this wasn’t somehow meant to punish or pick on Regina 

or Saskatoon. But if you’re going to do it on a needs basis and 

spend your dollars where it’s most needed, it seems to me those 

numbers speak for themselves. 

 

I also, though, want to acknowledge, because I wouldn’t be fair 

if I did not, the service — the great service that the Regina and 

Saskatoon systems have provided this entire province 

throughout the years. 

 

We ought not penalize them for any success and for all the 

work that has gone on either. And I want that to be on the 

record, and I have no doubt that they’ll continue to be of great 

service to all of the province, other than just those who live in 

or around Regina and Saskatoon. And we ought to be very clear 

about that, and we owe them a great debt of gratitude. 

 

But I think if you work on providing the special money, if you 

like, for where the needs are greatest, the priorities we identified 

were these in this order: the North, number one; rural 

Saskatchewan generally, number two; Regina and Saskatoon, 

three. And I don’t think, as I said, you being a member of a 

socialist party would disagree with the fairness of that 

approach. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I think it is important that people across this 

province have access to the library resources. That’s why I was 

so supportive of the Saskatchewan library system that was set 

up over many years in this province. One of the corner-stones 

of that library system was an inter-library loan system where 

resources could be shared across the province. And the 

Saskatoon Public Library and the Regina Public Library have 

built up their collections on that basis and that understanding 

and that system working, that those resources go out of the city, 

across the province to people who want to borrow them. 

 

You can’t set up the same kind of libraries you have in 

Saskatoon in every rural area of the province. But you can, 

through an inter-library loan system, make those resources 

available. And with the new technology, the high technology, 

the automation systems that are now possible, those resources 

can be made more easily available to people. 

 

The Saskatoon Public Library in 1986 lent out — sent out on 

inter— library loan — over 8,000 items to other parts of the 

province, and the Regina Public Library almost 10,000. Those 

resources are going out; they’re being shared by the rest of the 

province. 

 

My question then to you is, in terms of your plan for the future 

— which I don’t see in planning for the year 2000, and I don’t 

see in your prescription that you don’t want to be handcuffed 

for next year in terms of what the libraries are doing . . . So it 

seems almost ridiculous to ask you a question about where you 

think the libraries are going to be going in the next year. But is 

the government going to require that resources be shared in this 

province? Are you  

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1614 

 

supporting that concept? When you talk about making resources 

available across the province, do you support the concept of 

sharing resources from the city libraries and from the 

Saskatchewan Library to the smaller libraries and back again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I do support that concept. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Is funding an automation project, ongoing 

automation, a priority for the sharing of those resources? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, and as funds are available. I want 

to just comment on one of the points you made. You made 

reference to the fact that we can’t duplicate what’s available in 

Regina and Saskatoon across the province, and I think it’s safe 

to say that you’re correct there. But I would hate to use that as 

an excuse for us not updating and increasing the collections in 

the Meadow Lakes, in the Swift Currents, in the Nipawins of 

the world. I mean, I don’t think we should not be proactive in 

those areas. 

 

And I raise it for another reason, that because of this new and 

expanded role that we see for regional colleges, as I said earlier, 

the library system is . . . We have greater expectations for it and 

we’re prepared to put some teeth into our commitments in terms 

of dollars, as I said, as best we can and as available. So it’s very 

much a part of this dynamic restructuring that’s going on, and a 

very important part. 

 

And I really don’t disagree with a lot of what you’ve suggested 

in terms of areas that are priorities and need attention. And yes, 

we will give those areas attention as and when funds permit. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Will you be using the regional library system, 

then, as a back-up for the regional colleges? Are you going to 

put the money into the regional systems so that they can be part, 

a stronger part, of a one-library system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We fully expect that as we develop 

our distance education initiatives that our regional library 

system will have an important role to play there. 

 

And I don’t know if I can elaborate much more at this point in 

time because we’re in the infant stage, if you like, of our 

distance education. And much consultation has yet to go on 

with some of the major players in that regard. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well let’s look at the distance education then. I 

don’t particularly want to get on to it just yet. 

 

But I understand in the distance education, from the blueprint, 

Preparing for the Year 2000, you only mentioned that the 

Saskatchewan Library was involved in the distance education 

movement to some extent. But I didn’t get any sense of how the 

library fit in. You say in the blueprint: 

 

To co-ordinate the new education outreach initiative, the 

Minister of Education will appoint a Distance Education 

Council. The Council will advise the Minister on the 

development of the new network of facilities and 

programs. It will also be  

asked to develop a policy on electronic distance education. 

 

What is the relationship in your mind between the regional 

libraries and this new network of facilities that you’re going to 

set up? Who’s going to be on the distance education council? 

Which groups? And what is the relationship of the distance 

education council and policy to the libraries? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I picked up your questions in reverse 

order. The distance education council is not yet appointed, but 

there will be library representation on it. I want . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Sorry? 

 

Ms. Smart: — I didn’t hear that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The distance education council has 

not yet been appointed. As I said earlier, it’s in its infant stages. 

But I think I can safely give you the commitment that we fully 

expect there’ll be library representation on it. I want to pull 

together all the players who have been involved in this, whether 

it be STELLA, the Saskatchewan Tele-Learning Association, 

what they’ve been doing, whoever may have been involved 

here, to give their best advice, guidance, and input. 

 

I guess a further perspective I might offer with you in terms of 

distance education, I guess there are models around where you 

have things centralized as opposed to decentralized. Our view 

would be that we would go with the decentralized approach or 

the regional approach. If I’m a bit hazy, it’s because we are yet 

in the infant stages on this. The reality is, I think, for all the 

reasons that you’re outlined, it holds some exciting promise. 

Libraries will be involved in a very integral way, and perhaps in 

2 or 3 or 6 months more the details will have been forthcoming 

as we get this council up and running. 

 

Ms. Smart: — But these are issues that are concerning people 

now in terms of the budget that you’re being presented and we 

have to discuss. And it really concerns me that you’ve talked a 

lot in the House around education, or around a lot of cliches 

about developing into the new 21st century and your blueprint 

and the information age, and how we have to come to terms 

with reality. And yet when I ask you the hard questions about 

how you’re organizing libraries in this province, you don’t have 

the answers. And yet you’ve got a very good system that you’re 

cutting back. You’re cutting back on the library systems, but the 

funding that you’re cutting back on . . . You want to face 

reality, and yet you won’t answer these hard questions about 

what you’re doing. 

 

(2130) 

 

Do you want to stand up and talk? You’ve just said, Mr. 

Minister, that you would go with a decentralized model for 

developing the distant education council, so you’re promoting a 

decentralized model for the development of distance education 

and of libraries in the future. That seems to me to be in some 

ways a contradiction with the idea of having an amalgamated 

library service. You’ve amalgamated libraries into the 

Department of Education, and yet you also want to decentralize, 

and how are you going to do that? 

 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1615 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll give you as broad an 

understanding as I can give you at this time. We are going to 

establish a distance education council, but it will be not mere 

talk and mere rhetoric because backing that up is something in 

the order of $3 million of new money for this distance 

education, this outreach initiative. I don’t want to pre-empt, for 

example, the advice and guidance and input that I might get 

from a council that I would suspect would have, as I said 

earlier, representation from the libraries, STELLA if you like, 

university extension branches, regional colleges, the new 

institute, and obviously SaskTel has some interest here. There’s 

the Department of Transportation, I think it is, as well, from a 

licensing standpoint. 

 

The idea is to develop regionally accessible education outlets 

utilizing, where possible, existing resources. We don’t want to 

get ourselves in a situation of building buildings, if you like, or 

whatever where we don’t need to. And as I said before, to 

assure you that this commitment — we’re not just going to 

study the issue to death or undertake paralysis by analysis — 

there’s a $3 million fund behind this initiative. 

 

But as I said before, I don’t pretend to have all the answers; as 

you yourself or other colleagues have pointed out in your party, 

we should consult, and this is an excellent example of where we 

are going to consult with some who have done some fair 

amount of work in this area, and because of that, I want to draw 

on that advice and guidance before I lay out a more concrete 

framework that I have to you tonight. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well, I guess I’m getting mixed messages 

because partly I’m hearing that you want to continue the 

one-library system, then you want to go into a decentralized 

system. You don’t know quite what’s going to happen with this 

distance education, and yet you’re telling me to read this 

Preparing for the Year 2000 — that’s got all the answers in it. 

It hasn’t got anything in it except a lot of hype. And you’ve got 

to get a lot more specific and lot more real about what you’re 

doing with libraries and with education than what you’ve been 

able to do so far. 

 

I want to turn to another point that you made in speaking to the 

throne speech last December, Mr. Minister. You were talking 

about duplication of services, and you were saying: I’m never in 

favour of unnecessary duplication. And certainly in the 

economic realities that we live with, we must never, ever have 

unnecessary duplication. Can you tell me then, if you don’t 

believe in duplication of resources, why your government has 

developed special centres offering a network of advice to 

business, business resource centres around the province to offer 

a wealth of business information from convenient store-front 

locations serving as one-stop information storehouses for 

entrepreneurs and prospective business people, providing them 

with the latest management, marketing, and financial 

information, plus consulting advice on business ideas and 

problems. The centres also carry many other business, manuals 

and guides as well as management aids, marketing and 

statistical data, and facts about government and 

non-government programs of assistance for business. 

 

Why did your government set up these business resource 

centres separate from the regional library system which is a 

public information system already established? Why didn’t you 

take that money and strengthen that regional library system? 

Why did you put it into business resource centres? We have a 

business resource centre in Saskatoon with exactly the same 

information in it as the Saskatoon Public Library just two 

blocks away. Very expensive business directories and trade 

directories are duplicated by your government. You want to 

save money. Why did you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think, although there may be some 

small overlap relative to functions that the hon. member might 

subscribe to, a business resource centre as versus libraries — I 

think quite frankly you’re talking a little bit here about apples 

and oranges. Why do we have business resource centres? We 

have business resource centres because under the NDP small 

business in this province was largely ignored and its 

development was not fostered. And if there was any help, it was 

hidden away in some closet, because it’s well known the NDP 

are against small business. I don’t think I can say it any more 

plainly than that. 

 

We put these small-business resource centres out where people 

can see them, where they can have access to them, where they 

can find out what market trends are, get help in some areas. 

And I’m quite proud of the initiatives taken by my colleague 

from Indian Head-Wolseley in that regard. 

 

Why would we have them? I mean, we have them for small 

business just like we have ag rep offices to help farmers across 

rural Saskatchewan. I think what you’re talking about here, in 

mixing business resource centres and libraries, is a little bit 

apples and oranges. I suppose there’s some faint — relative to 

information surfacing if you like — there’s probably some faint 

overlap there, but I think we ought not confuse their mandates. 

 

Ms. Smart: — That’s it? To say that there’s only a faint 

connection between a business resource centre and the business 

section of the Saskatoon Public Library, for example, or the 

business resources that could be made available through the 

regional library system, really indicates that your concept of 

information sharing, your concept of a knowledge-based 

economy, is not very substantive, it’s not very deep. 

 

You would have seen that you could have used the money to 

fund the libraries and to make them stronger than to go diddling 

off in every direction, decentralizing all over the place with 

other resource centres that conflict. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’re not a happy lady, Anne. 

 

Ms. Smart: — No, I’m not particularly happy having to deal 

with the Minister of Education who talks a lot about coming to 

grips with reality and then, when you try to ask him questions 

about reality, he hasn’t got the answers. 

 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1616 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Go ahead. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I will. I’m just not going to yap over all this 

noise. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Another topic that I think we should discuss, 

Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . when I can have 

some order . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would just like to make a comment here 

that I have been very pleased thus far this evening with the 

amorous kind of relationship that we’ve had. It has been making 

the life of the Chairman relatively easy, and I would appreciate 

it if we could continue in that kind of a relationship. So if the 

member from Saskatoon Centre has a question, would she 

please continue. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Let’s talk about another pet project of the 

minister’s, let’s talk about the literacy programs. I understand 

your government has established a special literacy council . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairperson, I can’t talk above 

this noise. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would members from both . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Order, please. Order. Would members from 

both sides please try to contain themselves somewhat, so that 

the member from Saskatoon Centre can continue her 

questioning. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I’d like to ask you some questions about the 

special literacy council that you’ve established. I’m wondering 

if it has any more substance to it than the distance education 

council at this point? You are claiming that you are going to use 

the expertise of the Saskatoon and Regina public libraries, I 

understand. Can you tell me what groups are involved in the 

special literacy council? Who’s going to control the project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The literacy council is . . . we are 

close to having it appointed. We’ve released a background 

paper there, which is our first step on our new initiative relative 

to literacy. It, too, has some very chilling statistics that I’m not 

particularly proud of, and that’s exactly why we are going to 

launch this new offensive. 

 

As to who will be there to provide advice and guidance and 

input again, and whom we will be looking to for our 

consultations, is once again the libraries, volunteer groups, 

business, the media, perhaps — we’d like to make this fairly 

broad-ranging — professionals who work in the area. We are 

going to try and involve all who may have an interest to help us 

get this initiative up and running. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I’ve been aware of the literacy problem for 

some time. We’ve been working on it in the Saskatoon Public 

Library for over 10 years. And the libraries are very concerned 

about what role they’re going to play in the development of this 

literacy programs. 

 

Can you tell me where the funding is coming from for the  

literacy programs? What budget is it coming out of? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It comes out of our budget, the $3 

million education outreach fund. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I’m sorry. I didn’t hear the answer. Where did 

you say the funding was coming from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Education budget, education outreach 

fund; $3 million fund. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Education outreach funding. I don’t think any 

money has been designated for the libraries for the literacy 

program. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In an indirect sense, because we 

expect them to be involved in this process. 

 

And I . . . I mean, that’s one of the advantages, I suppose, of the 

amalgamation, is that you have to sort of compartmentalize the 

funding. I mean, if we’re getting to an initiative, and they can 

be involved, and the K to 12 can be involved, the advanced ed, 

— we’re all one team is what I’m saying. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well the libraries are already funding a lot of 

work and a very great number of resources and in a lot of 

subjects. They can’t take on another project like that without 

increased funding. 

 

Will their funding be increased in order to provide all those 

resources for the literacy programs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — All I can say is that I have every 

expectation that the literacy initiative will be adequately funded. 

 

(2145) 

 

Ms. Smart: — That’s not a very satisfactory answer for people 

who are trying to provide their library budgets. Where do you 

intend the resources for the literacy programs to be stored and 

housed and circulated? Where are you going to put them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The volunteer initiative; I suspect we 

would see it broadly dispersed throughout the community. I 

would reiterate again — I mean obviously I want to have some 

consultation with the groups I mentioned before, and that’s 

exactly why I’m having a literacy counsel established, to give 

me some advice, guidance, and input on that. It seems to me 

that might make some sense, but I would look to them for 

direction on that. 

 

Ms. Smart: — That doesn’t mean anything. You haven’t 

answered my question. Where are the resources going to be 

housed? How can you come up with a special literacy counsel 

and toot and blow your horn about literacy as you have done 

since we started talking about education, and when I ask you 

very specifically where’s the funding coming from for the 

literacy resources, and where are they going to be housed, and 

how are they going to be circulated, you talk about volunteers 

doing it. That’s going back to libraries in the 1910s in 

Saskatchewan. That’s not progress. That’s very destructive 

change. 

 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1617 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I want to take the hon. member 

through a logic track here that does not a typical of the NDP. 

On the one hand . . . on the one hand you criticize us if we 

pretend to have all the answers in the dome, in the legislature 

here, and that you criticize if we don’t go out and consult. 

That’s exactly the line of attack that was used by a couple of 

your critic colleagues. 

 

Here what we are clearly saying when it comes to literacy, and 

this is education. There have been a lot of people that have a lot 

of knowledge, including the library system, out there that might 

be of some use to us. Why wouldn’t we engage in their 

expertise. 

 

And I’ll tell you what — you may not want to consult, you may 

think you have all the answers, but I’m telling you, I want to 

avail myself of the knowledge and the expertise that volunteers 

and professionals and libraries and whoever else might have out 

there, as we engage in the literacy initiative in our distance 

education initiative, and I don’t apologize for it. 

 

Ms. Smart: — All I’m asking is if you know what you’re doing 

and where you’re going. And it doesn’t sound as if you do. And 

the thing that is so distressing is that you stand up here and tell 

us that you’ve got all these programs going. When we try to ask 

you about education, oh, you’ve got this literacy program 

going, and you’ve got this distance education program going. 

And then, when we try to find out where it is, it’s smoke and 

mirrors, that’s what it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — You haven’t got it organized. And it’s not good 

enough for the public library system in Saskatchewan for you 

not to have those answers more specifically than you have, 

when you’re cutting the funding on libraries, you’re setting up 

alternate resources centres around the province, you’re talking 

about literacy, and you have no idea how you’re going to get 

going on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, two comments I would 

make here. In the blueprint for the future, Preparing for the 

Year 2000, first couple of paragraphs go this way: 

 

This document provides the policy framework within 

which the government wishes to pursue future 

developments in post-secondary education. 

 

Recognizing that many parties share a partnership in adult 

education, this document does not seek to define a single 

course of action. Rather it establishes some long-range 

policy objectives and goals around which institutions can 

co-ordinate their future plans. 

 

This document also provides plans, provides details, of the 

government’s own plan of action for the next few years. 

 

That is our intent. And to show you that we already are making 

the first steps in some of these new initiatives, I will provide for 

the hon. member our most recently released paper entitled: A 

New Beginning: A Background paper on Adult Illiteracy and 

Undereducation in Saskatchewan. 

 

This is the kind of thing that the literacy council will be — the 

background paper that they will be wresting with. This is our 

first step. I don’t think you can suggest that somehow we don’t 

have these things out of the chute. We do. But we do want to 

take advantage of the expertise that’s out there, and I would ask 

one of the pages to deliver this to the library critic, please. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well, I appreciate receiving that document. I’ve 

been involved in a national organization on literacy for some 

time, and I’m somewhat familiar with the issue. 

 

But the question . . . the part that you’ve just read out of this 

blueprint for the future is just exactly what I’m questioning. 

You say that this document establishes some long-range policy 

objectives and goals around which institutions can co-ordinate 

their future plans. 

 

I don’t see any policies or goals in here around which libraries 

can plan anything. In fact, I’ve heard you say that they 

shouldn’t have any future plans, period. So it’s all rhetoric, 

because you haven’t been able to give me that information. 

 

You say, the document also provides details of the 

government’s own plan of action for the next few years. There 

are no details in here about libraries — none. None whatsoever. 

 

It doesn’t establish long-range policy objectives and goals, 

around which institutions can co-ordinate their future plans, 

unless they have the money to do so. And when I ask you where 

the funding is, you say the funding isn’t there. 

 

Now when we’re talking, we’re talking about . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Three million. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Yes, but how much for libraries? My question 

was: how much for libraries? I heard the three million. But you 

didn’t answer my question. How much of that is for libraries? 

For the literacy resources? Are they going to be the centres for 

the literacy resources, and how much money is going to go to 

the libraries? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said before, I have every reason 

to believe that the funding will be there, and it will be adequate. 

But I’m not going to leap-frog, or pre-guess, or prejudge what 

this Literacy Council may — the guidance and the advice and 

the input that they may have. 

 

And you can ask the question 100 times, and my answer will be 

the same 100 times. Until I have a chance to consult with the 

professionals and the volunteers in all these sectors, I can’t tell 

you. 

 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1618 

 

Ms. Smart: — Did you, did you consult with the regional 

libraries when you brought in that book purchase grant? 

 

Did you consult with them to change their funding from — to 

cut back the $700,000, to do the 10 per cent cut? Did you 

consult with them before you changed it to a book purchase 

grant, if you believe in consultation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The very day the budget came down, I 

had two telephone conference calls with the library system to 

advise them of the book fund, and to share with them our view, 

based on the numbers of letters that they had sent to me as to 

why we had set up this special fund. 

 

As I said earlier, I think, to a person, they were very grateful for 

it. And so if you’re asking me if I was in touch with them as a 

result of that initiative, yes. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I used the word consult. To me consult means 

you talk to somebody before you do something. You don’t 

phone them up on budget day . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — You advised them of what you are doing, and 

you call that consultation. That’s just another example of why I 

find it so difficult to trust the words that you use and why I call 

it so much hype, because you’ve talked over and over again 

about consulting, and you don’t consult, you don’t know the 

meaning of the word, if that’s your description of consultation. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hang in there, Anne. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Oh, I will. Don’t’ worry. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Can we have some order in 

here so we can finish off the evening in good style. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you. I have another question that’s a 

concern to many of the librarians. I want to know whether you 

have any intention of amalgamating the school libraries with the 

public libraries, particularly in the rural areas. Is that part of 

your plans? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 

 

Ms. Smart: — So you will not. There is no consideration of 

amalgamating school and public libraries? Have you been given 

more information that you want to share with me? 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Okay. The next question . . . So you go on 

record as saying that you have no intention now, or in the 

future, of combining the small public libraries with the school 

libraries in the rural areas? You will not do that? Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Your observation is correct. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I’m sorry, I didn’t hear that response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Your observation is correct. What I 

was checking with my official is . . . I think in one of the 

northern libraries we have a relationship established with one of 

the schools. I was trying to be as correct as possible in my 

answer to you. 

 

Ms. Smart: — That’s why I talked about the regional libraries 

and the rural libraries. I know the difference between those 

libraries and the libraries in the North. 

 

I have another question that’s of great concern to the libraries. 

Are you intending now, or in the future, to bring forth user fees 

for using the public libraries in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I’d like to call for order. 

 

Ms. Smart: — So you’re not going to install library user fees, 

and you’re not going to combine school and public libraries . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, it’s okay. 

 

I have another question for you, and this regards the school 

libraries. Can you tell me how many teacher/librarian positions 

have been eliminated as a result of the provincial funding cuts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As far as we’re . . . we’re not aware of 

any. And as the hon. member would note, given the autonomy 

of local boards, it’s up to them to decide on the disposition of 

their staffing. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Are you saying then, Mr. Minister — there was 

an article in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald regarding the 

teacher/librarians. 

 

Saskatchewan School Library Association president said 

countless teacher/librarian positions, including her own, 

has been eliminated as a result of provincial funding cuts 

to school libraries. 

 

. . . the beginning of April in this year, school districts 

learned that in order to save money the provincial 

government is stretching its school library funding over 10 

years instead of five years, as it has done in the past. 

 

What funding was that that was stretched over 10 years instead 

of five years, and did it have anything to do with the libraries in 

the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The education development fund, the 

dollars were intact at 150 million, but rather than being spent 

over five years, we’ll now spend it over a 10-year period, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Ms. Smart: — So as the article points out then, it has to go 

twice as far and spread very thin. 

 

In some schools the entire library program has been cut back or 

abolished. Do you call that supporting the library resources 

centres? 

 

  



 

August 6, 1987 

1619 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — They didn’t hear the question. I am 

aware of no circumstances such as that, and I doubt that any 

board of education would be so irresponsible as to abolish their 

library. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 

 


