


















































July 6, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

July 6, 1987 
 

971 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I’d like to turn to the question of chemicals. There’s been a great 
deal of concern expressed in media and a great deal of attention 
paid and focused on the hazards of chemicals, especially as these 
apply to agriculture and to industry. But I would like to turn to 
the use of chemicals as far as these are used in the home, 
particularly in people’s gardens. You will know that there is a 
proliferation of chemicals for home use and a visit to any home 
garden will confirm an array of products for home use. 
 
The question I have is: is your department concerned about the 
potential health and environmental implications that result from 
their use by Saskatchewan people in their homes and gardens? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t have a program to deal with that 
type of chemicals, really. They’re 
 
licensed by the companies — many of the agricultural-type of 
chemicals that are used in gardens are licensed by the federal 
department, but Saskatchewan basically has no program covering 
that kind of chemical. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I can appreciate that you have no program 
and certainly no program is indicated in your estimates or any of 
the previous annual reports. My question is: does your 
department or you have a concern about the proliferation of these 
chemicals and their use by Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There’s been no particular accidents or 
anything brought forward that would indicate that we should have 
a concern. If people follow the recommendations on the label of 
product, usually there is no problem. If people are careless, of 
course you could get into difficulty 
with anything. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. There’s 
also advertisements on cigarette packages, yet that doesn’t deter 
governments from trying to, in addition to that, encourage the 
public to become aware of those kinds of concerns that are posed 
and the health risks that are posed by the use of that particular 
product. 
 
I can appreciate that usually there is no problem, but on the other 
had one can appreciate that not all of the population are as literate 
as we would like them to be. Not all the population, including 
young children, will necessarily be aware of the harmful effects, 
notwithstanding the best efforts of parents to try and keep young 
children and indeed pets away from areas where chemicals may 
have been applied. 
 
So the question is: will your department be looking at that  

type of concern? Even though you way that usually it’s not a 
problem, is this something that your department might fruitfully 
explore and fruitfully look at in terms of educating and in terms 
of trying to make Saskatchewan people more aware of this kind 
of potential problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The licensing of pesticides and chemicals of 
that nature is strictly under the federal programs and our 
department would basically have no jurisdiction to step in. It 
would be the federal legislation that would apply. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I can 
appreciate that departments such as the federal Department of 
Agriculture will control certain products through their Pest 
Control Products Act. We all know that, at least from events in 
the last number of years, that that is not always a foolproof or 
sure method to guard against abuse — and also in terms of 
products coming on to the market that are less than acceptable 
from a health or environmental point of view. And I can 
appreciate what you say that this in some instances are matters of 
other jurisdiction. The question I have again: is this a matter of 
concern? Is the potential problem a matter of concern to you and 
departmental officials? I’m not asking you about whose strict 
responsibility comes into play here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s not always a matter of whether or not 
I’m concerned. Of course I’m concerned if somebody is injured 
or is ill because of the effects of some chemical that’s being 
stored in a home. 
 
The legislation is fairly clear in the areas of jurisdiction that we 
have as a province and the areas that strictly fall under federal 
jurisdiction. Most of the types of chemicals that you described are 
licensed by the federal legislation, and for that reason we really 
have no jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, surely it would be within 
the purview of provincial powers to take upon itself the attitude 
that certain chemicals pose environmental risk or health hazards 
of the population, and therefore, we see a need in this context to 
inform, to educate the public about these potential hazards. 
 
Certainly that is something that, given our constitution, given the 
breakdown of powers between the federal government and 
provincial government, surely there is room there for a provincial 
jurisdiction to move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that much of the education that is 
needed is provided by the manufacturer of the product. The 
product is licensed by the federal government, and the 
educational responsibility then, I believe, falls with the federal 
government and with the manufacturer of the product to see that 
people using it are well enough aware of the hazards that it 
presents — that when they handle the product, they do it wisely. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligan: — Mr. Minister, what I hear you saying is 
that notwithstanding any potential problems, notwithstanding any 
concerns that you may have, you’re going to wash your hands of 
this business — that it’s something that you’re satisfied to leave 
in the hands of the  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

972 
 

federal government or the manufacturers. 
 
I, for one, am less than satisfied with the performance of the 
federal government when it comes to ensuring that the chemical 
products that are put on the market are in fact products that 
should be used, whether it’s in industry or agriculture. 
 
The question, I guess, really is — it’s not a matter of the specific 
products, but it’s more one of use of these products by people, 
and it’s more one of education and information. And I note that in 
your budget there is moneys for communications, and I know that 
from time to time that you expend moneys to alert the public 
about potential environmental problems. 
 
Given that context, is it not appropriate for your department to be 
responding in the light of this, this type of concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Perhaps one area that we have responded to, 
dealing with chemicals, is our institutional chemical collection 
program which does go into schools, hospitals, labs at universities 
— all of these different places — and removes chemicals that are 
dangerous and disposes of them. So that program is one area 
where we have been involved. 
 
If there’s indication that there is some really dangerous product 
that’s been available that should not be, then of course we could 
take action something like we did in this case. But we haven’t 
been getting any outcry from the general public that there is a 
major concern with any of the agricultural type of chemicals that 
are being used in gardens and lawns and things of that nature, at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — What you’re saying, Mr. Minister, that in 
a very peripheral way you do begin to deal with this kind of 
problem. My question is: if you deal with it in a peripheral way, 
notwithstanding the earlier comments that you had about 
jurisdictions and whether it’s appropriate for a province, is this 
not an area of concern that your department should be 
monitoring, and if necessary, be dealing with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s very difficult to be involved in 
everything that’s happening within the province related to 
chemicals. There are so many different kinds of chemicals 
produced today by many, many manufacturers. Each one of those 
is required to go through a licensing and inspection period to 
prove that it’s a product that’s useful on the market and one that 
is clearly identified in the manner and the quantities that it can be 
used in. For us to even attempt to be involved in any great way 
would be extremely costly and, in most cases, beyond the 
jurisdiction that our legislation provides. We would be tramping 
on the toes of the federal department. 
 
And I think, if you have a specific product in mind, or specific 
products, we would be pleased to hear what products they are, 
and perhaps we can intervene at the federal level to have them 
dealt with. But we aren’t getting that kind of reaction — people 
voicing an opinion that the products are there and that they should 
be taken off the market, or anything of that nature. 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — There are any number of products, Mr. 
Minister, that provide warnings because of potential hazards and 
so on. The question is not the products per se. The question here 
is one of use, and more appropriately, one of abuse. 
 
The question I have is that even though your department is not 
now involved, and you say that you find it impossible to be aware 
of everything that’s going on in the province — and I would 
suggest even less aware if this budget and your estimates pass 
given that you are spending less money now than you were in the 
past — to what extent is your department, even in a minor way or 
in a beginning way, beginning to monitor the situation? That is to 
say, do you have contacts with doctors throughout the province? 
Do you have contacts with the health department. 
 
I know that some of these things are a concern for those with 
respiratory illnesses. I read here from an article in the Prince 
Albert Daily Herald and is date-lined Regina. It says: 
 
An Alberta couple visited 17 doctors before finding out their 
weakness and headaches had been caused by a pesticide sprayed 
on an apple tree, a symposium on family medicine was told. 
 
And the chairman of the department of community health at the 
University of Alberta used this story to illustrate that physicians 
and members of the public are generally unaware of the potency 
of any pesticides being used in Canada. 
 
Another doctor, a Dr. Howard Hopkins, of Regina, told the 
symposium that physicians should recognise that every patient is a 
candidate for occupational health problems. Housewives, for 
example, could be at risk from a wide variety of household 
cleaners, other chemicals, and even dust in the air. Dr. Hopkins 
urged physicians to check respiratory problems with special care. 
 
I’m just wondering — following that up — has your department 
had any discussions with the Department of Health, or God 
knows, even with the federal departments about the potential for 
problems in this area. And again, given the proliferation as you 
admit of these types of chemicals for home use, is your 
department beginning to liaise with those departments with a view 
to identifying whether or not health problems are being exhibited 
to physicians and the like with the view to understanding and 
perhaps then following up on the problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the type of chemicals you’re speaking 
of in this instance would likely be more under the Department of 
Health. They have a toxicology lab within the Department of 
Health and they do have some expertise in that area. Our 
department really doesn’t have. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I can appreciate, Mr. Minister, that various 
departments have various jurisdictions, and I can appreciate that 
the federal government will have toxicology labs, the Department 
of Health may well have toxicology labs, but it’s more than a 
question of dealing  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

973 
 

with specific chemicals. It’s a question of the use of these 
chemicals, and again, the abuse of those chemicals as they’re 
applied in people’s yards and in their gardens. And the question I 
have: do you have any information at all to suggest that this may 
be a nascent problem and one that we should be dealing with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think we’re all aware that there is some 
problem with the handling of chemicals, but as I indicated to you 
before, the licensing is federal. The responsibility to put clear 
directions on the containers so that the individuals using the 
product have the opportunity to read and beware of the dangers 
and beware of all the methods of handling and use, are also 
enforced by the federal government. And I think the chemical 
companies do a reasonably good job of providing that kind of 
information to the public. 
 
I don’t know how many chemicals the hon. member purchases, 
but I can tell you in my lifetime I have purchased thousands of 
pails of chemical. So I know that every chemical comes with a 
brochure that explains it reasonably well. 
 
(1915) 
 
Whether we could do better by the type of advertising the 
department can do, I’m not sure. We would have to come down to 
specific chemicals, specific cases before I could really give you an 
answer that might even begin to deal with the issue that you’re 
raising. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I can certainly appreciate 
that you’re a careful and exacting person and therefore would tend 
to use chemicals in a careful and exacting way. I guess the 
concern, again, I have is about potential for abuse and a potential 
for a problem and whether or not your department knows anything 
about this whole area or is moving in any way to acquaint 
themselves with what might be a potential problem or a real 
problem. 
 
And again the question I have: is there not some role for your 
department here? Is there not some merit in your department 
undertaking to acquaint themselves with the use of chemicals in 
people’s homes, in their gardens and lawns to establish very 
clearly that there is no cause for concern? On the other hand, if 
there is some cause for concern, to begin discussions with other 
departments such as health or Agriculture Canada so that jointly, 
various departments, various jurisdictions, can get together to 
begin to deal with this type of situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We haven’t as a department, been dealing 
directly with this kind of a chemical issue. But I can tell you that 
the people within the Department of Environment are very 
conscious of the effects of chemicals on the environment. All of 
them are home owners, people who use products in their gardens 
and in their homes the same as you do. So yes, they are very 
aware. 
 
And some products have raised concern. I would say that 2,4-D 
and 2,4,5-T over the last few years has raised considerable 
concern. But as it’s been followed through, the chain of events 
indicate that many of the concerns  

that were being raised were not all that valid once they were 
followed to their conclusions. 
 
So yes, my department’s aware. But to move in and take charge 
and take the responsibility and spend our taxpayers’ dollars on 
items that really are a federal responsibility, I don’t think is quite 
proper. If we find that the federal government is abdicating its 
responsibility, then we will make every effort to see that they play 
their role, but I don’t think it’s proper for us to get involved until 
that stage. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, leadership is simply more 
than cutting back in an aspect of departmental operations and 
trying to defend it in the House. Leadership is also beginning to 
recognise problems in our society and taking some leadership to 
deal with those problems. And I would suggest in this respect that 
where you say that, well it’s the federal government’s 
responsibility, provides very little in the way of leadership for the 
people of this province. You’re talking about, well, we don’t want 
to get the government to be spending any money in these times 
and so on, on problems. 
 
I’m not suggesting that you spend a great deal of money. I’m 
simply suggesting that your departmental officials start to become 
educated and informed in a systematic way about the use and the 
abuse of these types of chemicals. Begin to monitor the situation, 
and if necessary develop the liaisons with the Department of 
Health and the federal departments, those that are concerned, so as 
to understand about this particular problem, and then, if necessary, 
encourage those that have more direct responsibilities to become 
involved. 
 
My sense is that it’s not a matter of products or labelling; it’s a 
question of use and abuse. And it’s one that, either in terms of heal 
education or environmental communication, environmental 
education, is one that the province should be dealing with. And 
that’s what I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I have a follow-up question based on a comment 
that you made, Mr. Minister. You said that you wouldn’t take note 
of a concern about the environment and garden pesticides, yard 
pesticides, unless there was a general outcry from the public. You 
said there’s been no general outcry in this area. I was wondering 
what you would think was a general outcry since there’s been a lot 
of statements made lately about concerns about cut-backs in 
health, and there’s been a massive demonstration in Regina just 
lately. I’m wondering what you would consider a general outcry 
before you would take notice of an issue like this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Would the hon. member be indicating to me 
that the big demonstration here was on environmental concern 
about chemicals? I doubt it very much. 
 
Ms. Smart: — That wasn’t my question. My question was, what 
is your definition of a general outcry? I know there’s many people 
concerned about the spraying of pesticides in their backyards 
coming from other homes and city blocks, and also out in the rural 
areas in terms of what  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

974 
 

other farmers are using on their fields. And my question is . . . My 
comment is one of concern about taking leadership as Minister of 
Environment. And my question is, if you’re not going to take 
leadership unless there’s a general outcry, what is your definition 
of a general outcry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If we start to hear from people with expertise 
in the area of agricultural chemicals that there is a serious problem 
with any given chemical, of course, we’ll take action. And it isn’t 
he numbers of people that would generate that, it would be more 
the outcry from people with a background in the chemical area 
that would understand what the real problem is. And is we start to 
hear that, of course we’ll take action. 
 
If there seems to be a number of people using a given chemical 
that are ill because of it, then we would respond, either through my 
department or the Department of Health. But to say that on just a 
whim . . . You say, generally overall there’s a concern about 
chemical. Of course there is. But you don’t expect the government 
to jump up and ban all chemicals, I hope. That’s not the way 
governments operate, and I don’t think it’s proper that we should. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have several 
questions along this line of questioning initiated by the member 
from Regina Victoria. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said that, in fact, in dealing with the whole 
question of chemicals and their application and use in 
Saskatchewan, it was outside basically the purview of the 
provincial government to deal with it. If that is the case, sir, how 
was it then that in New Brunswick, for example, the chemical 
2,4-D and new compounds of 2,4-D and their use is banned by the 
province of New Brunswick precisely because of concerns raised 
over the effects — long-term effects — of the application of that 
chemical. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m afraid I can’t speak for New Brunswick. I 
know that when the suggestion was made that 2,4-D be taken off 
the market, the letters that we got in this province were exactly on 
the opposite side of the fence. People indicated to us that 2,4-D is 
a very valuable product to them, has done a good job. They don’t 
see that they’ve had any serious effects from it. And the outcry 
that we were receiving was that the government should not ban it 
but rather allow them to continue to use it until a better product 
was made available. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You will admit, however, Mr. Minister, that in fact 
that the control and regulation of a chemical like 2,4-D is in fact 
within the purview of the provincial Department of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry. There was too much talking. I 
didn’t catch your question. Could the member repeat it? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Wee I can appreciate your speaking with your 
deputy minister. The question is a political question, quite frankly, 
and the answer doesn’t require consultation with the officials. 
Very simply it’s like: is it or is it not within the scope of the 
Department of the Environment of the province of Saskatchewan 
to deal with chemicals like  

2,4-D — and I use that as an example because of what’s happened 
in Ontario and what’s happened in New Brunswick — that, in 
fact, it’s true that your department can control the use of these 
kinds of chemicals in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The licensing of pesticides like 2,4-D are 
really under the federal government, the jurisdiction of the federal 
government, and if we were to begin to address 2,4-D and whether 
or not we should allow it here, it would more properly be dealt 
with the by our Department of Agriculture dealing with the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Lyons: —Well, Mr. Minister, that’s not the question. The 
question that the member for Regina Victoria posed and that I’m 
posing now is this: is it within or is it not within the scope of the 
Department of Environment to control the uses of chemicals like 
2,4-D? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My answer would still be the same, that it 
would be within the Department of Agriculture and its dealings 
with the federal department. Those chemicals are not handled or 
given licence by the Department of the Environment. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well could the minister explain to us then, please, 
how it is that the Department of the Environment in New 
Brunswick, dealing with the same chemical, was able to exercise 
some leadership in that area in regards to protecting the people of 
New Brunswick from a known health hazard in controlling the use 
and the application of 2,4-D? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pin him down, Herb. Make him say he’s 
against the use of 2,4-D. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, I’m still wondering how the member 
feels about the use of 2,4-D and whether or not he is actually 
opposed to the use of it. 
 
But in response to your question, in New Brunswick the product 
2,4-D would be licensed by the Department of Environment — the 
use of it. Not here. Here, the offer to use it in this province comes 
through the Department of Agriculture. 
 
So as you may be or may be not aware, different provinces 
organise their departments differently. New Brunswick is entirely 
different than ours, and the Department of Environment has no 
authority to do what you’re asking it to do. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Just to make clear, when you’re referring to the 
Department of Environment, you’re referring to the provincial 
Department of Environment. Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s the department I speak for; I don’t 
speak for any other. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — The Department of Agriculture that you’re 
referring to is the provincial Department of Agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, it’s both provincial and federal. The 
provincial has some authorities; the federal has the actual licensing 
effect on the chemical 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

975 
 

Mr. Lyons: — So you’re saying that under any existing 
regulations that are administered by your department, you are not 
able to control the use of chemicals, whether there’d be 
agricultural chemicals or hazardous chemicals of some kind. 
You’re saying that it’s not within the role of the Department of 
Environment to deal with those chemicals. Let’s just say 
agricultural chemicals, first. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Agricultural chemicals will fall under the 
purview of the Department of Agriculture. When it came to the 
chemicals used in the schools, and in the laboratories at the 
universities, and in the hospitals, our department has been 
involved but it’s in a consultative and co-operative relationship 
with the other departments where we have set up a method of 
collecting and disposing of many of those chemicals. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, there has been a great deal of 
debate and discussion throughout North America on the use of 
agricultural chemicals and their spreading use — a debate which 
has been brought home to a lot of people in Saskatchewan through 
their own use, both through personal contact with the chemical 
and adverse health reactions, but also in terms of the kind of 
pricing structure that the chemical companies have practised 
throughout North America in supplying farm chemicals. 
 
Have you, as the Minister of the Environment, dealt with, or made 
representations to, or developed a relationship with the 
Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture in relationship to the use 
of agricultural chemicals in Saskatchewan? Have you or any of 
your officials in fact met with to discuss some of the concerns and 
health hazards raised with members of the Department of 
Agriculture? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Through the Canadian Council of Resource 
and Environment Ministers there is an ongoing discussion with the 
federal government and with the governments across Canada 
dealing with the agricultural chemicals and with all chemicals. 
And the ongoing discussion continues. As concerns arise, they 
come forward, they’re dealt with, and they disappear. So I think 
we do have ongoing relationships, in that manner, by the ministers 
and the staff at various levels within the department of 
Environment dealing with Agriculture Canada and provincial 
departments of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, considering that would be a 
fair bit easier for you to deal with the Saskatchewan minister in 
charge of the Department of Agriculture, have you or any of your 
officials in the Department of Environment dealt directly with the 
Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture and broached the whole 
subject of the use and continuing use of agricultural chemicals like 
2,4-D and any related associated health hazards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There is a provincial committee between the 
Department of Environment, the Department of Health, and the 
Department of Agriculture that meet periodically to discuss the 
agricultural chemical issue within the province. 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, has that committee dealt with 
specifically the issue of the 2,4-D usage in Saskatchewan, 
particularly in light of the University of Kansas studies which 
show that, in fact, farmers who use 2,4-D may, and I repeat may 
— although the study seems to not suggest but will — in fact have 
a higher incidence of non-lymphatic cancers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes the committee has had meetings and 
have dealt with 2,4-D. 
 
It’s interesting that you should bring the Kansas study. You know, 
the Kansas study itself is not conclusive. The Department of 
Agriculture in Ontario banned 2,4-D for a short time. And then as 
further studies took place, they found that the evidence given in 
the Kansas study was not supportable, and they have re-instituted 
the use of 2,4-D in Ontario. So it’s a difficult one to come to grips 
with because the studies are not conclusive. 
 
Mr. Lyons — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not just relying on the 
University of Kansas study in this regard. Are you aware of a 
study dealing with 2,4-D done by the toxicology centre which 
your department funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, I’m aware of it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Good. Perhaps you’d like to enlighten us as to the 
contents of that study and some of the conclusions it’s reached in 
regard to the use of 2,4-D. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The toxicology centre here did not support 
the Kansas study, and they do not recommend that we ban the use 
of 2,4-D here at this time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask you whether it 
supported the Kansas study. I asked you if you would, in fact, put 
forward what the findings were and tell us that, in fact. Tell us 
what the findings were of that study. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the member would be probably better 
advised to ask the toxicology centre for a copy of the study. I’m 
sure they’d make it available to them. 
 
Though we do provide a grant to that toxicology centre, by no way 
does it fall under my purview to administer the toxicology centre. 
It operates on the university campus in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you said you were aware of the 
study. Have you read the study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I wouldn’t say that I’ve read all of it; I’ve 
read parts of it. I’ve probably read the executive summary part of 
it as much as anything else. I didn’t read it all. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, are you aware that what that 
study says in fact, on the one hand, while it doesn’t come out and 
openly say that the University of Kansas study on the use of 2,4-D 
is right, it also doesn’t deny — it doesn’t deny it. And in fact what 
it says . . . And isn’t it true that what it says is that short-term 
properly handled use of 2,4-D will not cause long-term toxic 
effect, but in fact that the toxicology centre at the University of 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

976 
 

Saskatchewan would not say that the long-term use of 2,4-D 
would not produce long-term effects? In fact, exactly the opposite 
was their conclusion, they would specifically not relate to the 
effects of the long-term use of 2,4-D. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think our Saskatchewan toxicology centre is 
too new to be giving long-term predictions of the effects of 2,4-D. 
They haven’t had the opportunity to do that kind of study at this 
point. 
 
The Ontario government and the federal government have both 
done significantly large studies on 2,4-D and neither one at this 
time are recommending the banning of 2,4-D. So I think that 
we’re wise to wait and watch and let the research continue until it 
does come with some more conclusive evidence as to which way 
we should go. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m very interested in the fact that 
you seem to be taking the advice of the federal Department of 
Agriculture. I think it’s very important for people in the province 
to realise that the federal Department of Agriculture, which 
controls the use of farm chemicals, and agricultural chemicals, has 
within it a number of expert committees. These expert 
committees, in fact, in the use of farm chemicals, are dominated 
by none other than the chemical manufacturers, the chemical 
manufacturers which have a stake in the continued long-term use 
of agricultural chemicals, whether it’s 2,4-D or malathion or 
Decis, or whatever, whatever particular chemical you want to deal 
with. And that in fact there is no definitive long-term-use studies 
of agricultural chemicals in Canada done by any independent body 
that is not associated with any of the farm and agricultural 
chemical companies. 
 
But what is interesting, Mr. Minister, is that you haven’t quoted 
from the federal Environment department and its stand on the use 
of farm chemicals. And the federal Department of the 
Environment is much less sure, is much less sure of the continuing 
use of agricultural use of chemicals in this country. 
 
First of all, the Minister for the Environment, Mr. Tom McMillan, 
in fact has introduced an environmental protect Act which deals or 
tries to deal with in fact what has been one of the major failings of 
the Department of Agriculture, and that’s the licensing, 
registration, and testing of farm chemicals over the past number of 
years. According to Mr. McMillan, the federal Minister of the 
Environment, there are literally tens of thousands of chemicals at 
use in Canada which have not been registered or have not gone 
through a long-term independent test, and have in fact, not gone 
through the kind of testing procedure which you seem to imply 
that all chemicals . . . Won’t you admit that, in fact, there has been 
a failing on behalf of the Canadian government in dealing with the 
registration and testing of chemicals for use in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member starts out by saying that the 
committee at the federal level have been dominated by the 
chemical companies. The chemical companies have been 
involved, and, I think, a good portion of their involvement has 
been in the financial side, to provide funds so that the research 
goes forward. I  

hope that the hon. member isn’t indicating that the scientists who 
are doing the research are being bought off by the chemical 
companies. If that’s his thinking, I think he’s got a lot of 
apologising to do to some of our fine researchers. 
 
The chemical companies and the federal government would like to 
see far more research done. Research is not a low-cost area to 
work in. It’s very high-cost, and before you can make definitive 
decisions on the effects of chemicals, you have to have a long 
period of time elapse to watch and study and see what the 
long-term effects are. 
 
I don’t believe that you would find hundreds of chemicals on the 
market that have not been licensed. Most chemicals that I’m aware 
of have had some licensing before they come on the market. If the 
member has a list of chemicals that are not licensed, I’d certainly 
like to see it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re taking issue with the 
federal Minister of the Environment in this regard and in regards 
to those chemicals, the tens of thousands — not just hundreds, but 
tens of thousands, using Mr. McMillan’s own words — of 
chemicals, which have been introduced into Canada which have 
not been through proper testing procedures and have not had 
proper registration. 
 
I wonder, sir, when you say that the chemical companies haven’t 
been involved in buying off any of the testing laboratories 
involved, are you familiar with the I.B.T. affair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I’m not. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Let me enlighten you. It was the I.B.T. 
Laboratories, a group of laboratories in the United States, 
supposedly, independent and supposedly be able to provide 
independent testing for chemicals that were going to be introduced 
into the American and Canadian market. 
 
They were a laboratory which, in fact, Canadian firms used to try 
to give supposed independent testing. The I.B.T. affair turned into 
a scandal in the sense that when the Department of the 
Environment and other departments in the federal government 
checked into the background of this laboratory found, in fact, that 
they were cooking the books and that the methodologies that they 
were using to test the chemicals which were introduced into 
Canada that had been tested in this manner didn’t in fact have the 
kind of background of testing that they supposedly had. 
 
But I take issue, and I want you to respond to this concern: the 
federal government, your federal Department of the Environment 
says there is a problem with the registration and testing of 
chemicals in Canada and there has been. There has been. Do you 
agree with that assessment of Mr. McMillan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not sure of the basis for Mr. McMillan’s 
comments. He has the right to speak his mind as he sees things. I 
don’t have the background  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

977 
 

information of what he is dealing with there. If the concern is 
raised here, we will deal with it. But if he wants to make a 
judgement and make a statement like that, that’s entirely his 
statement. I would have no way of backing it up. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, are you familiar with the 
proposed new environmental protection Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Next question: have you read it? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — The member from Weyburn seems to be 
anticipating this question. He’s doing a good job for not being a 
lawyer but a veterinarian. I guess the next question is this: have 
you been briefed on the environmental protection Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have, through our department, been 
through the environmental protection act and have recommended 
some changes to it over the period of the development of the Act. 
The deputy minister has been at a number of meetings in Toronto 
and other places dealing with that piece of legislation. So we have 
been quite involved in it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Then you will please to tell the House what your 
activities were in regards to that Act, what were the amendments 
that you suggested, and why, in fact, why was that Act brought 
forward? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My department has done considerable work, 
along with the departments across Canada, and as they met, 
they’ve jointly and individually put forward proposals for 
amendments and change. That’s a very major Act, and for me to 
even hope to cope with that kind of amendments and to tell you all 
the things that my department has dealt with would be 
unreasonable, I think, in the setting that we’re going through. 
 
The legislation has had first reading only. It’s sitting on the order 
paper and will likely have many more amendments before it goes 
much further in the House. Our staff will continue to work and 
monitor and try and influence change in areas where they would 
find concern. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder could you tell us 
how many amendments were proposed to the Act by the 
provincial Department of the Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I wouldn’t even attempt to answer that 
question. There are many, but I couldn’t begin to tell you how 
many. That would be a most difficult thing. I don’t think anybody 
has been keeping a record of how many changes. They’ve 
proposed change, and as the Act changes, then they review again 
and again until across Canada the departments of Environment 
feel that we’re on the right track. And they will be continuing to 
work on it. 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Well I don’t think that answer is good enough, Mr. 
Minister, with due respect. Point of facts is, is that the department 
obviously had some kind of response paper presented tot he 
proposed new environmental protection Act. In that response 
paper there were amendments laid out or concerns laid out. Would 
you tell us how many amendments and in what areas were the 
concerns expressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Many of the discussions took place long 
before my time here, and the deputy says he wouldn’t even 
attempt to try and indicate how many different proposals were put 
forward. He’s been working with it, but there were many, many 
proposals for change over the period of development of that Act. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — well given that your deputy seems to be running 
the show, perhaps your deputy would be prepared to table all the 
response papers presented by the department in response to the 
proposed environmental protection Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There are consultations and discussions and 
proposals made to another level of government. I don’t believe 
that there’s any compulsion on me to table that kind of 
information here in this House. Much of it’s internal working 
documents of a department, and they’re going to stay that way. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well I’d like to know what you’re tying to hide, 
quite frankly. I asked you a specific question: how many 
amendments to the new proposed environmental protection Act 
were put forward by the provincial Department of Environment. 
that’s easy. 
 
If you have documents there, and you say that the deputy minister 
has been involved with this process, I mean, he can surely have 
some notion as to (a) the areas that he put forward proposals, and 
(b) the number of proposals put forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ve answered your question several times, 
and I’ve told you that I have no way of knowing how many, and 
that I don’t propose to give you an answer to that because I’m not 
sure of it. Any answer I would give would only be a haphazard 
guess, and I don’t believe in going that way. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. Let’s deal with it this way. Did you, or your 
department, or any official in your department, now or prior to you 
becoming the Minister of Environment, put forward any 
suggestions or proposals to the Minister of the Environment, the 
federal Minister of the Environment, as to the registration of 
chemicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think that my department would be 
the agency that normally would deal with that. That would more 
properly be dealt with by our Department of Agriculture, and they 
have had opportunity to be involved if they wished. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, given that the proposed 
environmental Act deals to the main with the whole question of 
licensing, registering chemicals, it seems to me that it’s a fairly 
germane question to ask the department: did your department — 
yes of no? — put  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

978 
 

forward any suggestions or proposals to the Minister of the 
Environment, the federal Minister of the Environment, as to the 
registration of chemicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think that my department would be 
the agency that normally would deal with that. That would more 
properly be dealt with by our Department of Agriculture, and they 
have had opportunity to be involved if they wished. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, given that the proposed 
environmental Act deals to the main with the whole question of 
licensing, registering chemicals, it seems to me that it’s a fairly 
germane question to ask the department: did your department — 
yes or no? — put forward any suggestions or proposals in regards 
to the licensing of chemicals? surely the deputy minister knows 
that if you don’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The registration of agricultural chemicals will 
still fall under the pesticide control Act, even though there is a new 
environmental Act being put in place. The new Act can only deal 
with that issue in so far as the federal legislation allows, and that’s 
a very limited area that they can get involved in. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well that’s not the question I asked. I asked 
specifically: did the Department of Environment put forward 
suggestions or proposals to the federal Minister of the 
Environment as to the registration of chemicals, agricultural or 
non-agricultural? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the proposals that were put 
forward by the different governments across Canada were put 
forward at a meeting of the Canadian Council of Resource and 
Environment Ministers. They wouldn’t be put forward specifically 
by any one province. They were put forward as a group and 
approved as a group in a meeting in Toronto, I believe. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Did the Department of Environment for the 
province of Saskatchewan take to the council of ministers of the 
Environment any proposals or suggestions in response to the 
proposed environmental protection Act regarding the registration 
of chemicals, agricultural or non-agricultural? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The simple answer would be yes. But the 
areas . . . I am not going to provide that kind of back-up paper to 
support the answer. The simple answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Would you please, then, provide the list of areas 
which the proposals dealt with. Since you say that it did deal with 
the proposals, will you now give us a list of those proposals and 
suggestions and what areas they covered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Those would have been part of the overall 
discussions held by all the governments across Canada. No, we 
will not provide that information. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m not asking, Mr. Minister, for a list of things 
discussed by Ontario or the Yukon or Prince Edward Island or 
anywhere else. I want to know what the position of the 
Department of the Environment for the  

province of Saskatchewan was at those meetings in regards to the 
new — the proposed new environmental protection Act. I’m 
asking you as the Minister of the Environment for Saskatchewan 
to put forward to the House what was Saskatchewan’s position in 
regards to that proposed environmental Act. It seems to be a fairly 
straightforward question. What are you trying to hide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think it was a very straightforward question 
and I think I gave a very straightforward answer. No, I’m not 
going to provide that information. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, will you tell, will you please tell the people 
of Saskatchewan why you won’t answer, why you won’t answer? 
What are you trying to hide? What is wrong with putting forward 
the position of the Department of the Environment? Is it because 
you didn’t have a position there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — What we had was working documents that 
were used at meetings where the governments across Canada met 
and where there are many, many changes occur, as the day 
proceeds. And no, I’m not going to provide that kind of 
information because it would not really be the kind of information 
that would give you significant answers even if I did, and I don’t 
intend to provide it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. I can go, Mr. Minister, I can go and get the 
Act and the proposed new Act and start with clause A and ask 
whether or not the Department of the Environment for 
Saskatchewan is in favour or opposed to that. And I may have to 
do that and I will do that it that’s what is required. I’m asking you 
a fairly straightforward question. Let’s deal with the question on 
this matter. Is it the position of Saskatchewan Environment that 
increased registration of chemicals is necessary in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not sure what the hon. member means by 
increased registration. That could mean more chemicals, wider 
range of chemicals, register them more often. I’m not just sure 
what you mean when you say increased. 
 
I don’t believe that the whole process of the Canadian 
environmental Act is really the responsibility of my department. 
The questions that you’re raising possibly should be answered in 
the federal House. But that legislation is not my legislation, it’s 
federal legislation. And I don’t feel the responsibility is mine to try 
and answer the questions that the members ask. 
 
Mr. Lyons: —- I don’t believe it. I don’t believe what you said 
that somehow I should be going to Ottawa to ask the federal 
government what the position of the Saskatchewan Department of 
the environment is in regards to the new proposed environmental 
protection Act. That’s just what you said. That’s what you said. 
And you know what happens if I went to Ottawa? They’d said go 
on back and ask the Minister of the Environment. But he probably 
can’t tell you, because the people in Ottawa probably know better 
what Saskatchewan’s position is in regards to the environmental 
protection Act than you do, with all due respect. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, why is it you will not tell the  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

979 
 

people of Saskatchewan what Saskatchewan’s position was when 
it comes to drawing up an important piece of legislation like the 
environmental protection Act. When I ask for increased 
registration, I’m asking you specifically in terms of using the 
language of the Bill itself. And that means, and that means 
tightening up registration procedures for chemicals. 
 
Let’s ask another question, though, that the Act deals with. Is it the 
position of Saskatchewan, within response to the environmental 
protection Act, the proposed environmental protection act, the 
proposed environmental protection act, that there should be some 
method of banning of export of sales of chemicals, agricultural or 
non-agricultural, to offshore countries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think a question like that is so broad and so 
vague that there really is not answer to be given to it. I doubt it the 
hon. member could give an answer to it, and I certainly don’t 
intend to. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — The answer is very simply, in response to the 
environmental protection Act, I personally support that kind of 
initiative. And that’s a very easy, very easy answer to give, 
because I’ve read the Act and I’ve had wiggly-wiggly that you’re 
doing here that you haven’t, and that you’re trying to squiggle out 
of putting forward the position of the Department of Environment, 
or your own political position, because you haven’t dealt with in a 
serious manner. 
 
I’m asking you because one of the crucial elements of that Act is 
for the export of hazardous chemicals to offshore countries will be 
controlled by that Act. Does the Saskatchewan Department of 
Environment and you as Environment minister support that federal 
initiative? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s a federal initiative. It’ll be interesting 
to see as the Bill progresses through the House whether or not 
that’s exactly the interpretation that’s left if the Act. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’ve been saying here that 
your department has had lots and lots of input into the Act. You 
say you’ve had a long-term relationship with developing that Act, 
and that Saskatchewan Environment’s had that long-term 
relationship. could you tell us, in terms of the relationship with the 
control of export of chemicals produced in Canada, does the 
Department of Environment for the province of Saskatchewan 
agree — not whether I agree or anybody else agree — does it 
agree with the Bill as it’s now proposed and is before the House of 
Commons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think Saskatchewan is a large enough 
producer to be involved very much with offshore shipments of 
chemical. I know that the few chemicals that are produced here are 
practically all consumed here. If our chemical companies get large 
enough and we start looking for other markets, we ship other 
products offshore and probably would ship most chemicals if we 
had them. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well is the minister aware of any chemicals that 
are produced in Saskatchewan that are exported? 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Almost anything that is made anywhere in 
the world has some chemical content. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Is the minister aware of any particular agricultural 
chemicals that are produced in Saskatchewan and exported? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not sure what this has to do with our 
estimates. Potash, of course, is one that’s shipped offshore; oil is 
another one that goes offshore. There’s many things, but I don’t 
believe this has much to do with our estimates. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well it’s got lots to do with your estimates because 
it deals with precisely the kind of, precisely the kind of situation 
that is dealt with in the proposed environmental Act, which is one 
of the reasons why I’m asking you about our position in regards to 
the provincial environmental Act. 
 
It’s very, very . . . You know, for the life of me I can’t figure out 
what you’re trying to duck and why you’re trying to dodge and 
hide this. You know, there’s some fairly simple questions and 
fairly straightforward answers that are required to these; they’re 
not complex, they’re not complex; they’re fairly simple. They’re 
fairly simple so that the member for Weyburn, who’s continually 
talking during these estimates, will understand them. They’ll fall 
within the narrow range of grasp of ideas he’s able to hang on to. 
 
Mr. Minister of the Environment, Mr. Minister of the 
Environment, is it the position of the Government of 
Saskatchewan through the provincial Department of the 
Environment that the export of hazardous chemicals be controlled 
by the Government of Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I suppose all chemicals in some form are 
hazardous, depending on what you put them with. You know, if 
you take ordinary nitrogen and you mix it with oil it becomes an 
explosive. So all chemicals can become hazardous, and in other 
cases they’re harmless. 
 
So the member is asking a question that really that I feel has very 
little relevance to my estimates. I would ask him to return to the 
estimates of the Department of Environment. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well if the Minister of the Environment for the 
province of Saskatchewan . . .That’s some admission, sir; that is 
some admission that you don’t know what the heck’s going on in 
terms of the proposed environmental protection Act. 
 
And it’s obvious from your answers or your refusal to answer — 
refusal to answer these questions — that you don’t know anything 
that’s going on in terms of the environmental protection Act, an 
Act which the minister, which the federal Minister of the 
Environment himself says represents an important piece of 
legislation in dealing with the importation or exportation and the 
registration of hazardous chemicals in Canada. 
 
And hazardous chemicals . . . It includes chemicals that  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

980 
 

the member from Victoria talked about, chemicals which are 
deemed hazardous by among other things, their toxicity. And 
we’re not talking about making dynamite; we’re not talking about 
silly things like that, in terms of his estimates; we’re talking about 
things like the chemicals which are produced here in Regina and 
formulated here in Regina, and shipped to the United States. 
Things like Hoe-grass. Did you know that Hoe-Grass was made 
here, here in Regina, and exported? Did you know that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, of course I know that. I’ve known it for 
a long time, sir. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now, Mr. Minister, if you’d known that for a long 
time, perhaps then you will realise how this hooks in with the 
environmental protection Act — the proposed one. Because 
should the products which are produced or formulated here in 
Saskatchewan, because the initial ingredients don’t come from 
here but the formulating of them are here . . .We have the largest 
formulary plant, Hoechst company, for all of Canada, located in 
Regina. Many of the products that they produce here in Regina are 
exported. If in fact some of those Hoechst products were to be 
deemed hazardous chemicals for some reasons or other, it would 
affect the production and the formulation of that chemical here in 
Regina. 
 
And you say you’re not interested. You say that it’s got nothing to 
do with Saskatchewan. Well I think you better sort of think 
beyond trying to defend your government and your own 
departmental record in terms dealing with this problem. 
 
Just think a bit. Think about what about I’m asking. I’m asking 
you: do you support the federal government’s environmental 
protection Act as it is now before the House of Commons? Do you 
as the Minister for the Environment in Saskatchewan support that 
Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That Act is about one week old in the draft 
form that it went to the House. We don’t even have copies of it 
here in Saskatchewan in its final form at this point. We’ve had 
copies in the process of developing it, but in the final form, we 
haven’t even received copies. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, that doesn’t preclude you from 
discussing it whatsoever, but it certainly speaks volumes about the 
close consultation that you originally began to talk about it in 
regards to putting forward this legislation. It’s obviously that 
you’ve had close enough consultation where it comes before the 
House of Commons and your good buddies in Ottawa don’t even 
have the common courtesy to send you a copy of the Bill before 
it’s presented. It shows what kind of close consultation and in 
what high regard you’re held by the environmental department 
and the federal Minister of the Environment. And given your 
performance in the House tonight, I can see why. 
 
What I’m asking you about, sir, is that in consultation that you 
talked about and that you’ve said has existed between your 
department and the federal Department of Environment, do you 
support, do you support the initiatives which were outlined and 
which were hopefully given to your department — although 
judging from your response lately, I’m astounded at the kind of  

hiding that you’re up to. Do you support the federal Department of 
the Environment minister’s initiative in regards to the 
environmental protection Act? Do you support the major thrust of 
that Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — When the department has worked with the 
Canadian Council of Resources and Environment Ministers, 
they’ve worked very carefully to try and put forward ideas that 
would bring the legislation in line with what we could support. 
 
I advised the member that I don’t have a copy of that Bill. And 
you may or may not realise that there was a strike in the postal 
system in Canada that did delay things somewhat. My deputy tells 
me that he has now received it. I haven’t yet, but I will likely in a 
day or so. 
 
We will be dealing with it and dealing with it over a long period of 
time. We’ll have most of the summer, it looks like, before that Bill 
will go forward. So I would like very much to have a chance to see 
it in the form that it was presented in the House before I would 
make any rash decision of whether or not I can support that piece 
of legislation. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, before you saw the final 
version of the Bill . . . and judging from your comments now, you 
must have dealt with the form just before the final version. I know 
that a lot of people in Canada had an opportunity so see that, 
myself included. Could you please outline for us the areas of that 
Bill you supported — or probably, if you didn’t have objections, 
those areas that you objected to — in the last from final form of 
the new environmental protection Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I advised the hon. member earlier that I was 
not going to get into that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well you’re going to get into if we have to stay 
here all summer and deal with it. You won’t move from that seat, 
let me tell you, day in and day out, because we’ll stick on this 
subject, I want to know what you’re hiding from the people of 
Saskatchewan. Why won’t you put forward Saskatchewan 
Environment’s position regarding the new environmental 
protection Act, in the last from final form? What about . . . What 
was there in that form of that Bill, the proposed Act, that you 
object to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ve advised the hon. member that I’m not 
going to answer the question so we’re just going to sit here until he 
wants to ask a question that’s on our subject. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I said I wanted an answer to the 
question. I said I want an answer to the position of the Department 
of Environment for the province of Saskatchewan. As a member 
of the opposition and as a member of that legislature, your refusal 
to answer that question is nothing more than a slap in the face of 
the process of democracy — your refusal to answer what is not a 
complication question, what will not take a long period of time, 
what in fact, if you weren’t so darned stubborn about sitting there 
and acting like a bump on a log, or if you’d in fact consult with 
your deputy minister, you would be answer? Or if you had a grip 
on what was going on in environmental issues in the country, 
you’d be able to answer. 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

981 
 

I’m asking you this question again: what is it in the next to last 
form of the Act, the environmental protection Act which is before 
the House of Commons, did your department object to, if 
anything? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I asked the minister a question. He doesn’t appear 
to be in any mood for answering. I would like to know form the 
minister the answer. I’ve asked him a question, and I’d like a 
response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I can give you the same response time after 
time all evening. If that’s the response the hon. member would like 
to have. 
 
I’ve told you that the legislation that’s before the federal House 
will be dealt with in the federal House. Our staff have been 
involved along with the departments across Canada, and have put 
forward the proposals that have developed the legislation that’s in 
place. 
 
That legislation has not even been sent to me at this point. When it 
arrives I’d be pleased to read it. But I don’t believe that I have any 
responsibility to speak for federal legislation in this House. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, no one is asking you to stand 
up and defend the federal legislation or to try to take the federal 
legislation apart. 
 
But your job is . . . You’re the Minister of Environment for the 
province of Saskatchewan. As the Minister of Environment for the 
province of Saskatchewan, supposedly you’re supposed to form 
opinions as to things which may affect Saskatchewan 
environment. Is that not true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m going to have to make a record, Mr. 
Chairman, and just play it to him every once in while, because the 
answer would be the same. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I asked the minister a 
question. Once again he’s ducking the question. 
 
I asked him that: in regards to federal legislation which affects the 
province of Saskatchewan and the Department of Environment of 
Saskatchewan in particular, do you not see that as part of your 
responsibility, to form an opinion on this type of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t believe it’s my responsibility to deal 
specifically with that legislation in this House. 
 
I form opinions on many things; I don’t give them all to you. And 
I believe that I’m entitled to an opinion on this Bill that I don’t 
have to give to you. This Bill is in the federal House. The federal 
House will deal with it. We have federally elected members from 
Saskatchewan who will deal with it. If there is areas of that Bill, 
when I have a chance to again study it in its final form, that I’m 
chance to again study it in its final form, that I’m concerned about, 
I’ll raise those concerns with the Minister of Environment at the 
federal level. If I don’t get the results I want that way, then I’ll 
deal with the federal members that I know in the House of 
Commons. But that  

particular Bill is not before this House and I feel no compulsion to 
give opinions as to whether or not I support any given any part of 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, you may not feel any compulsion, Mr. 
Minister. In fact, judging from the kind of applause you got from 
your back benches over there, they don’t feel any compulsion. But 
there’s a certain compulsion which is laid down. And that’s the 
kind of process which takes place during the estimate process, 
takes place in this legislature, in which the people of 
Saskatchewan do have the opportunity to ask you questions in 
regards to the opinions that you as the Minister of Environment 
and in your capacity as the Minister of Environment hold in 
regards to important environmental legislation. You’re getting 
paid 75 or $80,000 a year to deal with that, to deal with those kind 
of questions, and you darn well better be prepared to answer. You 
darn well better be prepared to answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I asked you a question before. I’m going to ask 
you again, and I’m going to keep asking you that question, 
because it is your responsibility to answer. And it’s your 
responsibility to answer to the people of this province. And you 
darn well should feel some accountability. 
 
The question is this: there was a proposed environmental Act 
which was circulated widely throughout Canada. The Department 
of Environment for the province of Saskatchewan was involved 
with consultations with the federal department, both directly and 
through the Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. 
That’s also clear; that’s also clear. 
 
There was a proposed Act circulated demanding comments, 
asking for responses, asking for responses. There was a long 
consultative process, which not just tried to hide things behind 
people’s back, but in fact tried to deal with important 
environmental questions openly before the public. Why is it, why 
is it that when the federal Department of Environment asked for 
public consultation, including from the Minister of Environment 
for Saskatchewan, on behalf of the government for Saskatchewan, 
you’re trying to hide your response? There are lots of briefs 
presented in regards to this Act, the proposed Act. In fact, there 
was a whole consultative mechanism with thousands of dollars of 
taxpayers’ moneys spent to in fact engage people in that kind of 
consultative process. 
 
what I want to know, and I believe that what I’ve got the right to 
ask, and what the people of Saskatchewan have the right to ask is: 
what was the position of the government of Saskatchewan in 
regards to this proposed Act? Were you or are you or are you not 
in favour of the thrust of the proposed Act as laid out in the Bill 
which is supplied to everybody for a consultation? Were you or 
were you not? And what’s so hard for you to answer that 
question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member is asking the same  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

982 
 

question time after time. And I have given you the answer many 
times — that I don’t propose to deal with the federal environment 
Act here. Let them deal with it in the federal House. And they will 
deal with it. So you say, yes or no, are you in favour of the Act. 
That Act has many, many clauses. You might be partially in 
favour of some and entirely opposed to others. I can’t give you a 
definitive answer of whether I support or don’t support the Act, 
because that’s the way Acts are written. You may support one 
clause, not support the next. And you would in the overall have to 
make a decision at the end how you vote if you’re in the federal 
House. I don’t have that responsibility in this House for the federal 
Act. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, you said that you may or may 
not have responses, that the department may or may not have 
responses. You’re saying that now. Before, earlier on this evening, 
you said that in fact that the department did have responses. 
 
What we are concerned about is the responses from the 
department. And there is nothing wrong, there is nothing 
necessarily bad in supplying the people of Saskatchewan that kind 
of information. Or do you believe that the people of Saskatchewan 
have the right to know what your position is in regard to important 
environmental legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That piece of legislation has gone through 
many, many hours of negotiations. And we as a department have 
gone through many hours of negotiations dealing with that piece 
of legislation. And we do not propose to give all of the inside 
working documents and the answers that were provided to the 
federal government from those documents. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’d like to ask the minister a question about the 
provincial environmental impact assessment process, and that is: 
given the experience that we’ve had with that process now over 
the last nine years, I wonder if the minister would be prepared to 
support a change in the Act that would mean that instead of an 
environmental impact assessment being done by the proponent of 
the project — in effect the proposed developer contracts out the 
environmental impact assessment at the present time — would the 
minister be prepared to consider a change that would result instead 
in the Department of Environment commissioning out the 
environmental impact assessment? Naturally in conjunction with 
or in consultation with, I guess I should say, the proponent of the 
project, so that in effect we would have a truly independent 
environmental impact assessment report completed on the 
development rather than one that in effect at this point in time has 
been completed by the proponent. Would the minister be prepared 
to examine that matter with a view to implementing such a 
change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would have a difficult time supporting that 
kind of a change, and let me tell you why. When you have a 
proponent and he’s going to do a development and he’s going to 
pay the bill to have the environmental impact assessment done, I 
believe that it’s his responsibility to select the best group of people 
to do the project for him, the best group that he can come across, 
because he is going to, in the end, pay the bill for that group, and if 
he gets a group that does a very effective  

job, he is more liable to get his project approved than if he gets the 
cheapest group that he can possibly find and does a poor job. 
 
If we were the department and we were recommending the 
contractor to do that environmental assessment, and then when it 
comes back through the department for us to do the actual 
assessing of what has been decided, we selected the firm that did 
the project, it would be very difficult for us then to criticise that 
firm and have them redo or change or bring into line parts of the 
project. 
 
So no, I think the proposal that you are making would not be the 
proper way to go at all. I think the route that we have at this time is 
effective. The proponent selects his own contractor, the proponent 
pays the bill, and we do the assessing of what they bring forward. I 
think that’s the way it should be, that the Department of 
Environment is left as the group who takes a look at what has been 
done to see that the environment and the people in the province are 
protected to the best way possible. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well I’d make this point to the minister, and I 
should say that it’s the view of members on this side of the 
legislature that the time has come for a change in the way the 
environmental impact assessment process works. And this, it 
seems to me, ought to be the heart of the change. 
 
What we’re seeing right now is a situation where time and time 
again the proponent, or the developer of the project, commissions 
out the project, and I’m not suggesting that he or she intentionally 
commissions the project out to people who will automatically 
write a good report, but there is a certain element of that going on 
in some projects. And it’s our view that what would be much 
better is a more independent process where there is an independent 
evaluation of the proposed project and the negative environmental 
impacts that it will have so that the people who are reviewing the 
project and writing the assessment are, in effect, not depending on 
receiving their pay cheque from the proponent of the development. 
 
And that is the current major weakness in the process, is that 
naturally the people who have the contract to do the environmental 
impact assessment will be cautious about recommending against 
the project going ahead because they are going to be collecting a 
pay cheque from the proponent when they have completed the 
environmental impact assessment report. And if they want to get 
the proponent’s business again, they ought not to write a report 
that is too critical of the proponent and his proposal. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it’s our view that what would be a much better 
process is if we had an independent environmental protection 
commission that reported just directly to the legislature in the 
same way that, shall we say, the Ombudsman’s office or the 
Human Rights Commission currently reports to the legislature. 
And that independent environmental protection commission,, 
which would be small in nature, would contract out the 
assessments to the people that it believes are most qualified to do 
the assessment. The work would still be paid, the assessment 
would still be . . . The responsibility with respect to cost of the 
developer would not be a  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

983 
 

public responsibility 
 
It’s the developer who is proposing this project; it’s the developer 
that ought to pay to have an assessment done of what the negative 
environmental and social impacts of that development would be. 
And I believe then that after that assessment is done, the 
independent environmental protection commission ought to 
submit the assessment to the Legislative Assembly for all 
members to review and for debate in this House if necessary, 
before the project goes ahead. Would you be prepared to entertain 
that kind of a proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. I would not, and I think I gave my 
reasons for not being prepared to go that way. I think it would be 
an absolute mistake. 
 
The system that we have in place worked well. And I give credit 
to the NDP government, when it was in power, for bringing forth 
this legislation. And it has worked well. And it has been here for 
five years since we’ve been government. We haven’t 
recommended changes because we feel that the process in place is 
one that protects the environment and serves the people as well as 
any process could. 
 
I believe to go the route that you are proposing would not really be 
a workable route, and I would not be in support. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Could I ask the minister on a different subject, a 
question about the work of the spill response centre in the year 
1986. I wonder if the minister could tell the legislature how many 
spills were reported to the spill response centre in 1986 and give 
us some breakdown of the nature of the general categories of these 
spills and the numbers associated with those categories. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s in the annual report. And the total number 
of spills was 230; and if you want them all individually, I’ll give 
you the breakdown. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I wonder if you filed that information with 
us rather than reading it into the record. It might be a lot easier and 
less time consuming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the member has a pencil, it wouldn’t take 
long to give you the figures. Petroleum products, asphalt, 5; crude 
oil, 4; diesel fuel, 42; heating oil, 8; gasoline, 41; transformer oil, 
6; used oil, 2; other, 10; for a total of 118 in the petroleum 
products. 
 
Non-petroleum products: acid, 3; fertiliser, 7; industrial chemicals, 
18; industrial was, 3; other, 4; PCBs, 40; pesticides, 11; 
radioactive, 9; sewage, 17; for a total of 112. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Saskatoon Westmount, Mr. Chairman. I 
wanted to direct a question to the minister, Mr. Chairman, and it 
has to do with a mystery which is thickening with regard to what it 
costs the government to operate and where they’re operating from, 
and I can see only less information being available to this 
Assembly.  

And it has to do with the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
And in order to speed the minister’s estimates up, and I know all 
ministers will want to have their estimates speeded up as much as 
possible in this area, and it’s a technical area, I think, and really all 
it requires is some information to be provided in a form which 
would be meaningful to the people of Saskatchewan and to the 
members of the opposition in their questioning. 
 
The property management corporation receives an estimated 
payment of $985,700 in the estimates which are before us. And I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, for the purposes of clarifying and speeding 
up the study of this particular section, in anticipation of this 
section coming up in due course, whether the minister could 
present to us, possible before his estimates are completed, total 
amount paid by the department to the property management 
corporation in ‘86-87, and anticipated to be paid in ‘87-88; and for 
each year, what was the purpose of these moneys paid — for 
example, broken down into areas such as lease costs, service costs, 
and location. 
 
I wonder if the minister can undertake to provide that information 
on the Department of Environment and Public Safety. And I give 
all other ministers notice that we’d require similar information 
about their departments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In 1986-87 there would have been no 
budgetary item in our department to be paid to the property 
management corporation. 
 
In this year, the figure is tentative because we will be negotiating 
with the property management corporation to finalise rental rates 
and things of that nature. So the figure is put in a guestimate. I 
would say, at this point, and the negotiations will be ongoing. 
 
The anticipated method of breaking that figure down would be 
that the office space rental would come to something like 860,000 
and the mail and postage about 125,000. So I can’t give you 
definite, right down to the dollar figures, because those 
negotiations for rent are not complete yet. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — well I realise, Mr. Chairman, that the 
minister is putting forward the estimate, which . . . I understand 
what estimates are. But at the same time the minister is putting me 
in a catch-22 position. He says he doesn’t have figures for last 
year, and if we were to look in the document before us we’ll find 
there’s Supply and Services. But it doesn’t come before the House 
because there is nothing in it for this year. And what I want to be 
able to do is make a comparison. The minister . . . Obviously there 
must be some figures on which he is basing his $985,700, and 
there should be comparative figures for the previous year. And for 
the minister to say, to give me a breakdown that consists of two 
portions — one, 800,000-and-some-odd dollars, and the other, the 
balance — really doesn’t give me or anybody who’s examining 
the estimates much information along the lines which I sought. 
And I want the minister to be able to tell me that he can give a 
more detailed breakdown of the figure which I’m requesting. 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

984 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s going to be difficult to give you a detailed 
breakdown. The property management corporation has just been 
formed, as you’re aware, and it took over much of the 
responsibility that had been under Supply and Services. I that first 
figure that I gave you would be office space and rental and 
furnishings — that type of things — but I can’t give you detailed 
break-out of what it will be this year, at this point, because I just 
don’t have it. Maybe I could get something from the property 
management corporation because they were operating that in the 
past, and the figure really didn’t come to the department. I was 
dealt with strictly by Supply and Service. But I may be able to get 
some breakdown from them. If I can, I will provide it to the hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the information 
. . .The minister must have arrived at these figures, or the 
departmental people must have arrived at these figures, on the 
basis of some previous figures. I realise that the property 
management corporation has just been assembled, and this causes 
us concern because what this government has done has in effect 
taken the cost of what it costs government for rent and lease and 
so forth, and other charges, and effectively hidden them in a 
Crown corporation. 
 
And I say this may not be for ever and a day, but it will be 
effectively hidden for some period of time, for two reasons. And 
the first reason is, that Crown corporations, as the minister knows, 
are not examined except after the year has closed. That’s number 
one. 
 
And number two, this government’s record in examining Crown 
corporations has been a sorry record, as I understand it. Perhaps it 
was due to my absence, because I know Crown corporations were 
examined in detail and kept up to date when I was a member of 
this Assembly before. I wouldn’t want to ascribe all that to the fact 
that I was absent for four or five years. I think there’s some other 
reason for it. And the reason being that this government has done 
everything to hide information from the public. 
 
My understanding is that when Crown corporations are dealing 
with the different areas, when the government, as they say, hits a 
knot when they’re sawing the board, they immediately pull out 
and quit considering the Crown corporation. The consequence is 
that the information ins not supplied to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly or the people of Saskatchewan. And in view 
of that reason, the government’s record in Crown corporations, 
plus the fact that this information on the property management 
corporation payment of 987,000 . . . $985,700 will not become 
available to us till the year after it’s closed, really gives us no 
information at all, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I know you understand the position that the minister — if he takes 
this position — now puts the people in and puts the members of 
this Assembly in. And I don’t think it’s a satisfactory position as 
regards providing information so we can have a detailed 
examination of the estimates. 
 
And I want the minister to consider again the suggestion that he’s 
made to me and come forward with a proposal that will provide 
the information and near as possible in  

the context in which I’ve requested it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well as the member knows, in other years, 
Supply and Services was the agent that delivered space and 
furniture and equipment to all departments. And at that time it was 
in one large lump sum for rental of space, and renovations of 
space was another headline, and furniture was another headline, 
but no department really knew how much of that cost was 
attributed to that department. 
 
So what we’re doing, and what we have done, is to have a figure 
picked from that overall lease rate by the property management 
corporation that applied as close as they could pick it out to the 
needs of the Department of Environment. I believe the figures that 
I am giving you are more detailed than any figure that’s ever been 
available in this House to deal with the rental of office space, the 
purchase of equipment, and the cost of postage for each 
department. 
 
In other years, you would’ve had to just go to the Department of 
Supply and Services estimates and read down the overall lump 
sum figure of what the total cost would’ve been for government. 
This way at least, when we break it down to $985,700, that’s the 
closest estimate that we have at this point of what our rent will 
cost, the necessary furniture purchases will cost, and 
approximately $125,000 in mailing costs. So I think we have 
broken it down better than it’s ever been done in the past. It’s 
more information earlier than you have ever had in the past, and I 
believe that it will make departments begin to look at the amount 
of space they utilise. If they don’t need that much space and they 
know what the cost of the space is, maybe they’ll cut back and use 
the reasonable amount of space that is actually necessary. 
 
So I would advise the hon. member that I believe the direction that 
we have gone this year is not as he has indicated, that it’s hiding 
from the public necessary information, but rather giving the 
information up front, at the beginning of the year. And it’ll be very 
interesting to watch and see at the end of the year how else we can 
arrive to the estimated figure. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not about to accept 
what the minister says is available to us because I believe there is 
more information available to us. The Minister of Finance said 
that we are going — and he said it month after month — we are 
going to cut here and we’re going to chop here and we’re going to 
prune back on expenses. Now he’s not about . . . .the Minister of 
the Environment is not about to accept a pig in a poke. 
 
When the Minister of Finance says we’re going to cut back on 
expenses and he goes to the property management corporation and 
says to them, what are you going to charge me for a space and 
other essentials to run this department, they don’t just give him a 
ballpark figure and say, that’s it. They must have figures. They 
must have estimated on a much more detailed base than what it 
before us now, because we’re told by this government several 
times, that the property management corporation is the way to go 
for this government. It’s going to be efficient, effective, and you’re 
going to know what your costs are. 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

985 
 

(2045) 
 
Well they must have some basis for saying that. They must have a 
break-out of the figures of previous years. They must be able to 
give us more basis for this estimate than is in the book here before 
us, or than the three figures the minister presents to us at this time. 
And I suggest to you that anything less than that amounts to the 
government hiding the figures, not only for this minister in this 
department, but for all the other departments of government as 
well. And if this property management corporation is so efficient 
and so effective, then I’ve got to see more of it here on paper and 
not what I hear and what I see here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well let me tell the hon. member that the 
Department of Supply and Services held the lease contracts for all 
of the space that government occupied. They know exactly which 
buildings and how much floor space the Department of 
Environment is involved with. So they take those figures that’s 
included in this $985,700, they considered the requests of the 
department for furniture that’s going to be needed. They put that in 
this figure. They took last year’s mail and postage costs, and they 
put that in this figure, and the figure adds up to $985,700. 
 
Now it doesn’t give you the figures in how many square feet we 
have and things of nature; that may be able to be arrived at. I don’t 
have that detail at my fingertips. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well I believe, Mr. Chairman, I have an 
undertaking from the minister that he will attempt to provide more 
detailed information as to the components of these large figures 
that he quotes to us that make up the figure that we have in the 
estimate. And if the minister can provide that information before 
these estimates are closed, it would give us an opportunity to 
review it, and perhaps if there are further questions, we can ask 
them at that time. But I feel that it’s absolutely essential that the 
members of this Assembly, to do a meaningful examination of 
these estimates and other ones, have a more detailed expression of 
this individual components of the major figure we see before us in 
the estimates, and I’ll thank the minister in anticipation of those 
answers. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I’m 
wondering if you could file with the Assembly a copy of the 
outlines each spill . . . a copy of documents that outlines each spill 
that’s taken place in Saskatchewan during the year 1986. 
 
We asked for that information earlier, and in fact I think we asked 
for it back to 1984, and we’ve yet to receive any of it. And I’m 
wondering if you could file with us essentially a summary or the 
full copy, whichever’s easiest for you, that outlines each spill 
that’s occurred, what volume the spill was, where it occurred, and 
what actions were taken to clean it up. Could you file that with the 
Legislative Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member’s asking for a tremendous 
amount of work. As I indicated to you the number of spills and the 
areas involved in the spill, and I don’t really feel that we should 
take the time of the department to provide that volume of material. 
That, I  

think, is an excessive request, and it would take staff in the 
department a long time to put all of that information together. I’m 
not really sure that the member should even expect that 
information. 
 
The annual report will be filed shortly, and you’ll have the 
information that I gave you tonight in that annual report, but the 
actual location of each one of those would not be in that annual 
report, of course. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I guess the problem that we have in the 
opposition is that it’s very difficult to get a feeling for what the 
large spills are, where they took place, what kind of volumes were 
involved, if you don’t provide us with access to that information. It 
seems to me it’s the right of the official opposition to have access 
to the reports that have been filed with the spill report centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I am going to send across to you a request 
that was made the other day with regard to PCB (polychlorinated 
biphenyl) spills, and that gives you some information. I still feel 
that the amount of time and work that it would take to go back a 
whole year and provide the back-up information on all those spills 
is excessive. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, in 
regards to the supplying the opposition with information, we’ve 
made a request for a great many pieces of information which 
you’ve agreed to give us. Can you give us a status report on how 
that information is coming and when can we expect to receive it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I have some of it here that I could send 
across, but we haven’t been dealing with this kind of subject area 
today, so I’ve just been holding it until we got to it. 
 
If I could have a page come, I would send across to the member 
copies of the items that were asked for. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, just in response to that, one of 
the reasons why we’re asking for the information is so that we can 
take a look at it and then, sir, deal more succinctly with the issues 
as they arise and as we get to look at them. 
 
Which brings me back to an issue that we don’t seem to be 
making much progress to in trying to convince you of providing 
us with some information, and that’s in regards to The 
Environmental Protection Act and the proposed environmental 
protection act put forward by the federal government. 
 
So I want to ask you a few questions because, obviously, from 
your own statements that there were some concerns, if I’m right to 
assume that what you say in regards to the activities of the deputy 
minister is true in the sense that there were some concerns 
expressed by the Department of the Environment in 
Saskatchewan, and that the number of meetings that the minister 
alluded to and the kind of consultation process that went on, that 
obviously that there was some concerns expressed by the 
department. And I just for the life of me can’t understand your 
reluctance, quite frankly, to tell us what those concerns were. 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

986 
 

I am wondering maybe if you’ve had a change of mind and you 
can . . . you haven’t had a change of mind. So we’ll have to deal 
with this, I suppose, in another way. And I’m going to ask you a 
few questions regarding what the federal Minister of the 
Environment had to say on the concerns and whether or not 
Saskatchewan’s Department of the Environment hold the same 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Minster, in a speech to the national environmental law section 
of the Canadian Bar Association in Toronto, January 26, 1987, the 
Minister of the Environment. Mr. Tom McMillan, made a speech 
outlining what he thought were some of the concerns that should 
have been dealt by the new proposed environmental assessment 
Act. And the questions I’m going to ask you deal with our 
response, the response of the Saskatchewan government in regards 
to Mr. McMillan’s concerns as the federal Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
The first concern of Mr. McMillan, or one of the major concerns 
that Mr. McMillan raises, is the question of chemicals, the same 
type of question which the member from Regina Victoria was 
raising earlier on and which you, I would submit, failed to reply 
and provide an adequate response. 
 
Now, Mr. McMillan says: 
 

Nowhere is environmental law weaker than in the area of toxic 
chemicals. 

 
And you remember the member from Regina Victoria was saying 
somewhat the same things. 
 

. . . One of the biggest failings is the inadequate attention paid to 
their synergistic and cumulative effects. 

 
To help address that and other inadequacies, fundamental 
changes will be made to the way chemicals are regulated. In the 
past, the onus has been on government to demonstrate after a 
chemical {now this is after a chemical} has been marketed, that 
it is harmful to human health or to the environment. In the 
future the onus will be reversed: {at least this is Mr. McMillan’s 
contention that the onus will be reversed} manufactures will be 
required to satisfy government that a chemical is not harmful. 

 
In other words it’s got a reverse onus clause in it much the way, in 
fact, that The Trade Union Act in the province of Saskatchewan 
has reverse onus clauses. 
 

. . . In future, the onus will be reversed: manufacturers will be 
required to satisfy government that a chemical is not harmful — 
before it can be sold in Canada. 

 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: is it the position of the 
Department of the Environment for the province of Saskatchewan 
that the federal government is correct in requiring chemicals to be 
proved safe before they are sold in Canada? 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I really don’t feel that it’s fair for the hon. 
member to ask me if the federal minister is right or wrong on each 
question. You know, that’s his opinion. Let him have his opinion. 
And has speaking at a bar association . . . He probably had a few 
lawyers there and likely he had many different opinions when he 
was speaking. The same would likely be the case if he were 
speaking here tonight. So I told you before, I was not prepared to 
answer those questions, and I’m still not prepared. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not dealing with a 
supposition of what the minister thinks, the federal Minister of the 
Environment thinks. I’m dealing with what he has said repeatedly 
and what appears in the environmental protection Act, the 
proposed new environmental protection Act. I’m not asking you to 
comment on the minister’s private thoughts one way or the other 
on a particular law. I’m asking you as Minister of the Environment 
whether or not you believe that the onus is on chemical 
manufacturers to prove that their product is safe before it’s sold in 
Canada. Do you agree that they should do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The department in Ottawa that does the 
registration of the chemical has always had to make that decision. 
And the chemical manufacturers have gone out for years and done 
testing long before the registration occurred. That system has 
worked well. I’ve had really no problem with it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, why is it that the federal 
Minister of the Environment, Mr. Tom McMillan, has taken a 
consistent position day in and day out, and it doesn’t matter 
whether he’s speaking before the chemical manufacturers 
association in Canada or the national bar association, and he’s 
taken the position and is now putting into law a proposition that 
says, up until this time chemical manufacturers have gotten away 
with murder, literally murder, literally murder in the case of some 
of the chemicals introduced in Canada. 
 
And all I can do is think of thalidomide. And you don’t have to go 
very far to think of more examples. You can look at the Love 
Canal, to see the kind of . . . the literal murder that chemical 
companies have gotten away with in this country. 
 
The federal Minister of the Environment says they’re not going to 
get away with that murder any more; that they’re going to have to 
prove to the federal Department of the Environment that their 
products aren’t harmful to the health and safety of Canadians. And 
you stand there and say you don’t agree with that. You stand there 
and you’re saying you’re not agreeing with that. Am I to take it 
from what you’re saying that you don’t think chemical 
manufacturers can dump anything they want on the market and 
then we will see what happens after? Is that your attitude towards 
the chemical manufacture and distribution of chemicals in 
Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member makes some pretty wild 
statements. And you jump from agricultural chemicals to  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

987 
 

thalidomide. Do you know, that’s a fair walk across the door. 
 
I don’t think that you can even relate the licensing method of the 
two; they’re entirely different. One is for human consumption, and 
the others are for use in agriculture applications. 
 
So I believe the member is grabbing at straws. And if he wants to 
do that, that’s his privilege. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m afraid, Mr. Minister, the only straws that 
grasping going on here is you trying to find a response because 
you don’t agree with the federal Minister of the Environment; that 
you don’t agree with the federal Minister of the Environment in 
this fact. 
 
The federal Minister of the Environment says, up till now 
chemical companies have gotten away with murder, literally, in 
this country, and now they’re not going to get away with it. And 
you don’t agree with that. But you’re afraid to say that that’s the 
position of your department. You’re afraid to say before the 
people of Saskatchewan that, in representations made to the 
Minister of the Environment, that you don’t believe that chemicals 
should be made safe before they’re introduced in Canada, and that 
you are quite happy, as you said before, with the old system where 
any chemical can be dumped on the Canadian market. And it’s 
only through trial and error, and the error in terms of people’s 
death that . . . that it’s only that Canadian people will be laboratory 
rats for the chemical companies. 
 
If in fact, if in fact that’s not the case, when the federal Minister of 
the Environment introduced this draft legislation which said that 
chemical manufacturers are going to be required to prove their 
chemical products safe, was it the position of the Environment 
department in Saskatchewan that the federal government was 
right; in making that supposition and right in drafting that kind of 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ve advised you several times that I wasn’t 
going to answer those questions. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, would you please tell us . . . Would 
you please tell us why it is that you won’t tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what your government’s and your department’s 
position is in regards to the introduction of new chemical products 
in Canada. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to mention to the member from 
Regina Rosemont that when he asks a question of the minister, 
and the minister decides that he has either given a good enough 
and full answer, or he does not desire to answer the question, that 
he is not compelled to do so. 
 
And I would suggest at this time that you go on to a new question 
on this debate. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve asked a series of new 
questions in regards to this matter, relating to statements by the 
federal Minister of the Environment; also in regards  

to writings of the federal Minister of the Environment. We are 
doing Environment estimates. I’m glad to see, though, I’m glad, 
you see, that you bring it to the attention of the people of 
Saskatchewan that the Environment minister for this province 
refuses to . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to remind . . . Order, please. I’d 
like to remind the member from Regina Rosemont that a decision 
of this Chair is not debatable. So if you have another question, 
would you please go on, or we’ll continue on with item 1. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I wasn’t debating the decision of 
the Chair. I was pointing out, I was pointing out to yourself and to 
the Minister of the Environment that his refusal is ample, ample 
words enough — that his refusal to answer . . . I’ll pass at this 
point in time to the member from Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to address some 
questions to the minister with respect to a very urgent matter that 
has been brought to the attention of Regina people over the last 
few years that is now coming to fruition, and that is the rail line 
relocation project in the city of Regina. 
 
I would, Mr. Chairman, preface my questions with a little 
statement, if I may. 
 
The rail relocation project here in Regina has been under way for a 
fairly long time. The Rail Relocation and Crossing Act of 1974, 
which was a federal Act, provided for cities in Canada to, in 
co-operation with federal and provincial governments, move rail 
lines and yards that are in locations in the cities that are causing 
problems with respect to traffic flow, with respect to movement of 
hazardous goods, and with respect to environmental problems. 
 
The model for all of Canada, as members might know, is the rail 
relocation project in the city of Regina. This project, as it is now 
being under review, and is now in a process of being decided upon 
by the Canadian Transport Commission, will basically set the 
precedent for all subsequent rail relocation projects in the nation. 
 
And I want to inform members, but also to let the Minister of the 
Environment know that personally I support the rail line relocation 
project in the city; that having said that, the project, in my view, is 
a bad plan as it has been proposed to the CTC (Canadian 
Transport Commission). I believe it’s a major planning 
catastrophe, primarily because it does not solve the problems that 
it’s designed to solve, but in fact it just transfers the problems from 
one neighbourhood to another. 
 
And I outlined very clearly that the proposed location poses 
environmental risks. It poses health and safety risks as well to the 
people who live in the communities now known as Rochdale Park, 
Lakewood, Sherwood Estates, McCarthy Park, Walsh Acres, 
Argyle Park, Uplands, and the soon to be developed community of 
Lakeridge, which is in the west end . . . the north-west of the 
Rosemont constituency. 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

988 
 

Public hearings were first called by the Canadian Transport 
Commission for the city of Regina back in November. The 
hearings went from November, the first week in November or 
thereabouts, until the first week in May. During that time there 
were a number of presentations that were made by the principals, 
that is the railways and the city, as well as thousands of 
individuals, including MLAs, members of parliament, and citizen 
action groups and community associations. 
 
Their basic contention was that the plan is a good plan if it’s 
solving the problems that it’s intended to solve. They believe, as I 
believe, that the project will not solve the problems but in fact 
transfer problems and, in addition to that, threaten the supply of 
water from the well system that is now provided from wells in the 
north-west part of the city to the tune of 20 to 40 per cent in some 
periods of the year. 
 
I put forward an intervention to the CTC back in November 
outlining my concerns. At that time, the chairman, Mr. 
McDonough, indicated that he was quite surprised at the lack of 
interest and the apathy of the people of this city with respect to rail 
line relocation. I was as surprised as he was when he informed me 
at that time— this was about three weeks into the CTC hearings 
— that there were only two interventions — that of Les Benjamin, 
member of parliament for Regina West, and myself. 
 
Subsequent to that meeting, I started talking to more and more 
people in my constituency. I informed them of what Mr. 
McDonough had indicated his observation was of people in 
Regina — that is, a great deal of apathy. 
 
As a result of that discussion, and many discussions that I had 
thereafter with these individuals, I was interested in calling a 
public meeting, which I did, for January of 1987. The meeting was 
called on about a six or seven day notice, and nearly 400 people 
came out to that meeting. And the meeting was primarily designed 
to inform residents in my constituency and those living in Uplands 
and Argyle Park, as well, about the rail line relocation project. 
 
The meeting was well attended in the sense that it was 
jam-packed, and people were actually leaving the meeting area, 
the Riffel High School, because there was no longer any room to 
get into the rooms, the room that we had. And we had to broadcast 
it out to the forum outside the meeting area. 
 
During the meeting we had representatives from the city and from 
the CNR, and both were asked to make a little presentation and to 
answer questions that were put to them by the residents of North 
and North West Regina. 
 
As a result of those questions and the answers that followed, the 
people in the meeting decided it would be a good idea to form a 
citizens’ committee which they called the Citizens for Alternate 
Rail Relocation. We had 66 volunteers, 66 volunteers that evening 
— people who were anxious to see that the plan (a) was 
implemented; (b) that it was don in a proper way, and that it was 
done with as minimal interference to their life-style and to their  

communities as possible. 
 
After that public meeting, the Citizens for Alternate Rail 
Relocation met on three or four separate occasions to put together 
a brief to the CTC Canadian Transport Commission). And I have, 
for the minister and others present, a copy of that brief. 
 
They made a presentation and intervention to the Canadian 
Transport Commission, and at that time they outlined their 
objectives. And I’d like to just read into the record, if I may, Mr. 
Chairman, the objectives of this committee: 
 

1) to have rail relocation that will act as the model project for 
the rest of Canada to follow, a model project of which all of 
Regina can be proud; 
 
2) to have rail relocation that respects the quality of life and 
sense of well-being of those people living in residential 
neighbourhoods nearest to the relocated lines and yards; 
 
3) to have rail relocation that, when implemented, will have 
minimal disruption of the biophysical environment; 
 
4) to have rail relocation that is not based on determining a 
route that is the least costly of all available options; 
 
5) to have rail relocation that is guided and directed by at least 
the minimum evacuation requirements as determined by the 
Dangerous Goods Guide to Initial Emergency Response; 
 
6) to have rail relocation that will not cause property values to 
experience a decline; and 
 
7) to have rail relocation that is based on sound planning and on 
the realities of Regina’s population growth patterns, thus 
averting the unfortunate possibility of having to “jump” the 
relocated lines in the future to accommodate a growing urban 
population. 

 
The Citizens for Alternate Rail Relocation, Mr. Minister, went to 
the meeting. As a result of 10 days’ effort of the committee and 
other volunteers, they put together a petition supporting their 
presentation — a petition signed by over 6,000 residents of 
Regina. And I believe that if they would have had twice that time, 
they probably would have been able to obtain 20 or 25,000 
signatures. 
 
The reason I mention that, Mr. Minister, is because during the 
discussion of the committee they wanted to send the petition to the 
body that would be the most influential. And I guess the decision 
was to send it to the Canadian Transport Commission, because 
they were the body making the final decision. 
 
What was also discussed in that meeting was that they wanted to 
send the 6,000-name petition to the Government of Saskatchewan 
as well, mainly because the Government of Saskatchewan is a 
participant, is one of the funding agencies for the relocation 
project. And I  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

989 
 

want to inform you of that because it’s a very important project 
put together in a very short period of time by the citizens who 
have been described as apathetic by Mr. McDonough, the 
chairman of the CRC. 
 
And I think that they are citizens who have done a terrific job in 
putting together a massive brief that is well researched, that is 
looked upon by many people, in particular those who have 
followed the rail line relocation project over the last number of 
years, as being a high-quality project and a high-quality 
presentation. 
 
In their presentation, Mr. Minister, they went on and talked about 
a number of things. But I want to just discuss a few environmental 
issues that they raised and see if we can get do some response 
from you and your officials on them. And I refer to the 
environment impact statement which I have a copy of here that 
was done on the rail line relocation project. 
 

According to Section 3 of the Environmental Impact Statement, 
a significant volume of “petroleum products,” “balance fuel and 
chemical,” and “other car loads” will be transported on the new 
corridor. 

 
And for the minister’s information, the rail line relocation project, 
of which I have a map, will see the CN Craik subdivision, the CP 
Lanigan subdivision, the CN Central Butte subdivision, the 
Qu’Appelle CN subdivision, and the Indian Head CP subdivision, 
which are spread out east, west, and north, north-east and 
north-west of the city, concentrated into one route, into one 
neighbourhood, and the line, as we see it here, is not coming from 
all over the . . . from all directions into the city, but in fact they 
will be concentrated and travelling along one line. 
 
So the environmental impact study that has been done by the city 
under the jurisdiction of the provincial legislation has made some, 
in my view, some fundamental errors in judgement by expressing 
that, in fact, the noise and air pollution will be minimised because 
it’s going to be outside of the city — a total of 300 metres outside 
of the city, not a big distance, around a thousand feet which, by the 
way, will be on a hill overlooking the north-west part of the city. 
But that sort of error, in my view, is going to be a major problem if 
the project is approved by the CTC on that particular route. 
 
(2115) 
 
But having said that, I want to continue with this little statement 
that I have here and get to some questions on the EIS 
(environmental impact statement). 
 

Item 1 under section 2.4 of Appendix “A” refers to them as 
dangerous commodities.” Given this, has consideration been 
given to the minimum evacuation requirements as determined 
by Transport Canada? 

 
And the question that I would ask the minister at this point to start, 
regarding the environmental impact study: has the environmental 
impact study that was conducted on the rail relocation project in 
the north end of Regina  

considered the minimum evacuation requirements as determined 
by Transport Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As near as we can recall, it did not deal with 
evacuation times. Its been some time, as the member knows; it 
was back in 1982-83 that this was reviewed, so it’s been a 
considerable span of time. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well the reason I asked that question is because 
it was a question that was put to the officials at the CTC and they, 
of course, were not at liberty to respond to that because that’s not 
their duty. Their duty is to look at all of the interventions and 
make a decision as to what is fact and what is fiction. 
 
I want to just make a point that the environmental impact study, 
from what we have researched and discovered, does not take into 
account that very basic minimum evacuation requirements as 
determined by Transport Canada. And I have here, a book which 
— it’s called Emergency Response Guide for Dangerous Goods 
— which is put together by Canadian Transport Emergency 
Centre out of Ottawa. They have a toll free number 24 hours a 
day; it’s an operation for emergency spills. 
 
I would like to ask the minister and his officials whether in 
conducting environmental impact studies of the nature of the 
Regina railway relocation project, whether or not very important 
documents such as these, which outline minimum evacuation 
requirements for spills of every chemical that you can imagine, 
including ammonia, and boron trifluoride, and chlorine, and 
hydrochloric acid, and so on, would not be considered in terms of 
transportation EIS. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — During the review of the environmental 
impact study that was done in 1982-83, the department received 
an opinion from the provincial Justice department, which indicated 
both CN and CP come under federal legislation, and therefore we 
may not have jurisdiction as a government and as a department to 
deal with the environmental impacts as it relates to CN or CP. 
Now that wasn’t confirmed as final, but the opinion we had was 
that they may be the case. 
 
Since the proposal sort of came to an end at that time, like there 
was no further moves to go ahead with the study, no ministerial 
decision provincially has ever been given to give clearance or not 
to give clearance to proceed with the rail line relocation in Regina. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the 
environmental impact study that was conducted was not approved 
by your department or your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It was reviewed by our department but no 
final ministerial decision was rendered because of the judicial 
decision that was handed down by the Department of Justice here 
that we may not have jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Was an opinion ever requested by either the city 
of Regina or any other group, MLA, member of parliament, or 
principal involved with the rail line relocation project? 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

990 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Because of the decision that was rendered by 
the Department of Justice, the CN and the CP were both 
challenging whether or not our department would have the right to 
render the decision to give approval or disapproval of their 
environmental impact study. Consequently until such time as that 
position is clarified, the minister of that time did not render a 
decision on this project. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you’re saying that there has been no request 
for an opinion by your government, by the Department of 
Environment, on whether the EIS meets the basic requirements of 
the legislation. Is that what you’re telling us tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Department of Environment reviewed 
the environmental impact study that was done, and they did have 
some concerns with regard to the study itself, and some of those 
concerns were registered with the city. So they did their job; they 
told the city some of the areas of concern that they had, and did 
not give a final Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Solomon: —Can the minister share with me and others what 
those concerns were that you expressed to the city of Regina on 
the environmental impact study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The issues that were raised by the department 
were very similar to the concerns that you were raising tonight — 
the issue of noise, the issue of the aquifer, drainage of the area. 
Those are the main ones that were raised. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Does that include the transportation of 
hazardous goods, which was a concern of the department as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that they were only considering 
the CN at that time. The hazardous goods side would more have 
applied to CP, and it was not in that first environmental impact 
study. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Okay. So the environmental impact study was 
for phase one, not phase two being the inclusion of the CPR main 
line up in the north and north-west part of the city. 
 
The CNR does from time to time transport some hazardous 
material. And what worries me and what worries the people of 
Regina North and North West and Rosemont and North East is 
that if phase 1 is approved, if phase 1 is approved, in spite of the 
city — and they were never made public to my knowledge until 
tonight — in spite of that, what will happen, is that if phase 1 is 
approved, phase 2, if it goes ahead, phase 2, if it goes ahead, will 
have to go ahead on the same route. That is the objective of whole 
rail relocation plan. 
 
They will be approaching various people and developers in that 
district and securing property to build, not one line, but two main 
lies. And they will do that in phase 1, so that phase 2 will be a 
natural follow-up because it will be a double tracking. Actually it 
will be three tracks by the  

time they’re all done. But that land will be secured. 
 
And I am surprised, Mr. Minister, that if your department has 
raised the concerns with respect to phase 1, which are very serious 
concerns — the aquifer which could possibly be polluted, 
irrevocably polluted; the fact that the noise situation, which 
concentrating 20 to 40 trains a day in one district as opposed to 
dispersing them throughout the city, I find that totally amazing that 
you’re now telling us that you have rendered these opinions in 
private, have not provided any kind of advice to the city or 
provided any intervention to the CTC to that effect, which would 
in my view provide the CTC with some guidance as to what they 
might be doing with respect to this plan. 
 
And my advice and the advice of thousands of people has been to 
the CTC that the plan should go ahead, but that it’s a bad plan. It 
should be moved farther north so it doesn’t provide all of these 
hazards to people that this existing plan will actually provide if it 
goes ahead. 
 
According to the dangerous goods guide (that I referred to), 
chemicals such as propane, chlorine, anhydrous ammonia, and 
sulphur demand 1500 metres of open space in terms of responding 
to a spill or a fire. For (instance) if a chlorine spill occurred along 
the corridor, all residents within 1,500 metres — one “metric 
mile” — would have to be evacuated from the location of the spill. 
The 1500 metres is the minimum requirement for evacuation. If 
residents were downwind from a spill, the evacuation requirement 
would be even greater. The 1500 metre requirement is more than 
four times greater than the width of the current proposed buffer 
zone. 
 
So you’ve told the city about your concerns in terms of the EIS; 
you’ve not made them public until this night, at least to my 
knowledge. And that would have a major impact on the phase one 
planning and subsequently phase two planning of the rail 
relocation. 
 
Your department has not considered, not considered, or the EIS 
did not consider, the environmental impact study did not consider 
the hazardous chemicals and movement thereof. And this 
document here, which is produced by another government, 
another level of government in this country, the national 
government, says that those kind of movements of chemical and 
poisonous gas to require a minimum of the one I’ve mentioned, 
1500 metres. 
 
What do you think is going to happen if we have phase one and 
phase two go ahead in the proposed location and something like a 
chlorine spill happens? What will your department do to help 
these people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I might advise the hon. member that when the 
department reviewed the phase one environmental impact study, 
they did advise the city and through written communication 
advised the CRTC . . . or CTC, the Canadian Transport 
Commission, of the concerns that they found within that study. So 
I think both bodies were well aware of the concerns that were 
being raised. 
 
(2130) 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

991 
 

Now because we didn’t have, or didn’t seem to have the authority 
to make the decision that would be required here, our decision was 
not rendered . . . like, the minister’s final decision was not 
rendered. 
 
The project has met with many delays, as the hon. member knows, 
and before any rail relocation will start, there will be many more 
discussions held with regard to this relocation and the concerns 
that our department and many other departments will have. So 
we’re still nowhere near the time when the final decision of the 
exact location of that rail relocation will be made. 
 
I believe the department will continue to have involvement on this 
issue, and we’ll be putting forward concerns, and hazardous goods 
transportation will definitely be one of those concerns. But 
because it stopped in the way that it did in 1983, there’s really 
been very little opportunity for very much involvement by the 
Department of Environment until this year. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Can the minister tell us when you informed the 
CTC (Canadian Transport Commission) and the city, precisely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The city was informed in February of 1984, 
and the CTC was probably a couple of months later than that, also 
in 1984 though. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The obligation of a government, whether it be 
provincial or municipal or federal, and in particular the obligation 
of the Department of Environment, a department of the provincial 
government, is to minimise problems that its citizens encounter. 
The obligation of your government and your department, if you 
have concluded there are major problems with an environmental 
impact study, is not to quietly talk about them but to inform the 
public in an educated way so that they can more calmly and more 
wisely make decisions which affect their lives. They obviously are 
having a great deal of problem, and I’m having a great deal of 
problem with your department’s actions on this, Mr. Minister. 
 
I believe you have failed to fulfil your obligations with respect to 
informing the public about this issue. I think that the neglect of 
your department and the neglect of your government is something 
the people of Regina are going to be quite concerned about, in 
particular when it’s an issue that affects not just themselves but 
their families. There’s nothing more precious, as we know, than 
the children in our families. 
 
And if you think these citizens are joking around and playing 
games, you’ve got a . . . you are sadly mistaken, Mr. Minister. 
They’re very concerned about their families and their homes and 
their community. And that’s why they’re taken the action that they 
have. And as one of their elected representatives, I ask the minister 
whether you have any intentions to right what you have obviously 
wronged; and secondly . . . well I’ll get back to the second 
question later. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the hon. member is jumping at some 
pretty wild conclusions. I wasn’t laughing about the way the 
families were reacting in that area. What I did tell  

you was that the federal government is more liable to be the one 
that has the authority to deal with the issue. 
 
Now when the environmental impact study was done here in the 
province, our department reviewed it and it went forward for 
public review, so the information was not kept private. It was out 
for public consumption. The people had the chance to know what 
our department was saying and also to react to it. So the hon. 
member is jumping to conclusions, I feel, in making the kind of 
statements that he’s making here tonight. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I don’t believe that I’m jumping to 
conclusions, Mr. Minister. It’s my responsibility as an elected 
official, as it is your responsibility, that if there is an issue which 
affect those we represent, it is our duty and our obligation to 
inform our constituents to the best of our ability. I have done that, 
as the MLA for Regina North West. I maintain that you and your 
department have not done what you are supposed to be doing as 
government people, and I think that that’s a tragedy. I think it’s 
another indication of what the government has been doing, not 
only in the Department of Environment but in other departments 
as well. 
 
I want to take another question to the minister with respect to the 
fact of the statement that he made just a few moments earlier that 
there’s no problem — there’s no need to worry about these minor 
things we’ve identified in the environmental impact study, because 
the exact location is not yet determined. I asked the minister if you 
know what the mandate of the CTC hearings were that just 
concluded on May 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Our department did put its ideas forward, its 
suggestions forward, at the CT hearings that began last November. 
Some time in November they would put forward their position. So 
they have been involved as a department right up to the current 
time. Now at this point we’re waiting for a CTC final decision on 
the hearings that they’ve held. That won’t be the end of the 
discussions on this issue. It will be an ongoing discussion for some 
time yet, and don’t ever think that the Department of Environment 
is going to let the world go by. They’ll be still involved. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well if we continue to have as much 
involvement from your department as we’ve had to date in terms 
of informing the public of the issues, we’re in very serious trouble, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
I ask the question again that I asked latterly, and that is: do you 
understand what the terms of reference of the CTC hearings, the 
Canadian Transport Commission hearings, were that concluded in 
Regina on May 1 or the week of May 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not sure that I could quote all the 
guide-lines at the CTC hearings, but the basic idea that they will 
come up with decisions on, is whether or not the project should 
proceed, whether it should proceed in the present location, and the 
funding relationships that should be involved to carry it. Those are 
the main areas as we see it, at least. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I thank the minister. That is how I  
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

992 
 

understand the terms of reference of the CTC that concluded their 
hearings recently in Regina to be. 
 
With that understanding, I find it curious — I find your statement 
curious that you have stated in this House that the exact location 
has yet to be determined. 
 
The final term of reference, and you’ve just stated yourself, is that 
the CTC, after having spent months of testimony review and 
probably months more reviewing the testimony that they heard in 
the first place, and all supporting documents, they’ll be making the 
decision as to the precise location. There will be further input from 
the government of Saskatchewan in terms of the location. 
 
The only other input may be from the city of Regina. They are the 
only ones that can actually change the location in terms of 
reference, as I understand it, as I have been informed. 
 
And so I ask the minister, considering that decision of the CTC 
which will come forward in due course — that is, the location, the 
funding arrangements, and whether the plan shall go or not go, and 
in what form — can you tell this House, what do you plan to do 
with respect to the concerns you raised to the city and to the CTC 
on the environmental impact study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there has been an agreement 
reached with the city that any proposals that are finalised for the 
location and the removal or the re-routing of the rails around the 
city will come forward to our department for review. And any 
mitigative measures that our department might propose to solve 
some of the difficulties that you see with noise pollution and the 
aquifer, the drainage, and all of those things, would be 
recommended. If they were not followed, then the province has 
one other weapon at its disposal, and that is to withhold funding. 
And that is a fairly powerful weapon that can still be used and, if 
necessary, would be used. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, in entering 
this debate on the environment, and particularly following up the 
member for Regina North West on rail line relocation, I want to 
preface my remarks simply by stating that my constituency 
virtually coincides with ward 10 in the city that is represented by a 
councillor that was elected largely on the basis of his opposition to 
the rail relocation. 
 
And that councillor had the biggest plurality of any in the city. So 
it’s a big issue, particularly in north-end Regina. I think you 
understand that. I just want you to understand some of the 
concerns for the member from North West, and my concerns. 
 
I’m a little bit puzzled, though, when I hear you say that the 
federal department is more likely to act than the provincial 
department. My question is: who is in charge? Is it the provincial 
Department of Environment or the federal Environmental Canada, 
Department of Transport? Who is in charge of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: —The member asks a rather difficult question to 
give a definitive answer. 
 

At the time that the environmental impact assessment was done 
and was brought forward to the Saskatchewan Department of 
Environment, the federal transport commission looked at the idea 
of referring the environmental impact assessment to the federal 
Department of Environment. But because we were already; 
involved, they didn’t move in that direction. 
 
(2145) 
 
They left it with us, and then we received the ruling from the 
Saskatchewan Department of Justice which indicated that we may 
not have jurisdiction. So we haven’t given a ministerial decision. 
 
Perhaps that’s something that needs to be decided very soon as to 
who is going to make the final decision. And because of the 
process that we face here, I will undertake to try and get an answer 
from the federal government on that in the near future, but I don’t 
know how quickly that answer can be received. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, I am very concerned by your answer, 
as I hope you are too. We’ve got a major, major rail relocation 
project that is going to affect all of Saskatchewan, not just for the 
next couple or three years, but for the next 20,30,40 — perhaps 
longer than that. I think the planners certainly are leading us to 
believe that rail relocation, is going to be good for 50 or more 
years, and that that’s the route, indeed, that’s going to be taken. 
 
It is with more than a little bit of concern that I see the political 
volleyball going back and forth between the feds, and the feds 
saying, you take it, and you saying, no, you take it. Meanwhile the 
volleyball is going back and forth. Perhaps it’s fitting that the 
Regina field house was opened last weekend and you’ve got a new 
playing arena for it. 
 
All kidding aside, we’ve got a real serious problem here, and my 
question is: when is the near future? How soon are you going to 
expect an answer from the federal government as to just whose 
jurisdiction it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I want to assure the hon. Member that we’ve 
never pulled out of the decision making process. What I’m telling 
you is that it’s uncertain as to who has the final jurisdiction. 
 
When the original railways were put across Canada, I’m sure 
Saskatchewan had no say in where they went. That was decided 
by the Canadian Transport Commission. 
 
I think that, in this setting, times have changed considerably, 
Saskatchewan has matured considerably, and I would expect that 
we as the Department of Environment should have a fair amount 
of jurisdiction in making the final decisions. That’s what I propose 
to seek the authority to do from the federal government. Whether 
or not they will accede to that is something that I just couldn’t 
guarantee at this time. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Have you asked the federal government to say, yes, 
you have control over this matter? Have you asked them? 
  



 
July 6, 1987 

 

993 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’ve been waiting for the transport 
commission ruling, but we will proceed to try and clarify who has 
the right to make the final environmental decisions, and I think it 
should be our department. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I agree it should be your department. It somewhat 
concerns me, some of the answers I’m hearing on the rail line 
relocations. This project that so profoundly is going to affect many 
hundreds, if not hundreds of thousands, of residences in Regina 
now — it just astounds me that there isn’t a more definitive 
answer as to who has the authority. It is no wonder that there are 
many, many people as evidenced by the meeting that the member 
for Regina North West sponsored at the Riffel school — it’s no 
wonder that so many people came out, and they were all angry 
that night. I know, because I was there. And the people were 
intensely angry. They didn’t know whose fault it was, or who to 
even discuss the matter with. Even people that really had no axe to 
grind were very upset because they didn’t know who to talk to. 
 
And now we come here, and in the legislature we’re told that 
we’re not sure that you’re the person we should be talking to, or 
yours is the department we should be talking to. And it very much 
troubles me that that’s going on. 
 
I’ll ask again: when do you reasonably expect to get at least a 
preliminary answer from the federal government regarding 
jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t know how many jurisdictional 
decisions the hon. member’s been involved in. Those are not 
simple decisions. Those are one of the biggest arguments between 
federal and provincial governments, as to who has authority over 
certain area. 
 
The advice that we receive at this time from our Department of 
Justice is that likely the federal government has jurisdiction. So if 
we go to seek a change in that direction, it may take some time. I 
couldn’t begin to give you a day or a date when that might be 
finalised. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To go back to a 
question, the line of questioning that we were following earlier, 
Mr. Minister. You indicated that when the CTC renders its 
decision, if the decision is to go ahead with a plan regardless of 
what the plan is, that the plan must meet the requirements of the 
Department of Environment. You indicated that earlier, that’s 
correct? 
 
Are you saying that the sponsors of the plan, the principals of the 
plan, will then have to do another environmental impact study if 
the plan is the same? If they have a new plan that’s proposed, they 
obviously have to do another environmental impact study. But if 
that’s the case, if a new environmental impact study is required on 
the same location, I would like to know why. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that as long as the plan is in 
exactly the same location that was proposed in the first 
environmental impact study, there wouldn’t be a need for phase 
one to have another study. But if it’s moved to a new location, and 
if it includes more than just phase one and goes on to phase two, 
then there would be a need. 
 

So it depends on what you’re asking about — whether it’s just 
phase one, whether phase one is in the same location, whether 
phase one has moved, or whether phase one and phase two are 
combined — all of these things will have to be taken into 
consideration to make that determination. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — If phase one, as proposed, is approved by the 
CTC in general geographic terms, the concerns that your 
department has raised with respect to the environment, with 
respect to the water aquifer, then become irrelevant — that they 
will go ahead with phase one in any event according to the EIS? Is 
that what your are saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, the concerns that were raised, even if it 
stays in the same area, will have to be addressed. The Regina 
aquifer is a very important aquifer to this area of the province — 
extremely important to the city of Regina. So if they’re going to 
come in with a rail line that’s coming into the area of that aquifer, 
they’re going to have to meet the requirements that we’re laying 
down. 
 
You realise that there are many things now built on top of that 
aquifer, and I sometimes wonder why the city decided where its 
industrial park would be and put it right on top of the main aquifer, 
but that’s history. I think when this rail line relocation occurs, they 
will have to address the issues that have been raised by the 
department and take mitigative measures to try and correct those. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Someone once said that if we don’t learn the 
lessons of history, we’re doomed to repeat them. And I concur 
with the minister’s statement that we’ve had some pretty bad 
moves in terms of city dumps and other industrial developments 
over the aquifer, and I would sure like to see a major project like 
rail line relocation, which will be with us for decades — not just a 
few years, but probably five to 10 decades — be done in a proper 
fashion, and that would mean not being on the aquifer. 
 
If phase one goes ahead, Mr. Minister, as proposed, what will the 
principals have to do to meet those requirements that you’ve 
outlined in your private letters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that many of the mitigative 
measures that were proposed have already been addressed in the 
hearing process. Where at one time they indicated that they would 
be cutting their grade down into the ground so that they kept their 
grade levels, now they’re indicating that they would be willing to 
raise above the ground and actually put fill on top to help to 
protect the aquifer. 
 
So many of these questions are already being addressed in the 
proposals that were brought forward to the hearings of the 
Canadian Transport Commission. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


