













































July 16, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 16, 1987 

 

 

1201 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you, and through you to all the members of this 

Assembly, a young lady from Sydney, Australia. She arrived in 

Canada on January 17 and will return next January 9. She is 18 

years of age, and she graduated from grade 12 in 1986 in the top 

10 per cent of her home state of New South Wales. Next year 

she’ll be attending Sydney University. 

 

But in the meantime Nikki is spending a year in Canada on a 

Rotary youth exchange, and is learning and experiencing the 

Canadian way of life. She’s an all-around athlete as well, and 

while in Canada she has learned how to snow ski. And although 

she is spending this year in Dryden, Ontario, she is in Regina for 

a couple of weeks, visiting the Carlson family, and Mr. Carlson is 

a member of the Eastview Rotary Club of Regina. 

 

She is situated in the Speaker’s gallery, and I would ask her to 

rise, and would all members please help me welcome Nikki to 

our legislature. Nikki Anderson. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Call for Investigation into Collapse of Investment 

Companies 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Consumer and Commercial Affairs, and it has to do with her 

incompetent and downright negligent performance regarding the 

collapse of First Investors and Associated Investors of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Yesterday you told this House that you could not 

take any action on behalf of Saskatchewan investors until after 

the court-appointed manager filed a report in August, buy 

yesterday the Government of British Columbia named a special 

investigator to look into the business practices of these two 

companies. 

 

In announcing the appointment of a special investigator, B.C.’s 

Minister of Finance said, and I quote: 

 

The government felt compelled to move quickly on this. Just a 

few minutes ago we received a telex from the Government of 

Alberta. The Alberta treasurer, Dick Johnston, says a full 

investigation will be held into the collapse of the two Principal 

Group investment subsidiaries. And he told a news conference 

he now believes there is substantial evidence of 

misrepresentation in the activities of the two companies. 

 

I’m asking the Minister; will you finally feel compelled to  

move quickly on this and recommend either a full public inquiry 

or a special investigator to look into the business practices of the 

Principal Group here in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I’m aware of all the 

things mentioned by the member opposite. The matter of an 

investigation has been raised. And yesterday in Queen’s Bench 

Court in Alberta the parameters of the investigation has been 

expanded to include looking into or delving into the workings of 

the Principal Group Ltd., which is the umbrella for a number of 

other subsidiaries. 

 

We will be relying, Mr. Speaker, on the findings of that Court. 

Mr. Speaker, the Principal . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Please allow the Minister 

to finish her answer. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The Principal Group Ltd. are not licensed 

to do business in the province of Saskatchewan — the Principal 

Group Ltd. Two of their subsidiaries, and I believe their trust 

company, are licensed to do business in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I believe that if improprieties have taken place and 

are demonstrated to the court, then the door definitely is open for 

either civil or criminal action. I also note, Mr. Speaker, that a 

group of some 30 investors here in the province have got together 

and have indicated that they also will be pursuing class action 

suits in the hopes of regaining their money. 

 

As far as the investigation is concerned into criminal activity, that 

would be handled by my colleague, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister knows 

that her department is responsible for these companies that were 

licensed under the Investment Contracts Act, and my question to 

you is: why are you so reluctant to show some initiative on the 

part of the thousands of Saskatchewan consumers who have been 

hurt by this collapse, who say they were misled by the Principal 

group of companies? 

 

It’s your job to protect the consumers. Why won’t you do your 

job? Alberta feels an inquiry if warranted; an action is warranted. 

British Columbia says action is warranted. Saskatchewan must 

say action is warranted. Why do you inaction is warranted? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I do believe action is 

warranted, and action is being taken on behalf of the investors in 

the Principal Group Ltd. 

 

We have taken action under The Investment Contracts Act. 

Firstly, as soon as notification was received from Alberta, we 

cancelled the license of some 70-odd sales people throughout the 

province, plus the licence of the two firms in question. 

 

Unfortunately, the Act also provides for . . . The department 

could lay charges against the group, or the two companies in 

question. They could be fined up to $5,000. However, Mr. 

Speaker, that does not provide  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1202 

 

monetary redress to the investors. 

 

I believe that once the investigation has taken place into the 

alleged improprieties . . . And we will have access to that 

information once we see what the group of investors who are 

meeting with their lawyer. I believe, on Monday, decide to do. 

Action is being taken, and I’m sure redress will be available. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question. A 

new question to the Minister of Consumer Affairs. I have in front 

of me a copy of a Canadian press report of just a few minutes 

ago, or perhaps a half an hour ago or so, from Edmonton, referred 

to by my colleague from Saskatoon. In that story, the Alberta 

treasurer, the Hon. Dick Johnston, says, in calling the inquiry, the 

following. The story says: 

 

The government originally resisted calls for an inquiry, but 

finally caved in to demands from investors and opposition 

politicians. 

 

I might say that they caved in only after a few days of questioning 

by the opposition and by the concerned investors. 

 

Now Alberta has adopted this approach. Notwithstanding, they 

have the same recourse, the same legislation, and the same 

approach that you’ve just articulated to this House. If they’ve 

done that, what could be the possible reason for you not 

following the same approach in Saskatchewan, or are we to 

assume that this is a really part of a large scale cover-up as far as 

you and your government is concerned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the member 

that an investigation into alleged criminal activity, as alluded to 

by the member from Saskatoon Fairview, would be handled by 

my colleague, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary, I’m not asking 

at this stage in the game nor am I making allegations of criminal 

impropriety. That’s not the issue. What is at issue is this, Madam 

Minister, a determination of what went wrong, and who’s 

responsible for what went wrong, and where does the liability 

attach — either civilly or criminally. Let’s leave that aside for the 

moment. 

 

That’s what a public inquiry’s about. Now Alberta is doing it. 

British Columbia is doing it. We have a bunch of salesmen and 

other officials and officers in Saskatchewan, under these 

companies, have been doing similar things, it has been reported. 

My question is: why do you not call a similar inquiry in the 

province of Saskatchewan to determine who is at fault? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that in Alberta 

and in British Columbia an investigation is going on. I have no 

knowledge of public inquiries at this point in time. B.C. has 

appointed an investigator under its business practices legislation. 

Any investigation that  

would be going on in this province would be handled by my 

colleague, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 

of Consumer Affairs. The minister has just informed the House 

— and I think its been bad advice. I don’t attach any particular 

motive for it — that she does not know of the activities in Alberta 

with respect to an inquiry. 

 

My new question is this, which has to be prefaced by a brief 

report of yet another Canadian press story of just a few moments 

ago from Edmonton, which says, in part as follows: 

 

Justice J.V.H. Milvain has been made chairman of the 

management advisory committee set up to provide instructions 

to the court appointed manager of the two firms: 

 

Johnston has also promised the government will apply to the 

courts to allow the manager to examine witnesses under oath 

and call public hearings into the affairs of all of the associated 

companies. 

 

That is clearly the establishment of a public inquiry approach. 

And I am saying: why is it that your government simply won’t 

follow the lead of the other two provinces in having a public 

hearing as to who’s at fault? Can we assume, Madam Minister, 

that you’re not doing this because you and your department 

officials are at fault and you want to protect them, and that’s the 

reason why you’re not calling an inquiry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, my department is not at 

fault. My department has been doing what they have to do in all 

cases of this type. We rely, as I have said many times in this 

House, and the members opposite, particularly the lawyers on 

that side of the House, know the procedures that are followed 

with extra-provincial licensed institutions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Maybe they don’t. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well, maybe they don’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Please 

allow the minister to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, there . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I have just asked for some 

order and already the member from Regina Centre is trying to get 

around that request, so I ask him again to please allow the 

minister to finish her answer. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I also would say, Mr. Speaker, that what 

Mr. Johnston said in Alberta, the investigator will have to apply 

to the court for permission to call witnesses or have public 

hearings. I would turn the matter of investigation over to the 

Minister of Justice at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order,  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1203 

 

please. I’m afraid I must rule the minister out of order. We 

previously had a rule in the House where we would not pass a 

question form the minister that was being asked to another 

minister, so I am afraid that on that basis I must rule you out of 

order. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct a question 

to the Minister of Consumer Affairs. I ask the Minister of 

Consumer Affairs, with respect, to pay attention to the question. 

Leave aside for the moment whether it’s a full public inquiry 

ordered by a court in Alberta. Leave aside for the moment 

whether it’s an investigator, as British Columbia has set up. 

Frankly we don’t quite care, although I’ll make a comment about 

that some other time, about the forum of the investigation. 

 

What we as the opposition are urging you to do, your government 

to do, is to launch an investigation, whether it’s by application to 

court, whether it’s by a special investigator, or whether it’s by 

your own mandate and by your own powers, and you won’t do it. 

And my question is — I repeat again because you haven’t 

answered it — why is it that you and the government is so 

stubbornly digging in, refusing to find out and telling the people 

of Saskatchewan what went wrong and what can be done to solve 

the problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s question 

with regards to my investigation. 

 

Yesterday in question period, the hon. member from Saskatoon 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Now this is about the fifth or 

sixth time that I’ve already had to stand up in this question period 

and, quite frankly, I think we’re just wasting the time of question 

period with me constantly interrupting, which should not be the 

role of the Speaker. But I think hon. members should co-operate 

to help make certain that it’s a good question period. It’s your 

question period. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Now, this is the 

last time I’ll caution. I think members should have some respect, 

and that’s very elementary respect, just to try to be quiet after 

several, several requests. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the member 

from Riversdale’s question. Yesterday in this Assembly, the hon. 

member from Saskatoon Fairview — Fairhaven, something like 

that — posed a question as to whether or not the Department of 

Justice would conduct some investigations. 

 

I call Assembly that members of the . . . .or people from the 

Department of Justice attended the meeting of the various group 

of investors in Regina on Tuesday  

evening. They, I’m advised, took very copious notes of the 

various concerns raised by the many people that were there. 

Following question period yesterday, I directed the Department 

of Justice to make full investigation into any allegations of 

impropriety in this particular undertaking. 

 

I think the Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs indicated 

to this Assembly today that the Queen’s Bench court in Alberta 

has substantially and significantly expanded the realm of 

investigation in this particular area. My view is that the 

Department of Justice will have been instructed by me to make a 

full investigation across the province of any impropriety alleged 

in this particular activity. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — A question to either the Minister of 

Consumer Affairs, or the Minister of Justice — a new question. 

May I preface it by saying that this is very disturbingly 

reminiscent of the strategy adopted by the administration at the 

time of the collapse of Pioneer Trust. 

 

But I will say to the minister that that we can debate at a future 

date. My question to the Minister of Consumer Affairs, and to the 

Minister of Justice — I don’t care who answers it. I wish the 

Premier was here to answer it, because obviously we have two 

contradictory positions. 

 

There is public confidence at stake here. People have invested 

their life savings with these two companies. They are not going to 

be satisfied with some sort of secret investigation, Mr. Speaker, 

by the Department of Justice officials. That’s why, according to 

this report, Alberta is seeking to have public hearings, under oath, 

and full examination with public witnesses. 

 

That is my position. I’m not asking for criminal or civil: I’m 

asking for a full public hearing. Will the Minster of Justice or the 

Consumer Affairs minister tell us why in earth is there no one 

good reason for a full public hearing so that investor confidence 

can be restored in your administration and the investment . . . 

(inaudible) . . . of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows full 

went that the member, the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview 

yesterday in this Assembly raised allegations of criminal activity 

in this particular case. Now that allegation by an hon. member, I 

think, warrants an investigation of criminal activity. Now the hon. 

member, as a lawyer, should know that if you are alleging 

criminal activity, then surely the proper course for Justice to 

pursue would be for the police forces and the prosecutors to look 

into that information. 

 

You are the ones that are asking for that. Surely you, as a lawyer, 

would want the pursuit of criminal justice, or other wrongdoings, 

to be done in the proper and long tradition way of the judicial 

system. And that is to do it the way it is always done, and not be 

done on public in front of the television cameras for you to 

parade your political activity as opposed to pursue justice, which 

we all should be looking for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1204 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have confidence 

in the Department of Justice officials to examine the question of 

criminal impropriety, if there be such. And may I say, 

parenthetically, that what the member from Fairview was doing 

was communicating the allegations of those contained at the 

meeting of the other night. 

 

That’s not my question or the position of the opposition. Criminal 

investigation’s one thing. Will the hon. minister tell us who is 

going to examine whether or not the Minister of Consumer 

Affairs and her officials were negligent in their duties, which may 

not be criminal? Who’s going to investigate that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I wonder, when the hon. member speaks 

like that, whether he is interested genuinely in politics or whether 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order! Order. Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . or whether he is genuinely interested 

in the court system pursing the proper justice and the proper 

remedy in this particular case. Is it your interest only to look out 

for the 3,000-odd people that have made investments in this 

particular company? Is that your concern? 

 

If it is your concern, surely we should be doing: one, 

investigating the criminality as alleged by the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview — number one. That is most important, and 

that’s the one thing that should be done. There is a court process 

in place. The various people had a meeting. As I understand, from 

reading it, what they wish to do is pursue the matter in court. 

 

We are investigating, in the Department of Justice, all 

wrongdoing that might be associated with this particular case. It 

should not be restricted to the criminal law; it should be restricted 

to all areas of wrongdoing. And that’s what the Department of 

Justice is for, and that’s what they are in fact pursuing. 

 

You should be more concerned, I would suggest . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order! Order, please. Order. Now the 

member’s answer became a little lengthy and I would just like to 

draw to his attention that I was on my feet for about — I don’t 

know exactly how many seconds — but a relatively long period 

of time, and he did not stop speaking. So I’d like to draw that to 

your attention. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — A new question to the Minister of Consumer 

Affairs or to the Minister of Justice. I want to make this 

absolutely clear as to the position of the official opposition. We 

want to protect, yes we want to protect, in many cases, the life 

savings of 3,000 or more Saskatchewan people. We want to know 

how that can be done. And moreover, Mr. Speaker, I ask this 

question of the minister. We want to know how it is that this mess 

took place in Saskatchewan. 

 

I say, and I ask the Minister of Consumer Affairs, therefore; will 

you not do what Alberta and what British Columbia have decided 

to do on behalf of their citizens, and that is to have a full, 

complete, public, and open investigation to determine whether or 

not there’s liability in your department, liability from a criminal 

point of view, or liability which may warrant a change in 

legislation. Why is it . . . I repeat again that you’re reluctant to do 

that. Why is it that of all the three western provinces, when the 

other two are having investigation, only Saskatchewan has buried 

its head in the sand and says that it’s not going to help our 

Saskatchewan people? Why is that the case? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I don’t think it’s fair for the hon. member 

to indicate that we are doing nothing. The Department of Justice, 

on my instructions, are launching an investigation into this 

particular case. They are doing an investigation, and I think it 

would be unfair for the member from Saskatoon Riversdale to 

somehow suggest that we are doing nothing. 

 

We have a concern for the 3,000 people. I’m not sure . . . 

anybody in this House should make allegations that there’s 

criminal activity. We are certainly going to investigate whether 

there is criminal activity. We are going to investigate if there was, 

in fact, wrongdoing. That is being done by the Department of 

Justice. Why are you against that type of activity in the interests 

of the 3,000 people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 

Minister of Consumer Affairs, and it deals with the issue of First 

Investors and Associated Investors. 

 

Madam Minister, your counterpart in Alberta observed that there 

was now evidence, substantial evidence, of misrepresentation. On 

the basis of that, he is asking the court to have public hearings. 

 

My question to you is this, Madam Minister: do you believe that 

that substantial evidence of misrepresentation stopped at the 

Saskatchewan border; or do you believe that there is likely 

similar evidence in Saskatchewan; and if so, why are you not 

moving to have public hearings as your counterpart is doing in 

Alberta? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, I think your statement, far different from your 

seat-mate, was to the effect that the people of Alberta are 

applying into the court. The court is going to make the 

determination as to the parameters of that particular investigation, 

okay? And that’s properly how it should be; they’re applying into 

the court. 

 

The Minister of Consumer Affairs has said that you would not . . . 

you rejected out of hand yesterday and the day before that 

somehow we shouldn’t go to the court because the court will 

somehow just put it off for days and days, and months, and years. 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1205 

 

The hon. member from Riversdale, as he shouted from his seat 

from my last question, indicated this was in fact a cover-up, 

alleging that the Department of Justice, alleging in this province 

that the Department of Justice, alleging in this province that the 

Department of Justice is part of a cover-up. As a former attorney 

general, I think that is a disgusting way to talk about a department 

when I believe it’s a very good department, has served this 

province very well, and is a very professional operation. And he 

should stand up, he should stand up, Mr. Speaker, and apologize 

to the Department of Justice and apologize to people of the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if 

the Minister of Justice, would he advise: (a) is he aware of any 

other trust company failures in this province? (b) was the 

Department of Justice advised? and (c) was a single charge laid? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I think the 

minister was asked an important question, and we should give 

him the opportunity to answer that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Obviously the members don’t 

want to give the minister an opportunity to answer the question. I 

ask you once more to co-operate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I anticipated a question like 

that from the member from Riversdale. I did not anticipate a 

question like that form the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition knows full well — knows full well 

— that the Department of Justice in this province has a long and 

credible tradition — a tradition, I think, we should all be proud 

of. Served various governments — served various governments 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I am afraid I’m 

just going to, unfortunately, have to keep interrupting until you 

allow the minister to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, 

yesterday in question period, made allegations of criminal 

activity. Now that criminal activity, I take . . . and that allegation, 

I take very seriously. And it’s something that we intend to pursue. 

 

For the Leader of the Opposition, a very honourable, honourable 

person, to suggest somehow in his question that we would, in 

fact, cover this up, or the Department of Justice would attempt to 

cover this up, would not lay charges at any cost, I think is an 

inappropriate and unfortunate statement for the Leader of the 

Opposition to make — something that I would not have expected 

from a man of his dignity and his quality and his stature. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 

Question period is over. Could I ask the hon. members to please 

be quiet. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Environment and Public Safety 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask a few questions 

relating to the mandate under your department of the fire 

commissioner’s and some of the work related to the fire 

commissioner’s office. And I will start with . . . as you are quite 

aware, Mr. Minister, the entire insurance premium scheme has 

gone up considerably, particularly as it applies to home insurance 

over the last few years. And one of the ways or things that the 

government can do to help bring this back into perspective where 

their insurance rates are once again quite in line with what 

people’s expectations would be that they are, they should be. One 

of the things we can do is considerable work in the fire 

prevention aspect. And my questions will be asking about your 

department’s work in relation to the commission’s office. 

 

The first question I want to ask, Mr. Minister, is: in the Estimates, 

whereabouts in the Estimates, in which subvote in this booklet is 

the money allotted to the fire commission’s office come into? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — To answer the member’s question, it will be 

part of subvote 5. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And the . . . What is 

the amount that is allotted to the fire commission’s office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised by my staff that it’s 1.024 

million. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, you have stated that the amount 

of money allotted to the fire commission’s office is 1.024 million. 

I will come back to that again later. 

 

At this time, I would like to refer to section 22, I believe it is, of 

The Fire Prevention Act of 1980. My understanding is that under 

section 22 that a sum equivalent to 1 per cent of the premiums 

collected under The Saskatchewan Insurance Act is to be paid to 

the government for use of the fire commission’s office. Could 

you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that’s right. And the amount that’s 

raised is very similar to what I indicated as the supplement. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, my information here is 

according to the blue book published. The Public Accounts, in 

1985-’86, show that the taxes collected under fire prevention is 

1.7 million, and this was for  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1206 

 

‘85-’86. Do you project that there’s going to be that great a 

decrease in the funding for this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d advise the member that that tax that’s 

collected does not come directly to our department but, rather, 

goes to general revenue. The amount that I listed to you is the 

amount of money that’s allocated to this subvote. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I take you back, Mr. Minister, to the Act, The 

Fire Prevention act, section 22(2). It says in here, and I quote: 

 

Any moneys paid pursuant to subsection (1) are to be 

deposited in the consolidated fund and dedicated to paying 

the expenses incidental to the administration of this Act and 

the regulations. 

 

And does that not indicate, Mr. Minister, that the money collected 

on fire insurance premiums, a 1 per cent, should all have been 

given to you, to your department for work with the fire 

commission office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The money does go to Consolidated Fund 

and they appropriate as much money as we need to operate the 

fire commissioner’s office and the people that work out of it. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, if they’ve only appropriated 

that much to you, did you make some type of substantial 

representation to the department that allots the money, and 

indicate and bring to their attention exactly what it says in this 

Act, and that they should be paying you 1.7 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think there’s anything in this Act . . . 

if you read it carefully, there’s nothing in the Act that says that 

every cent collected comes. What it says is that the money that is 

collected is assigned to meet the expenses. And it does meet the 

expenses. But for us to have an extra half-million dollars in that 

division, when it wasn’t needed last year, would not be 

reasonable. 

 

The amount of money that our department requisitioned is what 

we received. It was enough money to pay the costs of that 

department. We don’t need to have excess there. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — We’ll get to talk about the need for the money 

in a short while, Mr. Minister. But I think you either better get 

this Act changed, or you should adhere to it. And I repeat it again, 

Mr. Minister. It’s quite clear to me. It says: 

 

Any moneys paid pursuant to subsection (1) are to be 

deposited in the consolidated fund and dedicated to paying 

the expenses incidental to the administration . . . 

 

It doesn’t say part of the money collected should be dedicated. It 

says “and dedicated.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — But the Consolidated Fund has no need of 

transferring more money to my department than we need to 

operate. What they do with the money in the Consolidated Fund, 

that’s done within Finance. And they  

can dedicate it. But the amount of money that my department 

indicates that it needs to operate the fire commissioner’s office is 

the amount of money I gave you. And it carried the cost of the 

department last season, and it likely will again. 

 

If there were need for more moneys within that fire 

commissioner’s office, then we would ask for more. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, you have stated that you are 

getting as much money as you need. That certainly isn’t the 

position of the provincial fire chiefs. I’ve had occasion to discuss 

this matter with several of their representatives, and I’ve been 

advised, for example, Mr. Minister, that in Saskatchewan you’ve 

only got four people that are allotted for training of volunteer fire 

chiefs. Would you confirm that number, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I am advised that we have four instructors, 

the principal, and one clerk, so six people in all. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — We have four instructors, Mr. Minister, for 

approximately 510 fire departments in the province. Manitoba 

has 16, for approximately 230 fire departments in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I am advised that in Manitoba they operate a 

fire college. We don’t have a fire college. It’s been talked about 

considerable, but hasn’t gone forward at this time. What we do is 

to offer instructions to people who are involved in the 

fire-fighting business. The larger cities operate their own fire 

instruction to their firemen. So basically when we have a school 

for fire-fighters, it deals with more the smaller centres. the 

smaller towns, villages, and small cities. The large cities look 

after their own. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that in 

view of us not having a fire college, it would just make that much 

more sense to have more field training staff to help out with our 

volunteer fire departments which are putting in a lot of work, 

gratis, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to turn briefly to some of the recommendations, Mr. 

Minister, that have been published, and I’m sure that you’re 

aware of, published in March 23, 1984 by the Select Committee 

on Fire Prevention Protection. These are concerns that have been 

brought to your department. It was a committee formed by 

members on both sides of the House, and they had access to 

technical advisers. And in this report there are several 

recommendations. One of the recommendations from page 11 is: 

 

That training for firefighters in Saskatchewan be accelerated. 

 

I am advised that as a result of this booklet being published, there 

has not been any increase in training for fire-fighters in 

Saskatchewan; has not been any increase in the number of 

instructors since 1984; that the number was four at that time; it 

remains as four. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Prior to 1984, we had two people involved 

in the instruction. We now have six people  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1207 

 

involved together — four instructors, one principal, and one 

clerk. I don’t know whether the hon. member has had the 

opportunity to go to one of the instructions that we offer for 

training of firemen. I’ve been at two this year. I would say that 

the work that’s being done by the instructors is excellent. And the 

comments that I receive, both verbal and by letter from the fire 

chiefs around rural Saskatchewan, indicate to me that they’re 

very satisfied with the course offerings that are in place at this 

time. 

 

(1445) 

 

That’s not saying that you can’t do better. But when money is 

tight in any province, you don’t expand things beyond the normal 

area that you can afford to carry. I think that we’re doing a 

commendable job at this time, and I appreciate the work that 

those instructors are doing. Until I start to hear that they’re not 

meeting the needs, I don’t see a great lot of need of increasing the 

service. If there is a need, and that starts to come through letters, 

through conversations with people in the fire-fighting business, 

then we’ll certainly take a look at it. But at this point, that need is 

not being expressed to me. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think that nobody will 

argue that the four people who are currently involved, and their 

support staff, are not doing a good job. I think that any 

communications that I’ve had with fire-fighters and the 

municipalities have all expressed the same view that you just 

have done, that they are doing a tremendous job with the 

resources available. 

 

The contention that you have, though, that there may not be any 

additional need is the one, however, that I’m trying to address 

here. I don’t believe that this committee of this Assembly would 

have come forth with these recommendations if they hadn’t have 

felt that there wasn’t this need. I also would like to mention that 

quite often, in a situation like this, a couple of dollars spent in 

preventative programs saves a lot of money down the line. That’s 

why I would like to pursue this line of questioning. 

 

On page 12 of this report it mentions that training modules be 

developed. The recommendation is recommendation number two: 

 

That training modules be developed that will deal with 

emergency planning and firefighting in shopping malls, 

hotels, high-rise buildings, factories, industrial complexes, 

refineries, etc. 

 

I’m advised that . . . etc., is a quotation from here. I add to the 

hon. member. 

 

Now the . . . I’m advised that one program has been developed — 

that there’s been a hospital program developed. I’m also advised 

that they’re working towards getting a program in place in 1989, 

that that is target. I’d like you to confirm that. However, I’m also 

advised that, even though you’ve targeted for 1989, you have no 

personnel in place to do this. So I want to know: how are you 

going to get it done by 1989 if there is no personnel in place to do 

it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d like to ask the member where he  

gets the 1989 objective? Could you elaborate a little on where 

you get that objective? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I’ve been advised about the objective, Mr. 

Minister. I’m not in the practice . . . I haven’t developed the 

practice of answering the questions, but I would state that I’ve 

been advised that that objective has been indicated to me by a 

volunteer fire-fighter. That’s why I’m asking for confirmation on 

it, Mr. Minister, rather than stating it as something I’ve gotten 

from a piece of paper. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well that’s the reason I asked you for 

clarification because there’s no knowledge of that 1989 deadline 

date for anything through this department. I can’t speak to it 

further than that. We have no knowledge of it, and that’s why I 

asked you where you received that; I though maybe we were 

missing something. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I would ask the question . . . I’d rephrase the 

question then. Have you set that up as an objective, to put these 

training modules into place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would reply, no, we have not. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Is it something, Mr. Minister, that you would 

feel that your staff should be looking at fairly soon, or have you 

. . . are you taking this document and filing it at this stage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the staff of the fire college 

are working, or the instructors are working, on a daily basis 

upgrading the modules of — the modules one, two, and three. 

But they’re doing it on an ongoing basis. There’s no indication of 

any specific date that the final level will be achieved. I think, as 

things change in fire fighting, there need for us to be prepared for 

change as well. 

 

And as you know, fire-fighting equipment has changed very 

rapidly in the last few years. We need to be able as a department 

to respond to the newest technology and be able to train people to 

use that technology. So we will be looking at it on an ongoing 

basis, and I’m advised that the staff are working steadily, 

improving each of those modules. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Good. Now, Mr. Minister, as I mentioned at 

the beginning of my questioning, and we established that there’s 

$0.7 million slipping through the fingers here that your 

department is not receiving for the fire commission’s office that it 

possibly could be. And here we’ve come across an example 

where money could be funnelled in with a few more personnel so 

that we could get these emergency training modules developed. 

Because under the present circumstances it could take 20 or 30 

years until all of this is done, in view of you not being able to set 

up a target date. 

 

If we proceed further to page 13, there are several 

recommendations there dealing with certification programs for 

fire-fighters — establishing certification programs. Now once 

again I’ll ask you: are there any staff that have been assigned 

directly to this, to work on and establish certification programs? 

 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1208 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that that is the goal in the 

training process, that they will gradually certify people at the 

different levels of training that they have achieved. And there is 

no date set to accomplish that, but they are working towards it, 

and as soon as people receive the proper amount of training they 

will be given that certification. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Recommendation 2 on that same page 

indicates: 

 

That certification programs for fire-fighters should include 

both written, oral and practical testing. 

 

What is the stand of your department with respect that 

recommendation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that at this time we use the oral 

examination and the field examination. We don’t have the written 

examination at this time. Whether they’ll have it soon or not, I 

couldn’t give you a definite answer at this time. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — You don’t have a written examination. Is it an 

objective of the department to work towards a written 

examination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that they are working towards 

that, but I can’t give you a date when they will achieve it. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Once again, an 

extra — I would mention that that extra 0.7 million would go a 

long way to speed those things up. I would like to turn to page 15 

of that same report. Item 3 talks about a principal for a fire 

training college. I would ask whether or not you have named a 

principal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think we’d be getting out in front of the 

college if we were to name a principal. We don’t have a college 

as yet. We have looked at it. The cost is considerable, as you can 

appreciate, and at a time when finance is tight we didn’t see it the 

route to go, to move out and establish a full-fledged fire college 

and hire a principal and so on. 

 

So no, we haven’t selected a principal, and likely will not select a 

principal until we have something definite that indicates we’re 

going ahead with the college. If we decided to build a fire 

college, then would be the time to put a principal in place to see 

that what was built as a college would meet the needs for the type 

of training they want to give. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Could you give me an indication of some of 

the preliminary work that you may have done towards 

establishment of a fire college? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — There’s only been some internal discussion 

within the department, some discussion with the Department of 

Supply and Services, but no decisions have been arrived at this 

time. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Have you had any negotiations with the 

federal government regarding federal funding for EMO 

(Emergency Measures Organization), or EMO funding,  

emergency measures funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Through our EMO branch, they have done 

some preliminary discussion with the federal government. But 

they’re not conclusive. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Would that be with respect to a fire college, 

or would it be with respect to something that was more 

multi-purpose? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the federal government were to get 

involved through the EMO, it would have to be a multi-purpose 

college, but we’re not at that point by any means. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — On page 16 of that report the 

recommendation states that the use of secondment be considered 

as a means of providing supplementary staff at the fire training 

college, and for Outreach programs. Now particularly with 

respect to Outreach programs, I would ask the question that, in 

view of the amount of work that you have stated that you would 

like to accomplish in the department, have you done anything or 

put any funding into place to be able to use secondment to do so? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, we have not at this time. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, that brings to an end the 

questions that I wanted to ask with respect to this. 

 

The comment that I would like to make is to summarize the 

essence of the questions that I’ve brought to your attention, the 

first premise being that there is money now being paid by all of 

the citizens of Saskatchewan, a 1 per cent levy on their fire 

insurance premiums, and this money is to be directed by law to 

the funding of the fire commission’s office. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has in 1984 set up a 

committee, a select committee, made up of members of both 

sides of the House. The committee has come forward with a 

series of, I believe, well-founded recommendations. These 

recommendations largely are endorsed by the fire-fighters of 

Saskatchewan, certainly by the fire chiefs, by the provincial fire 

chiefs. 

 

One point seven million comes into the government — 1 million 

is used by the fire commission. And I would urge that you would 

work within your department to get a little more of that money 

into the hands of the fire commission’s office so that they could 

do the jobs that need to be done in Saskatchewan, and they could 

do the jobs that the people who pay the premiums, the 1 per cent 

premium, feel that should be done. 

 

I would now like to turn to another item that I would like to spend 

a few minutes on, Mr. Minister. This item has to deal with what is 

known as 20th century disease; or other names for it are: 

environmental hypersensitive disorder, or allergy disease, or 

environmental disease. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to know whether you’ve ever been advised 

by the Department of Health about the possibility . . . or about 

this particular disease, the extent of it. Have  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1209 

 

you been advised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I have not been advised. That’s a new 

disease to me. It probably would be better to ask that question of 

the Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A lot of the material 

related to the environmental disease certainly does pertain to the 

Department of Health. I bring it up here because there are some 

materials, or some aspects of this disease, the preventative aspects 

of this disease, which I believe would fall under the purview of 

the Department of Environment. 

 

And there are a few things that I would like to mention to you in 

the form of questions, and ask that you be advised on this and 

perhaps, in the future, may be able to consult with the 

Department of Health on it. 

 

I think it’s important, first of all, to establish just exactly what this 

disease is. And I would ask the minister, first of all, if he is aware 

of this report which I have in my hand of The Ad Hoc committee 

on Environmental Hypersensitivity Disorders, published in 

August ‘85. It’s known as the Thomson report, and it was issued 

by the Government of Ontario. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would have to simply reply to the member 

that I’m not aware of that report, so I couldn’t offer you any 

information on it. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — This report was compiled by a committee, 

one of the members of whom is . . . whose name is Dr. John 

Gerrard . . . pardon me, John Gerrard, professor, department of 

paediatrics, University Hospital, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s a major document that the . . . It was published by the Ontario 

government, partly because of the extensive lobby group and 

partly because of the number of people that they have now 

identified that suffer from environmental . . . what is known as 

environmental disease. 

 

They estimate that there is between 20,000 and 50,000 people 

now being treated by the medical profession, or other people in 

the health field, that are suffering from what is known as 

environmental hypersensitivity. 

 

For the record, I’d like to read the definition of environmental 

hypersensitivity into the record from . . . the definition from the 

Ontario study. It says here on page 17 of this Thomson study: 

 

Environmental hypersensitivity is a chronic multisystem 

disorder, usually involving symptoms of the central nervous 

system and at least one other system. Affected persons are 

frequently intolerant to some foods, and they react adversely 

to some chemicals and to environmental agents, singly or in 

combination, at levels generally tolerated by the majority. 

Affected persons have varying degrees of morbidity, from 

mild discomfort to total disability. Upon physical 

examination, the patient is normally free from any abnormal 

findings. Although  

abnormalities of complement and lymphocytes have been 

recorded, no single laboratory test, including (some 

technical names here) serum lgE, is consistently altered. 

Improvement is associated with avoidance of suspected 

agents and symptoms recur with re-exposure. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, that’s a fairly technical definition, but in my 

own layman’s terms, and having a relative who’s suffering from 

that, I’ve been able to establish that this is a disease which is not 

really . . .has not been catalogued and does not have a long 

history — a long history in Canada, but it’s sometimes related to 

allergies. It’s very similar to allergy diseases — allergy-related 

diseases. 

 

But a person who has this disease may react in ways that is rather 

befuddling to the medical profession. And so the people who 

have this disease have been categorized under these names. And 

there have been several publications of them. Now how it would 

apply to the Department of Environment is because not only are 

some of the causes of the disease now alleged to be food and the 

natural surroundings in a home, but also the chemical pollutants 

in the air, particularly gas fumes, tobacco smoke, food additives, 

door from plastic, formaldehyde, and anything else that might be 

around. 

 

Now it may seem esoteric, Mr. Minister, but the problem is, when 

I saw the figures, there are some 20,000 to 50,000 people that 

were being treated this way in Ontario, I thought it really ought to 

be something that the Government of Saskatchewan, particularly 

the Department of Health and, to some extent, the Department of 

Environment should be aware of. 

 

So I would . . . and there is some intelligence about this matter 

here in Saskatchewan — as I mentioned, Dr. Gerrard’s name. I 

would ask, Mr. Minister, whether you’re aware of an 

environmental illness steering committee centred here in Regina 

under Catholic Family Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I’m not aware of it. I believe that the 

issue that the member raises is a serious issue, but I think it would 

be better dealt with under the Health estimates when people with 

a medical background are here that would have far more 

information on this subject. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I will be doing that, Mr. Minister. There’s a 

couple of items related to this that I would like to ask you about. 

One of the concerns of this group in Regina is monitoring the 

external air, particularly in the farming communities, because 

they have found that in early seeding . . . in early spring, during 

seeding and during . . .when there’s use of spraying and 

fertilising, that this disease seems to become much more 

prevalent. It seems to be associated with snow mould. It seems to 

be associated in areas around oil fields and gas wells. And again, 

symptoms seem to show up around harvest time. 

 

They’re doing some monitoring, Mr. Minister, and they have 

hired some students. I was wondering whether . . . And they have 

gotten some provincial funding for it. I was wondering whether 

the funding came from your department. 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1210 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we’re not funding any study 

of that type. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I would advise that this is 

something that your department should be looking at in the near 

future. I think there are some good advice to be received by 

people like Herb Vanhorne, who was very active on this 

particular illness steering committee. 

 

They tell us that they have found that, as a result, that they have 

found that there are so many people that are falling between the 

cracks of treatment in the health field, and that they have had 

some success in treating this — this what they call environmental 

illness — using some very specialized . . . people with specialized 

knowledge. 

 

I would ask, Mr. Minister, would you be prepared to advise that 

you would have your people in your department consult with the 

people in Department of Health, to see if there is any . . . or to see 

what action the Department of Environment should be taking 

with respect to the monitoring for the possible causes of 

environmental disease? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — My department will speak to the Department 

of Health. I’m not sure to what extent we’ll be involved, but we 

will make an initial contact and get more information. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, that brings to a conclusion my 

questions. I thank you very much for your last response, 

particularly, because I feel that this is something that we should 

be addressing. It is being addressed in some of the other 

provinces. And we will be able to keep in touch with you and 

follow up in the future. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I have two 

questions for you, very briefly. You sent over the list of the 

consultants for ‘86-87. With regard to that list, am I to understand 

that is a complete list — there are no consultants . . . consultations 

or consultants retained other than those on that list for the year? 

 

And the second part of the question has to do with item 3 and 

item 7, which are co-operative projects. Am I to assume that the 

$9,000 in the case of the item 3 — $9,025 — is half the cost, or is 

that the total cost? And similarly with item 7. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — On the Prairie Agri-Photo done from 

Carman, Manitoba. That figure was the total cost of the project, 

and we were reimbursed approximately half by Sask Water. 

 

On item 7, which is Environmental Managers Ltd., from 

Saskatoon dealing with the greenstone belt co-operative project, 

our department paid 9,995, the federal government paid 20 

million, and Northern Affairs paid 10 million. So it’s a $40 

million project and there were 40 . . . I’m getting it to be a fairly 

large project. I’m sorry, it’s thousands. It’s a $40,000 project of 

which we paid approximately one-quarter. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One further 

question with regard to payments to the property management 

corporation. I believe when we were investigating that figure 

prior to this time, there may or may not have been some question 

asked about whether there were any other payments other than 

that under subvote 6 to the property management corporation, or 

is that in its entirety? All the money was paid to the property 

management corporation in subvote 6? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — There are other things that are paid to the 

property management corporation. They’re listed under other 

services and CVA (central vehicle agency) vehicles and executive 

aircraft rental of $260,280; computer equipment rentals, a 

$23,600; stationery and office supplies, $31,140; duplicating and 

photocopying, $17,590. 

 

Those would be the other items that would be covered that go to 

the property management corporation. They used to go to Supply 

and Service but will now go to property management. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — You, Mr. Minister, said other services. I 

see only the heading, “other expenses.” Am I to assume that those 

other expenses came under administration and communications, 

subvote 1? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that they are spread throughout 

the subvotes, like each branch that uses the service would pay for 

it out of their subvote, so it would be part of the total list of the 

other subvotes. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — For further clarification then, Mr. Minister. 

In every one of these subvotes there is likely something that is 

paid to the property management corporation, and if so, could 

you identify, by sending across the list and indicating what 

subvote they came under? Just so I have a grip on the entire 

picture. 

 

If you agree to do that, Mr. Minister, I won’t ask you any more 

questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I gave you the totals, but I couldn’t today 

give you the break-out of how that falls under each division of the 

department. If that’s a real important figure to you, it’ll take a 

couple of days probably to break it out, but we could do that. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I’d like you to do that 

because this is the first vote that the first department is dealing 

with, the new property management corporation. I just want to 

survey the land a bit here, and I want to see the entire picture for 

the Department of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we’ll do that. But as I told you, it would 

take a couple of days probably before we can get back to you. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 

to just return to a topic that’s been occurring on and off again 

during this estimates, and that’s the environmental impact 

statements for the Shand and for the Rafferty projects. 

 

I wonder, can you give me the exact date on which your  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1211 

 

department received the environmental impact study for Shand, 

and also for Rafferty — the exact date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t have the exact date for the Shand one 

here; we could get it for you. It was in December, and it was prior 

to Christmas. But we don’t have the exact date with us today. The 

Rafferty came in on June 1. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — That’s June 1, 1987? Good, I just want to make 

sure, just for the record, that your answer for that is yes. Because 

I have here, Mr. Minister, a letter from Mr. Wheatley, who is the 

general legal counsel for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation,. 

to the Hon. Thomas McMillan, the Minister of the Environment 

in Canada. And it says . . . the date of the letter is April 28, 1986. 

And it deals with an application before the . . . for licence under 

the International River Improvements Act, of which I’m sure that 

you, as minister responsible for the water corporation, are 

familiar. 

 

And in this letter from Mr. Wheatley to Mr. McMillan, we see on 

page 4 of this letter, under section (f), details of the adverse effect 

of the improvement on flood control and other uses of water 

together with information as to plans to minimize such effect. It 

says: 

 

The improvement will not produce any adverse effect on 

flood control or existing consumptive use. All other types of 

effects have been addressed in an environmental impact 

study which is supported with proposed plans for 

mitigation. The environmental impact study is available 

upon request. 

 

Now this, Mr. Minister, is in a letter dated April 28, 1986. You’ve 

just told the House that in fact the environmental impact study 

was only submitted to your department ion June 1, 1987. That is 

14 months — 14 months — after the environmental impact study 

was available to the federal Department of the Environment. 

 

Why is it, Mr. Minister, that the federal Department of the 

Environment can receive a copy of the environmental impact 

study for Rafferty when the provincial Department of the 

Environment is only able to receive that environmental impact 

study on June 1, 1987? Why does the federal government get 

preferred treatment for an Environmental impact study when the 

people of Saskatchewan don’t? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I could advise the hon. member that there 

was an initial environmental impact study done and brought to 

the department, and then it was withdrawn. So the . . . You’re 

talking about two different environmental impact studies. There 

was one done, and Sask Power — not Sask Power, the Souris 

Basin Development Authority, I’m sorry — withdrew that 

statement and then proceeded to do a much more detailed 

environmental impact study. And that’s the statement that was 

filed on June 1, and the statement that will be dealt with by my 

department. But the other one was withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, was the original environmental 

impact statement — which according to this letter from Mr. 

Wheatley was available upon request to the federal Department 

of the Environment — was it in  

fact sent to the federal Department of Environment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I really have no idea whether it was or was 

not sent. You’re reading from something from Sask Water. I 

don’t know whether they had it at that time; I wasn’t there at that 

time. But I really couldn’t answer you. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — . . . (inaudible) . . . you’re minister in charge of 

both, and that in fact it’s the relationship between the provincial 

Department of the Environment and the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation in that you’re wearing both hats. It seems to me that, 

in terms of some of the background to this project, that you 

would have knowledge of it. 

 

Could you tell us, Mr. Minister, that . . . You say that the original 

environmental impact study was withdrawn. Why was it 

withdrawn? What were the reasons for its withdrawal by the 

proponents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Basically, I think that question should be 

asked of the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. But I will advise the hon. member that at the time 

that the first statement was prepared, they were not final on the 

location of the Rafferty dam. And when you change location, that 

changes the whole impact study. 

 

There were a number of other changes as well, but that was one 

of the very major changes that required another study to be done, 

was that they moved the original location that was proposed a 

number of miles so the whole flood area would be different, and 

that was the basic idea. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you’re saying that the whole flood 

area would be different, and other parameters, I assume, would be 

different. Now, I’ll get back to those other parameters in a 

minute. 

 

Was there any input form your department when it first received 

the environmental impact study? Did your department have any 

comments as to the reasonableness or the effectiveness of the 

original environmental impact study? And did your department 

make any comments as to the contents of the original 

environmental impact study? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — There were some discussions between our 

department and the Souris Basin Development Authority. I think 

that’s normal that there should be some discussion. And they 

went back then and did the detailed study that’s now in place. I 

think quite often when an environmental impact study is being 

done, they ask the department for guide-lines on the areas that 

they must cover, and those are often provided, and then the study 

is completed. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, one of the guide-lines — and I 

understand from reading the original project’s specific guide-lines 

when the two projects, when Shand and Rafferty-Alameda were 

combined — one of those guide-lines was the social and 

economic impact that the projects would have on the province. 

I’m wondering, in terms of dealing first of all now with the 

original EIS submission from Souris Basin, were there social and  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1212 

 

economic guide-lines, or were there, in fact, comments on the 

social and economic impact of the project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Those were internal discussions within the 

department. They were not written discussions, and I don’t 

believe that it’s proper that we even reveal what those discussions 

entailed. The requests of the department as they deal with the 

environmental impact study that is now before the department is 

much more significant, and at the time of the public review the 

department’s comments will be made available on that study. But 

the first one was withdrawn, and I don’t believe that the 

comments that were made should be revealed on that. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I disagree with that, but I won’t pursue it any 

further because obviously, I think it’s obvious that in fact there 

were comments, as you admitted, that came from the department. 

The environmental impact study was withdrawn, and the 

proponents of Rafferty were required to submit a new impact 

statement. 

 

Dealing with the second impact statement, dealing with the 

second impact statement, were there social and economic 

impacts, and the social and economic impact of Rafferty and 

Alameda — were they included in the environmental impact 

study that you have now before you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The guide-lines require that they be 

addressed, and they have been addressed, but it’s still under 

technical review, so we can’t deal with it any further than that. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I assume since they were applied to the 

Rafferty-Alameda project they were also applied to Shand. Is that 

correct? The same type of social and economic impact 

requirements that were in the original submission and the original 

requirements for the project’s specific guide-lines, they were also 

applicable to the Shand project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that they would be. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Given that you’ve received the Shand either last 

December or November, and I believe, in fact, in checking my 

records, it was probably November when you received it, and 

given that in fact there are those impact statements, one of which 

is a social and economic impact of Shand, I wonder if you’d 

perhaps like to tell us now how much the increase in power rates 

will be for the province of Saskatchewan if, in fact, the Shand 

power plant is built. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m afraid that’s not a question that would 

come under this department. If there is a question like that 

directed to the minister responsible for SPC, he may have an 

answer, but I certainly don’t. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, the project’s specific 

guide-lines, that you yourself admitted, has said that the 

economic impact of that project on the province would be 

required. Surely, in terms of those project’s specific guide-lines, 

you have taken the overall economic impact  

on the province, of Shand, outside the direct cost, and that your 

department has dealt with it. Are you saying that, in fact, Sask 

Power has not dealt with that economic impact on the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t know whether Sask Power has dealt 

with it or not, but the impacts that we will look at is the 

socio-economic impacts as they relate to environmental issues. 

And we’re looking at those. We will not have answers on the cost 

of power. I think that’s more properly asked of the power 

corporation. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — But surely, Mr. Minister, you will agree that a 

project, when it is built, has a socio-economic impact on the 

community, whether it’s a large community like the province, or 

a particular small community like the Estevan constituency, 

where the power project is going to be built, and surely that when 

you ask for socio-economic impacts, that the power corporation 

should be able to provide you with that kind of information. 

 

I’m asking you the question: is it true that Sask Power did not 

supply you, in dealing with the socio-economic impacts of Shand, 

that they didn’t, in fact, deal with the whole question of the 

increase in power rates for the people of this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — At the time that the public review period is 

opened, the hon. member will have the opportunity to look at the 

complete environmental impact assessment and also the 

comments that our department has on that assessment. But I’m 

not going to get into the assessment itself at this stage. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, in light of the type of questions, and 

in light of the kind of revealing statements made, particularly by 

the Deputy Premier insofar as his attitude towards the project — 

that it’s either go ahead or you get fired — I wonder, sir, in 

following along the line of questioning taken yesterday by the 

member from Riversdale, whether or not you, sir, will in fact deal 

with the question of the department and your own credibility by 

agreeing here and now to hold public hearings so that the people 

of this province can, in fact, question Sask Power officials on the 

socio-economic impact on whether it’s the small community of 

Estevan or the large community of Saskatchewan. Will you agree 

to hold public hearings so that the people of the province can find 

out what the real cost of Shand is going to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think if I’ve answered 

any question in this Assembly on any subject, it’s that question. I 

believe, if the member would like to go back and read Hansard, 

I’ve probably answered to the same member about 25 times on 

that question. And I see really no purpose in answering it again. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, I guess the only question that we’ll have left 

on that, Mr. Minister, is to ask you what have you got to be afraid 

of? What are you guys trying to hide when it comes to Shand? 

And you know, because we’re not going to get a straight answer 

coming from the minister responsible for the Sask Power 

Corporation when we go through that estimates, because he’s 

going to try to shuffle it off to somewhere else down the line . . . 

 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1213 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to interrupt the member. Would you 

please keep the questions on Environment rather than the Sask 

Water Corporation please. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I’m referring not to Sask Water Corporation, Mr. 

Chairman. I was referring to the Sask Power Corporation and it’s 

relationship to the Shand power plant and whether or not in fact 

we’ll be able to elicit the same kind of answers from the Deputy 

Premier who is responsible for the power corporation, or will we 

get the same kind of run-around we’re getting from him? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would caution the member, would you 

please stick with the environmental issues, not Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation. We’ll deal with that in due course. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, I’m sorry you’ve got hearing problems. I 

said Sask Power Corporation three times. And p-o-w-e-r does not 

spell “water” in any person’s vocabulary, Mr. Minister, can you 

. . . 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’m sorry to interrupt the member 

again. I apologize for my saying “Sask Water”. I do mean Sask 

Power. So would you please avoid that topic at this time. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairperson, you cannot avoid talking about 

Sask Power when they are, in fact, the proponents for a 

development of $720 million. The Shand, Rafferty-Alameda 

project that impacts directly on the Environment department, they 

are the proponents of the development, and I cannot . . .I’m sorry, 

I cannot — and I think it’s totally unreasonable for you to ask that 

I keep away from Sask Power, given the fact that they’re the 

proponents of a project which comes under his purview. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Are you challenging the Chair? I have made 

the ruling that we are now dealing with the Department of 

Environment. You may ask the minister pertinent questions 

dealing with Environment. And when we talk about the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation you may ask that appropriate 

minister questions dealing directly with Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. 

 

So would you please ask the questions appropriate. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will direct, or if you’re 

asking me to rephrase certain questions if that suits you, that’s 

fine. But in order to deal with the question of the Shand power 

plant and its environmental impact requires, unfortunately, the 

fact that we deal with the Sask Power Corporation. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we have gotten absolutely zilch — absolutely 

zilch form you in questioning about Shand, Rafferty and 

Alameda. And the reason we have is not because we haven’t 

asked questions. The reason in fact is that you’ve ducked those 

questions by saying that the environmental impact studies haven’t 

had their technical review — which I don’t believe. I think they 

have had their technical review and, I think, in fact that the kind 

of comments made by the Deputy Premier proves in fact that 

they’ve had gone through that technical review. 

 

And I think that statements by yourself in regards to the 

discussions between the first and second environmental impact 

statements in regards to Rafferty certainly leaves the impression, 

if not the realty, but certainly leaves the impression that the first 

statement was cooked and it wasn’t acceptable, and it had to 

come back to meet the requirements, the political requirements of 

the department on that. However, I won’t pursue this. 

 

We will attempt to elicit answers when the Sask Power 

Corporation estimates come up. 

 

I want to ask you about another issue though, Mr. Minister, and 

that’s the whole question of the sale of Saskatchewan water and 

water from the prairie basin to the United States. 

 

It’s my information, and I have it on, I would say, somewhat 

good authority, that a proposal has come before the council of 

ministers of the Environment and Natural Resources . . . proposal 

came before that council of ministers, advocating the disposal and 

the sale of water and diversion of water from Canada to the 

United States within the context of the free trade agreement 

which is presently being negotiated by Ottawa. I’m wondering, 

sir, what was the position of Saskatchewan at the council of 

ministers of the Environment, in regard to the water diversion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I have not attended a meeting of that group. 

The last meeting they had was in September, and I was somewhat 

busy in an election, so I didn’t go. I can advise the member that 

the issue of water apportionment would be under the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation, not the Department of 

Environment, so would be more properly dealt with there. 

 

Before you asked that question, you made some statements about 

not receiving any answers as it had to do with Shand and 

Rafferty. And I answered as many questions as was possible to 

answer, but there are certain areas that you can’t deal with until 

the environmental impact studies are complete. the member on to 

say that he didn’t believe me that those studies were still in the 

technical review process. 

 

The information I’ve provided you is information that was made 

available to me by the staff of the Department of Environment 

who actually do those assessments. So if you’re saying you don’t 

believe it, you’re saying that you doubt the word of the staff of 

the Department of Environment, and I take that very negatively. I 

believe that this department is doing a good job. The staff don’t 

have to come in here and tell you untruths. They’re giving you 

the facts. Whether or not you believe it, I guess that’s your 

privilege. But don’t be doubting the credibility of the staff of this 

department. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, it’s not the staff that’s answering 

questions, it’s you that’s answering the questions, so to attempt to 

involve the staff in that political game is patently not correct. It’s 

not correct. I never made one implication that the staff members 

were not telling the truth. I didn’t say, not once, and I don’t think 

— you could check the record of Hansard — you will find any 

implications to that matter. In fact, I think you will find the  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1214 

 

statements to the contrary, that in fact I have said time and time 

again, because of the priority of your government is not to staff 

the Department of the Environment, in fact to understaff it, and 

not to properly fund the Department of the Environment, but in 

fact to underfund it. And the facts and figures and the history 

since 1982 speak rather well to that fact, as we have shown, that 

in fact it’s ludicrous for you to say I’m trying to cast aspersions. 

I’ve said time and time again that the staff members of your 

department are doing a great job under the onerous conditions 

that you and your government have laid on them, that you and 

your government have laid on them. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, the question that I asked you originally 

regarding water, and the sale of water, comes under your 

department. It’s called the council of ministers of the 

environment and natural resources. Right? You have a 

representative, as you’ve already said . . . You already said, 

earlier on in these estimates, a representative of your department 

sits on that council. Is that not true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — My deputy minister has attended meetings of 

the council. Also, the Minister of Parks and renewable resources 

has attended meetings of that group. But the apportionment of 

water from Saskatchewan will fall under the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation; that’s within their jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I’m not asking you, Mr. Minister, I’m not asking 

you who sits or who doesn’t sit. I’m asking you . . .and you have 

in fact affirmed that a representative of the Department of the 

Environment, i.e. the deputy minister sitting beside you there, sits 

on the council of ministers. 

 

Let’s go back, then, to first cases: was the deputy minister of the 

Environment present at any meetings of the council of the 

ministers of the environment and natural resources at which time 

the co-question of water diversion and sale of water to the United 

States was raised? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — My deputy minister has attended the last 

three meetings of that group, and advises me that that subject did 

not come up at any of the last three meetings. There was a subject 

that dealt with the pricing of water, but not the apportionment. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — So your deputy minister was at a meeting of the 

council of the ministers of the environment at which the subject 

of the price of Canadian water for sale to the United States was 

discussed. Is that what you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, that was not the issue. The pricing of 

water as it related for municipalities to consumers, but not the 

pricing of water between Saskatchewan and the United States, or 

other provinces and the United States. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that to your 

knowledge, or to the knowledge of your deputy minister, or to the 

knowledge of anybody in your department, that the question of 

the diversion and sale of fresh water from Canada to the United 

States was not discussed? Are you saying that, in fact, you or 

anybody in your department has no knowledge of this subject 

becoming before the  

ministers of the council of environment and natural resources? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I am advised that the federal government has 

done what they call the Pearse Study, but that study has not 

appeared on the agenda of CCREM (Canadian Council of 

Resource and Environment Ministers) for discussion at any time. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, is the minister aware of a proposal and a 

project put forward by none other than the son of Simon 

Reisman, the free trade negotiator, a proposal put forward to the 

council of ministers by the so-called Grand Canal Company, 

which in fact is a proposal for the diversion of water and sale of 

water to the United States; and is the minister not also aware that 

that very subject was discussed by the councils of ministers of the 

environment and natural resources. Are you saying, sir, that that 

did not take place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there has not been an 

agenda item that dealt with the Grand Canal project. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, just to make this perfectly 

clear, because I don’t know whether you’re weaseling out of the 

question or not, when you say that there wasn’t an agenda item, 

was a proposal by the Grand Canal Company — listen carefully 

— was a proposal by the Grand Canal Company to divert and sell 

water to the United States ever come before any meeting or any 

committee of the councils of the ministers of the environment and 

natural resources? Have you or any . . . That’s the first part of that 

question. The second part of that question is: have you, or any 

officials in your department, ever received or seen or know of 

copies of this proposal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there has never been an 

item dealing with that project at the Canadian Council of 

Resource and Environment Ministers. Now if there is some 

subcommittee somewhere, I’m not going to say that there wasn’t, 

because they hold meetings all over the country, and we may or 

may not have people at those meetings. So I wouldn’t have 

knowledge of whether or not that has occurred. 

 

On the second part of your question, the deputy minister knows 

of the issue, has a copy of the report, but that has never been 

brought forward to the Canadian Council of Resource and 

Environment Ministers. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Good. Mr. Minister, has the deputy minister 

briefed you on this report, and has he put forward a 

recommendation as to the proposal contained therein? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, he has not. This is the first time that I 

have even heard of that report. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. . . . this report has been floating around 

for a little while. Perhaps you want to ask your deputy minister 

here now why is it that this is the first time you hear about it 

when there’s a proposal been put forward and circulated among 

environment ministers, environment ministries, and natural 

resources ministries throughout the country, and that you’re 

unaware of a  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1215 

 

major — of a major; let me talk about major — scheme to divert 

water from Canada to United States and sell it. Why aren’t you 

aware of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the project has been floating 

around for about 25 years. I’m sorry I wasn’t aware of it, but it 

has never come forward for any major discussion or any decision 

to the Canadian Council for Resource and Environment 

Ministers. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I just want to make absolutely clear that it’s your 

position and it’s your understanding and that you can say 

unequivocally that it has never, ever, ever appeared before the 

council. Is that your position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I haven’t been around that long. No, I won’t 

make that statement. My deputy has been three years, and I’ve 

been about seven or eight months. So no, I won’t make the 

statement that it goes back for ever. I don’t even know which year 

that group first met as a group under that name. That’s a very 

unreasonable question that you ask. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Perhaps it’s not so unreasonable when after, when 

I supply you with the information and fact that I don’t think that 

it’s quite correct — the information you’re receiving. But I’m 

going to leave that aside. One more question on this topic; do you 

support the sale of water and the diversion of water to the United 

States? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s not a question for the Department of 

the Environment to answer. We won’t be, as a department, selling 

water, so it’s not a question that I should be asked to answer. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, any . . . you have before you, you 

have before you schemes and developments, one of which is the 

Rafferty dam, part of which in the application before the 

international rivers improvement licensing process, that talks 

about the efficient management of water resources and its impact 

internationally. One of the proposals, and one of the proponents, 

and one of the great backers of this project form south of the 

border, Senator Quentin Burdick, talks about this project in terms 

of a method of rational and efficient use of water resources, given 

what’s going on with Garrison. 

 

It’s obvious that the intent, at least in Senator Burdick’s eyes, 

when he’s willing to try to put up $41.4 million in this project, 

which you have to give ministerial approval to, involves the sale 

of water, at least the apportionment of water, and the potential 

sale of water to the United States. 

 

And we’ve got schemes before us put forward by the . . . and 

supported by, I might say, by Simon Reisman, the great free 

trader himself who, in 1986, said before the Ontario Economics 

Opportunity Conference: 

 

Our last trump card, when it comes to free trade and getting 

a good free trade deal, will be to sell water to the United 

States. 

 

And those are Mr. Reisman’s own words. 

 

And you have before you a decision whether or not to  

approve the Rafferty dam and the Alameda dam, which for years 

have formed the basis of plans formulated by the Corps of 

Engineers in the United States and have formed the basis of plans 

for inter-basinal transfer of water from the Saskatchewan basin to 

the Missouri basin — plans drawn up and outlined very well in 

the Canada West Foundation’s publications — that you, in fact, 

have got to decide and to make that approval. 

 

And when the potentiality for that sale of water exists, will, Mr. 

Minister — and I ask this question specifically of you — given 

the fact that the Alameda and Rafferty projects have the potential 

to be used for sale of water to the United States, do you, as 

Minister of Environment, approve of that particular aspect of the 

scheme? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The apportionment of water that will go to 

the United States will be looked after through the Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation, not this department. So I won’t answer the 

question on water in this area. When we come to the water 

corporation and you want to ask that question, I’ll deal with it at 

that time. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, the fact that you have to 

give ministerial approval by the Department of Environment says 

that, in fact. And given that, in fact, you’ve already admitted that 

the socio-economic impacts can, in fact, be the apportionment of 

water to the United States, surely you’ve got some opinions on 

this matter as the Minister of Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — When it comes time to make the decision of 

whether or not to license the projects, we’ll make that decision. 

The time is not now. The environmental impact studies are still 

during the technical review process. They will be available for 

public review, and after all of that process is when I make my 

decision. So I won’t be giving you a decision on that at this time. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister, I 

have a number of questions I wish to direct to the minister having 

to do with the property management corporation and his 

department’s relationship with the corporation. 

 

But before I touch upon that, Mr. Minister, one question that 

flows at least slightly out of the line of questioning you were just 

dealing with. I understand, in previous answers that you’ve given, 

that the hang-ups that presently exist in relation to the final 

decision in respect of a possible grasslands national park in 

south-western Saskatchewan relate, at least in part, to matters of 

jurisdiction over water flows, and some dispute existing at the 

moment between the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

Government of Canada in that regard. 

 

I wonder if you can tell me if there is any connection or any 

linkage at all between that problem in south-western 

Saskatchewan, and any issue or any development or any potential 

development that may be under way or proposed in south-eastern 

Saskatchewan? Are the two matters totally separate, or is there 

any possibility of overlap or linkage there at all? 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1216 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would say they were totally separate, and 

the grasslands park is strictly under the water corporation. The 

problem that we’re dealing with there is strictly under the water 

corporation, not under Environment. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Earlier in your 

estimates there was quite a debate, and even a couple of recorded 

votes, about the relationship between your department and the 

new property management corporation. I understand, or I would 

expect, setting aside the hyperbole on both sides, that you can 

understand the opposition’s concern in this respect. 

 

Previously there was a department of government, the 

Department of Supply and Services, which handled the 

management and the administration of all accommodations and 

the goods and the services used by your department and others. 

The Department of Supply and Services was accountable to this 

House in a variety of ways during estimates, in the Public 

Accounts Committee, and through the regular auditing of the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

(1600) 

 

There is, Mr. Minister, I’m sure you will agree, no area of 

government operations so prone to the tool of patronage and so 

subject to public scepticism and cynicism as is the field of buying 

or leasing or building government office space — it’s a very 

sensitive area — or the field of the provision of equipment and 

supplies to government, and the contracting out for special 

services, and so forth. Those are sensitive matters about which 

the public is concerned. It is an area that obviously demands 

cautious and prudent management by those in government. It also 

demands close examination by this legislature to expose all of the 

facts and to prevent abuses. 

 

With the substitution of a new Crown property management 

corporation instead of the former government department, the 

opportunities for scrutiny by the legislature and by other official 

agencies in the province of Saskatchewan are at least changed, 

and perhaps reduced. That being the state of affairs, I’m sure you 

will appreciate why this side of the House, and others in 

Saskatchewan, are expressing some concerns. We’re dealing with 

a new state of affairs. 

 

To this point in time, we just don’t know, I suppose no one 

knows, whether it’s a better state of affairs. At least we know it’s 

different. In dealing with that new state of affairs, where the 

opportunities for accountability are changed and perhaps reduced, 

we have some questions to ask. I would like to address two or 

three of them to you at this moment, Mr. Minister. 

 

First of all, just as a matter of information and education for this 

House, since you are the first minister to present your estimates 

and therefore the first to have the opportunity to explain the new 

state of affairs, vis-a-vis the property management corporation — 

from your perspective, as the minister responsible for a line 

department of the government, what do you see as your 

relationship with this new property management  

corporation, and how would that relationship be different from 

what used to exist with the Department of Supply and Services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s true that property management 

corporation is new, and the relationship will be somewhat 

different, but not all that different. There will be differences. 

 

To begin with, when the Department of Supply and Services 

provided rental space to a department, the figure was never 

entered in the department’s budget. Under the property 

management corporation there is a figure in the departmental 

budget. To me, that has improved the accountability of a 

department for the amount of money that it spends. We have to 

show in our estimate a figure that covers the cost of our rent. I 

gave that before, and I think you likely have it. And it also 

included the cost of mail and postage, which used to be covered 

strictly under Supply and Service. Now the cost of us using the 

mail room will be a figure that will show in the departmental 

budget — again, I think, an improvement in the method of 

accountability of each department of government. 

 

So we feel that it’s a step in the right direction. It’s a new 

corporation. We will be dealing with it in a very similar basis to 

what we would have dealt with the Department of Supply and 

Service. When we need space for additional departmental use, we 

will go to that property management corporation and ask them to 

arrange space for us. In turn, we will pay the rental cost of the 

space that is leased. 

 

When we need vehicles through central vehicle agency, we’ll 

again go to the property management corporation and ask them 

for the vehicle for the type of use that we see, and they will 

purchase and lease to the department that vehicle. 

 

When I need to use the government aircraft, or my staff need to 

use a government aircraft, they will contact again that property 

management corporation and use the aircraft. And the charge will 

come through the property management corporation, and we pay 

the charge. 

 

The rental of computer equipment again, a similar method is 

used. Stationery and office supplies, we will order through the 

property management corporation. They will buy and it will be 

charged to our budget. 

 

So the method of operation is not significantly different as far as 

the department is concerned, except all of the things that the 

department uses and the costs of those items will show in the 

departmental budget, which to me is a better method than we’ve 

had prior — one that should make it easier for the public and for 

the opposition to review the expenditures of any department and 

have it all laying in the blue book before them, and know what 

that department is spending and for what purpose. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You have referred to 

a number of specific items that are reported now, which 

previously would not have been reported, or not reported in the 

same way. And since this is a new venture this year — and, 

presumably, no one has previously gone through these 

calculations before — can  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1217 

 

you tell me how the specific items would have been arrived at in 

terms of all of the valuations that you have mentioned? 

 

Would, for example, that information simply have simply have 

been supplied by what used to be DSS? Or would there have been 

a negotiation between your department and the new property 

management corporation? Did you simply submit the valuations 

and they were accepted by the property management corporation? 

I’m just wondering what process you went through to arrive at 

what is now a new set of arithmetic which your officials 

previously would not have had to concern themselves with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — For the first year of operation of the property 

management corporation, the calculation of the cost of our 

present office space . . . They know how much they’re paying for 

each office space that we occupy, so that was added up. And that 

was given to us as a rental rate for this year. And the same for the 

mail and postage. 

 

Those figures were available to Supply and Services, and so those 

figures were provided as a budgetary figure for this year. At the 

end of the year, we’ll have an accurate account of whether or not 

we’ve used that amount of space, oar whether we’ve used that 

amount of postage. 

 

The other figures, when it comes to CVA (central vehicle agency) 

vehicles and aircraft usage, computer equipment rental, stationery 

and office supplies, and duplicating and photographing — all of 

those figures submitted by our department as estimated costs that 

the department will incur this year for those items. So that area is 

not new; it’s in the budget, and was in last year and the year 

before. So it’s an ongoing process. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated that at least 

some of the figures that you’ve referred to will be a little bit 

dependent upon your actual experience this year, this being the 

first year under the new information to be gleaned when you get 

to the bottom line at the end of the year to determine the exact 

arithmetic. 

 

Do I take it from that, that in terms of these estimates, that we 

ought to perhaps very boldly underline that word estimates this 

year because of the introduction of the property management 

corporation into the scheme of things. And there may be some 

larger degree of risk associated with some of these numbers than 

might have been the case in the past, because there is a new 

instrument involved here in the calculations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think I would go that far in my 

statement. They are estimates, and they always are. If, during the 

course of the year, we have need for considerably less office 

space and we have made some changes, and if we can lease some 

of that space to another department of government or something, 

then the figure could change for rent. 

 

But most of the other expenses will be fairly regular kind of 

expenses that this department has incurred over a long period of 

time. So they are estimates, and estimates can go up or down a 

little, and sometimes departments have  

to vire from one subvote to another. But I think, when you look at 

our estimates, we’ll be reasonably close. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated some items of 

extra information that the new regime under the property 

management corporation brings forward in the estimates that 

previously weren’t there. Can you give us the assurance that all of 

the information that used to be there under DDS will still be fully 

available in a comparable form now under the new property 

management corporation. 

 

You’ve indicated some new areas where the legislature will be 

able to have new and additional information, and that’s to be 

commended. I wonder if you can give us the specific undertaking 

that there’s no area in this new rearrangement of things where 

there will, in fact, be a case of less information being available. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s very difficult for me to guarantee 

what the property management corporation will have. I would 

anticipate that all the information will be available. It was 

available before, but I couldn’t guarantee that to the member. 

You would have to ask of the minister responsible. 

 

Mr. Goodale_ — A supplementary point just to that answer then, 

Mr. Minister. Can you say that in respect of any information 

which for one reason or another, you haven’t been able to supply 

during your estimates relating to your department’s relationship 

with the new Crown corporation, can you give us the assurance 

that if you have not been in a position to provide that information, 

that the information will be forthcoming to the legislature in due 

course, in any event, in the proper time frame, and from the 

proper officials related to the property management corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think it’s possible for me to speak for 

the property management corporation, but I don’t see any reason 

why it wouldn’t be available. It’s simply that you would have to 

go to that minister to get the break-out. Much of the information 

that was asked of me has not been made available to the 

department. I think when you come to the estimates of the 

property management corporation that you should ask that 

minister the question. I don’t believe I can speak for me. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — But you can think of no substantive or 

procedural impediment that would in any way prevent the 

question being asked and the answer to be forthcoming. There’s 

nothing structurally that stands in the way of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t see anything structurally form what I 

see of the property management corporation. I think when its 

estimates are looked at that you will be able to deal with. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — One final point then, Mr. Minister. Can you 

confirm that insofar as the Department of the Environment is 

concerned, there are no substantial budget changes for 

expenditures on accommodations and supplies and services and 

so forth now under the property management corporation, as 

compared to the previous state of affairs that used to exist under 

the  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1218 

 

Department of Supply and Services? 

 

(1615) 

 

That, in effect, your expenditures in relation to accommodation, 

supplies, and services, and so forth in the coming year are 

essentially the same as in the previous year with no substantial 

changes that would attract the notice of the legislature. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — There would be one area of change that the 

member would like to be aware of. The technical services 

division was transferred from the Department of Labour to our 

department. So that space rental allocation would be additional to 

what the Department of Environment would have shown a year 

ago. But I believe the legislature is aware that that transfer has 

occurred and would anticipate that that adjustment would be 

made. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — One final point, Mr. Minister, and I think this 

will be the final one. In the item in the estimates related to the 

property management corporation, of some $985,700, roughly 

speaking, what proportion of that would be attributable to the 

transfer that you referred to in your last answer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would like to advise the hon. member that I 

don’t have the dollar figures. I could give you the square footage 

of the space that we have and it’s 1,072.5 . . .I’m sorry, it’s square 

meters. I’m not just quite up on some of these new terms, but it’s 

1,072.5. 

 

I’m going to send across to the member the same list that I had 

sent across to the opposition a while ago. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I simply want to thank the 

minister for his answers. It’s been helpful. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Item 2 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have just 

several questions on the item number 2, subvote 2. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you please explain why there was the roughly 

$95,000 cut in communications allowance, given that the staff 

complement remains the same in information and 

communications? Is it the intention of the department to cut back 

on communicating to the public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Is the member asking the question under 

item 1? Like item 2 basically deals with environmental protection 

branch. It’s a different branch. Was that question intended for 

item 1? 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, it was item 2. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that all communication 

expenses are under item 1. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Item 3 agreed to. 

Item 4 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Under item 4 there, I’ve noticed that you have 

apportioned amount of money and have lost staff from this 

particular area. Could you please tell us how that staff person was 

lost and for what reason? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe I dealt with that before. But for the 

hon. member, the two positions that show as being deleted here 

are now contractual positions. It’s the same two individuals 

working but they were put on a contractual basis and their salaries 

are basically recovered through the JEPP program from the 

federal government. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Could you tell me what areas of work those 

individuals are involved in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We had a report prepared. I think the easiest 

answer to your question would be to send this one across. I 

believe the question was asked by Mr. Shillington. I would ask 

you to share the information with him. 

 

Mr. Lyons: —I don’t recall the question actually, Mr. Minister, 

whether Mr. Shillington got it or not. When you say that these 

individuals are now on a contractual basis, is it because of an 

efficiency measure within the department? You say you’re 

getting funds from JEPP, is that an efficiency mark? Or is it sort 

of robbing Peter to pay Paul — one taxpayer paying for what 

another taxpayer isn’t doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I guess it’s an efficiency measure for 

Saskatchewan, but the JEPP program allows us to operate that 

way. And their contract goes through as expenses and is 

completely picked up on the JEPP program from the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Just a couple of questions. The member for 

Regina North was asking you several lines of questioning 

regarding the question of the dump. The member from North 

West was talking about the whole transportation of hazardous 

goods, and the potentials for disaster in the northern part of 

Regina. I’m wondering, have you advised the Emergency 

Measures Organization or taken any measures to that effect to ask 

them to prepare some kind of evacuation plans? Or do they have, 

to your knowledge, do they have those plans in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that that would be the 

responsibility of the city of Regina’s Emergency Measures 

Organization. But our EMO staff would assist them if they want 

to move forward with that. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Just a short question. Could you inquire from 

your staff whether or not the EMO has such a plan in place, given 

that Regina seems to have now become a concentration . . . on the 

one hand, in the east part of the city we’ve got chemical plants 

which have the potential for major public hazards. If there’s a fire 

breaks out, for example, and given what’s happened with the rail 

line relocation, can you find out whether in fact there is a plan in 

existence from your Regina branch of EMO? 

 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1219 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We haven’t had any request from the city of 

Regina to be involved in that kind of a contingency plan. If we 

were asked, we would assist them. But the city is autonomous; it 

makes its own decisions. And at the time that they request 

assistance, that’s the time that we could provide it. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Item 5 

 

Mr. Lyons: — In regards to item 5, Mr. Minister, on the question 

of public safety, I that the other colleagues here have dealt 

extensively with questions in this regard. I just have a question in 

regards to monitoring and the effect that the moves that you’re 

planning on making and are implementing in terms of the public 

safety personnel. Do you have any plans in place from your 

department to monitor whether or not the removal of gas 

inspectors, for example, to Sask Power or that type of 

rearrangement, do you have any plans in place to monitor the 

effect on the safety of people in Saskatchewan, whether or not 

such a move will increase the danger to people in the province or 

in fact enhance their safety? Do you have any sort of plans to 

look after that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t have any specific plans in place. 

We will be watching very closely as this change takes place. It is 

a big change, and we all realize it. But we feel that it likely will 

be an improvement, and we’ll be watching very closely. I believe 

the best method of monitoring is people will be responding to us 

by mail and by telephone and in person, and if we’re starting to 

detect that there is a problem, we’ll certainly address it. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Okay, just so that I’m clear. But there is no 

agency or department or any specific individual that in fact will 

keep tabs on it, that these moves are made in the hopes that there 

will be just public feedback if something happens. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We will still have the regulatory role of 

government and will maintain some staff, and the final details of 

how many are not worked out, so I can’t give that to you. But we 

will be maintaining some staff, so we’ll be watching it very 

closely. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I just . . . a comment. I urge you, I 

strongly urge you that in fact that you maintain or develop some 

kind of monitoring plan for this. Given the understaffing that’s 

going on in the department and the chopping of personnel in the 

public safety area, and the kind of work-load that people who 

work in this area are under, I would strongly urge you, and in all 

sincerity, to put in place some kind of monitoring program so that 

you can act swiftly. I don’t believe you or anybody else here 

wants another Polly Redhot type affair that when we get that kind 

of feedback is when we take action, that hopefully we can be 

pro-active in that area. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, the changes under this subvote 

are really, generally speaking of two kinds. One, of course, is the 

transfer from the Department of Labour to the Department of 

Environment and Public Safety; and secondly, the loss of some 

30 or more person-years. 

 

Can the minister say, first of all, on the structural point, how this 

arrangement that is now prevailing in Saskatchewan, putting 

these duties and functions as a part of the Department of 

Environment, how that compares to other Canadian jurisdictions? 

Whether or not we’re following a pattern that’s developing 

elsewhere in Canada, or whether this is different from what other 

provinces do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that it varies. Departments are 

structured differently across the nation. Some places it’s 

Department of Environment, some places it’s Department of 

Labour, and it can be anywhere. 

 

I suppose the public safely side fits very well with Environment. 

That’s what we’re involved in is public safety. And we’ve had I 

think, a fairly good working relationship with the technical 

services division. 

 

(1630) 

 

Part of the reason for the drop in numbers that you see here of 

course, is the transfer mid-year of this inspection for power and 

gas to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. So there is . . . .part 

of the difference that you see is contributed to that factor, that we 

will be transferring those two areas. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Could the minister indicate, of the 31 positions, 

I think it is, or 32 positions . . . the minister has indicated already 

that perhaps what is happening, in reality, is not a cut of that 

magnitude. Could the minister be a little more precise on that 

point as to exactly what the real drop in person-years is, after 

taking into account the transfers to Sask Power and so forth, part 

way through a year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The blue book shows 32.8 positions; of 

those, there are 11 early retirement, and 21.8 will be transferred to 

Saskatchewan Power for the gas and electrical inspection. So that 

gives you the figure that we have at the top, of 32.8. So there isn’t 

the real number of people difference. But the 11 early retirements 

we didn’t replace. Many of them we felt would be better hired by 

Sask Power at the time that they take over that position, so they 

would have the opportunity to interview and put in place the 

people that they need. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — In regards to that final comment, Mr. Minister, 

are you saying that your 11 early retirees are going to go to work 

for Sask Power as inspectors. Did I understand you correctly in 

saying that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, that isn’t what I said. I said we did not 

rehire to fill the 11 early retirement vacancies. We thought it 

would be better if, at the time that the duties are transferred to 

Sask Power, that they have the freedom to hire the people that 

they see that they need. It wouldn’t be these same 11 people. 

These people have retired. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I understand that okay, but I’m trying to get at the 

comments and sort of follow along the comments made from the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

In actuality, the actual cuts then to the complement of staff is 

32.8, that early retirements combined with the  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1220 

 

22.8, leaves the staff cut complement of 32.8. Yet in reality the 

22.8 goes to Sask Power. I guess the question is: who is going to 

do the job of the 11 early retirements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Eight of those early retirements relate to the 

inspection side of the power and gas. The other three relate to 

other areas that were still left with technical services. Some we 

will replace; some we won’t. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — but if you’re saying that there’s eight gas 

inspectors cut from the complement in the province, are you 

expecting then that Sask Power will require the 22 people, 22.8 

person-years of people, to cover the jobs done, normally done, by 

the eight inspectors. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member is trying to stir the figures up, 

and I don’t know where you’re getting your ideas. What I told 

you was that there were 21.8 power and gas inspectors being 

transferred. And there are eight early retirements — there were 

eight. So the Sask Power will have those eight vacant positions 

available to them to hire the kind of people that they wish. 

Whether they need eight, or whether they need 20, that’s the 

choice of Sask Power once they take on the responsibility. 

 

They will hire the number of people and the type of people that 

they need in their system to do the job. We’re just telling you 

how many we’re transferring. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — If I could just pursue this point for another 

moment with the minister. Of the 21.8 positions, Mr. Minister, 

there are, I guess, notionally moved from the Department of 

Labour to Environment and Public Safety, and then from 

Environment and Public Safety over to SPC, what is the precise 

rationale for determining that those 21.8 positions are more 

appropriately attached to SPC, as opposed to your Department of 

Environment and Public Safety? 

 

How is their function different, and how can they perform that 

function more effectively under the power corporation as opposed 

to directly a part of your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I have answered that question before, but I’ll 

answer it again. The decision was made to transfer the gas and 

electrical inspections division to the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. That method of inspection is used in Ontario and 

Manitoba — that the utilities corporations do the inspections. 

 

In the case of Sask Power, at the time that a new gas installation 

takes place. Sask Power always sends a gas man to turn on the 

gas, to light the furnace, and light the water heater. So he 

basically does an inspection before he does that. They are fully 

qualified gas inspectors. It seems like a complete duplication in 

that area for us to be following right behind them to do another 

gas inspection. So that’s part of the reason. 

 

The other reason is because Sask Power has offices around the 

province where they could easily locate inspectors, and they 

could work out of that office and cover the area fairly effectively. 

 

Another matter that we considered was that the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation has a very complex billing system on 

computer, and this can fit into the system with very little 

difficulty. It would not require the purchase of more equipment or 

more personnel, in most cases. 

 

So these areas make it look to us as though it’s a reasonable 

approach, and should be probably more economic, as far as the 

government is concerned, to do it this way. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister is a 

position to give us the precise date upon which the transfer of 

personnel either has taken place or is due to take place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’re aiming for October 1. 

 

Items 5 and 6 agreed to. 

 

Item 7 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I wonder, sir, I noticed here that 

there was an estimated grant to third-party persons concerned 

with hour environmental matters, of $40,000. Could you provide 

us with a list of organizations receiving the $40,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Thirty-two thousand of that grant goes to the 

Canadian Council of Resource and Environment Ministers, and 

the others are miscellaneous grants. We get called on for small 

grants for environmental week and things of that nature. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Are you prepared to produce the list of the 

breakdown and the break-out of that $40,000. You say the 

32,000; that leaves 8,000 more. Could you provide me with a list 

of where the rest of the money’s gone? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I gave the member the 32,000. That is the 

CCREM grant. And of the other 8,000, I can give you a list of 

where they went last year. It doesn’t come to exactly 8,000. There 

was the Western Canada Water and Sewage Association 1986 

conference, 1,000; Canadian waste materials exchange operating 

expenses, 1,000; the Petroleum Association for Conservation of 

the Canadian Environment, 5,000 — that deals with the 

underground storage tanks, the leaking of underground storage 

tanks, that they’re being checked across Canada; and the last one 

was the Regina Science Fair, $200, for a total of 7,200. So that 

leaves us 800 in this year’s budget that we could spend for other 

things. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Have you received, Mr. Minister, a report from 

the petroleum association of Canada’s environment (PACE), the 

$5,000. Have you received a report from PACE on their findings 

and, if you have, does any of their findings relate to the 

contamination of Saskatchewan’s environment through leaking of 

gasoline tanks. In other words, are we suffering the same kind of 

problem that they’re suffering down in New Brunswick? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have an initial report. It’s not in its final 

stage yet. But I’m sure that in Saskatchewan we’re like every 

other province; we’ve had some underground  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1221 

 

storage tanks that have leaked, and we’ve had some spills that 

have been identified. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Will this report be, that’s recently being prepared, 

will it be made public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would expect it will be made public when 

it’s in its final form. I’m not just sure of the time frame. It should 

come this year, but the exact time I’m not sure of. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — And I take it that the report is being prepared by 

PACE (Petroleum Association for the Conservation of the 

Canadian Environment), and not by the Department of the 

Environment, is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that’s correct. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, specifically related to item no. 7 

and the $40,000 from grants to organizations and persons 

concerned with environmental matters, the minister mentioned 

that some 32,000 of that went to support the ministerial council 

across the country. I presume that is Saskatchewan’s 

proportionate share in terms of the administration of that council. 

 

And the minister mentioned then five or six other organizations 

that had received small amounts for what appeared to be special, 

one-shot type of events or occasions. Could the minister tell us if 

that effectively represents all of the requests that his department 

would have received last year for contributions and grants, or was 

this just a listing of the ones you were able to respond to out of a 

longer list? I’m wondering if the department was in a position to 

respond favourably to virtually everyone who made a request, or 

whether these were just sort of the lucky few and there were 

many others who made a request but were turned down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there were likely one or two 

others that we didn’t respond to. Our department would, of 

course, look at them as to their need, whether or not we felt 

there’s a project that we should support or not support. But 

significantly, we responded to most of them but there would have 

been one or two that we couldn’t. 

 

Item 7 agreed to. 

 

Item 8 

 

Mr. Lyons: — The grant to the Toxicology Research Centre at 

the University of Saskatchewan; we had a little discussion earlier 

on about the whole question of testing of toxic chemicals in the 

province. I wonder, Mr. Minister, are there any conditions 

attached to this grant, and is that the $200,000 going towards any 

directed research form the toxicology centre from your 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The grant is actually given for operating 

expenses of the toxicology centre. And there’s an agreement 

signed each year with the university that deals with the operation. 

But no, it wouldn’t be assigned specifically for any research 

project or anything like that. It’s the ongoing operation. 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, is there any input from your 

department into the type of research done by the toxicology 

centre or is it, in fact, done sort of within that type of research 

solely decided by the researches in the toxicology centre? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The research that they do is decided by the 

board of directors, and we’ve had a member of that board. One of 

our staff have been a member of that board from the time the 

toxicology centre started. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Since there’s some direction given through the 

department, at least through the member of the department that 

sits on the board, I wonder if you have any knowledge as to, as 

the minister, of whether in fact there’s going to be some ongoing 

research program into the toxic affects of farm chemicals and a 

long-term monitoring program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The toxicology centre at the time of the 

opening, when they spoke, indicated that that was a major 

concern and one of the major studies that they would be doing. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I presume all that information will be then made 

available to your department. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would expect that we’d have the 

information, and I imagine most of it will be public information. I 

might tell you that Saskatchewan was indeed privileged to have 

the toxicology centre built in our province. It’s the only one in 

Canada and, because of that, is attracting other things to our 

university in Saskatoon that would not have been able to be 

placed in Saskatoon without the toxicology centre. 

 

So the indications we have form the university is that they’re 

really pleased with the opportunity to have it, and they indicate 

that they see on the horizon two or three other major items that 

will come forward because of it. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m not in any way trying to dispute 

the importance of the toxicology centre. In fact, I wouldn’t mind 

even appearing as an advocate that you increase funding; that 

somehow if you could get the Executive Council and cabinet to 

increase funding, I think that some of the concerns raised by the 

member from Prince Albert in regards to environmental diseases 

and the increasing appearance on the medical field of these — for 

want of a better word — environmental related diseases, indicates 

that there is a growing problem in North America and in Canada. 

 

There’s particular problems in Saskatchewan, given some 

abnormal type of occurrences, particularly in regards to multiple 

sclerosis and, in southern Saskatchewan, the high number of 

premature miscarriages and spontaneous abortions. I’m 

wondering whether, sir, whether you’d not consider increasing 

the grant to the toxicology centre so that they could carry out that 

long-term research. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — That would be an Executive Council 

budgetary decision in another year. This is the amount  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1222 

 

that was approved, and I believe represents a fair portion of the 

operation of that toxicology centre. You realise that it’s funded 

not just by Saskatchewan but by other provinces as well. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I’m aware of that fact, Mr. Minister, and I . . . But 

given that it’s located here in Saskatchewan; given that it, as you, 

yourself, said, provides a magnet that other institutions and other 

operations will be attracted to; and given the fact that 

Saskatchewan happens to be one of those places in the world 

where we’re subject to daily constant bombardment in the 

summer time of toxic chemicals, and nobody knows those 

long-term effects, I would ask you to urge your cabinet 

colleagues to consider that for next time round, to in fact increase 

the proportionment. I notice that the ‘86-87 proportionment was 

$200,000. And given the operating costs, the increase in 

operating costs, I’d ask you to increase, in fact, that proportion to 

the toxicology centre. 

 

Item 8 agreed to. 

 

Item 9 

 

Mr. Goodale: — If the minister has responded to this point in 

general questioning earlier, I apologize for asking again, but this 

appears to be a case under item 9, where there’s a rather dramatic 

drop in ‘87-88 compared to ‘86-87. I wonder if water is getting to 

be a less controversial subject in Saskatchewan, or what the 

precise reasoning might be for, I guess, a cut of more than 50 per 

cent in terms of the budget allocation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The reason for the drop . . . we looked at the 

actual expenditure for last year, and the water appeal board had a 

surplus of 28,599 which they were allowed to retain. So when 

you add the reserve they had to the 41,000 there is still a drop 

form the estimate of last year, but it’s approximately the same 

figure as the actual expenditure for last year. 

 

Item 9 agreed to. 

 

Item 10 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Minister, of all the items that 

have come before us I think that, in terms of the estimates this 

time, this item under operation recycle — the cut-back and the 

eventual elimination of operation recycle — I think, tends to 

show a foolhardy attitude towards the problems which were dealt 

with by operation recycle, not only the vehicles around but the 

whole notion, and the whole thrust, and the initiative of the 

department to, in fact, clean up Saskatchewan, was exemplified 

by this particular item under the budget. 

 

And I know we’ve had a discussion before, and it was raised by 

the member for Moose Jaw North, and raised by the member 

from Moose Jaw South, and other members here, on the whole 

question of operation recycle. I wonder, sir, whether you would 

consider — or is it totally beyond the realm of possibility — that 

you would consider urging your cabinet colleagues to take 

another look at this item and, in fact, maybe reversing your 

position on it, given its importance to bringing into the  

consciousness of Saskatchewan people the need for a clean 

environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’ve looked with great detail at this item, 

and we feel that we will achieve the same goals by going the 

route that we are, where Ipsco, who use the steel, will continue to 

have it gathered by probably the same contractor. And if we can 

meet the same need without having to have staff and government 

expenditures, I believe that the province will be well served. 

 

and if we see the need in the future, if the cars weren’t being 

collected or something, there’s nothing to stop the government 

being involved at another time. 

 

Item 10 agreed to on division. 

 

Item 11 — Statutory. 

 

Vote 9 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Environment and Public Safety 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Are there any questions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d like to thank the members of the 

opposition for raising quite a number of questions. I think it 

shows an interest in environmental issues, and I’m pleased to 

have that opportunity to share information with you. 

 

I’d like to thank the staff of the Department of Environment for 

the assistance they’ve provided, and thank you very much for the 

questions. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’d like to join you in 

thanking your officials for the lengthy time that they’ve spent 

here in the House watching what may be to them some 

elementary questions, but given that it’s our first go-round, both 

as minister and mine as critic of the Environment, I think it’s 

important that we ask as many questions as we believe is 

important to the people of the province, and also that we go 

through the exercise of estimates in Environment in the way that 

we did, in order to raise the whole questions of the profile of the 

environment and of the Department of the Environment, in the 

hopes that next year you’ll be able to convince your caucus 

colleagues that there are serious problems out there, and that 

they’ll provide increased funding for the department. Thank you. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


