













































October 20, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 20, 1987 

 

 

3381 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the rules of 

this Assembly, I’m very proud to present here today a petition 

signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These 

petitioners are deeply concerned about the government’s 

erosion of health care services in this province and urge the 

government to stop eroding Saskatchewan medicare. 

 

These petitioners are from a number of Saskatchewan 

communities including Coronach, Val Marie, Bruno, Radisson, 

Guernsey, and Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly 

today to present a petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan 

residents. These petitioners are deeply concerned about the 

government’s erosion of health care services and urge that it 

stop undermining medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from varied places in Saskatchewan such 

as Spruce Lake, Turtle Lake, Battleford, Hudson Bay, Grand 

Coulee, Central Butte, and Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 

also today to present petitions signed by hundreds of 

Saskatchewan residents who have indicated their concern with 

the cut-back in health care services. 

 

This petition here is from communities of Meadow Lake, 

Balcarres, Edam, Yorkton, Veregin, MacNutt, and 

Willowbrook. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 

present a petition signed by several hundred people throughout 

Saskatchewan who urge this government to stop undermining 

and eroding medicare in our province. 

 

This particular petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents 

from Canora, Shellbrook, Middle Lake, Debden, Birch Hills, 

and La Ronge. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to the 

rules of the legislature to present a petition signed by some 

hundreds of Saskatchewan people. The operative phrase in the 

petition urges the Government of Saskatchewan to stop its 

policy of eroding and undermining medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

And these particular petitioners are from many communities, 

including Melville, Carrot River, Watrous, North Battleford, 

Balcarres, Yorkton, and others. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 

behalf of hundreds of Saskatchewan residents who have signed 

a petition expressing their concern about the government’s 

erosion of health care services and urging the government to 

stop its undermining of medicare in Saskatchewan. 

The petitions that I am about to table include people from the 

communities of Rosthern, Tisdale, Blaine Lake, Weyburn, 

Hudson Bay, Gull Lake, and Estevan. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

Assembly today to present a petition signed by hundreds of 

Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are deeply concerned 

about the government’s erosion of health care services, and I 

urge you to stop . . . and it urges that it stop its undermining of 

medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from different communities is 

Saskatchewan including Hodgeville, Admiral, Cadillac, 

Mossbank, Duck Lake, and Estevan. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today pursuant to the rules of 

this legislature to present a petition signed by many people who 

are concerned about the government’s undermining and eroding 

of medicare. 

 

These residents are from various communities, including 

Frenchman Butte, Evesham, Rocanville, Gravelbourg, Willow 

Bunch, and Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In accordance with 

the rules of this Assembly, I’m proud to present here today a 

petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These 

petitioners are deeply concerned and have shown their concern 

about the government’s erosion of our health care services and 

they urge this government to stop eroding Saskatchewan 

medicare. 

 

These petitioners are from a number of Saskatchewan 

communities including Bruno, Hafford, Meadow Lake, St. 

Walburg, Leoville, and Indian Head. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today as well, 

in accordance with the rules and procedures of this Assembly, 

to present a petition signed by several hundred Saskatchewan 

residents, and these petitioners are urging the government to 

stop its erosion of medicare. These petitioners are from several 

different Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker, including 

Preeceville, Weyburn, Radville, Ogema, Archerwill, and Rama. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in accordance with 

the rules and procedures of this Assembly, to present a petition 

signed by several hundred Saskatchewan residents. These 

petitioners are asking the Conservative government to stop its 

erosion of medicare in Saskatchewan. They are from several 

different Saskatchewan communities including Kerrobert, 

Moose Jaw, Indian Head, Fort Qu’Appelle, Spring Valley, and 

Duck Lake. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In pursuance with 

the rules and procedures of this Assembly, I too rise today to 

present a petition signed by several hundred Saskatchewan 

residents. These petitioners are also urging the Government of 

Saskatchewan to stop its erosion of medicare here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from many different Saskatchewan 

communities including the communities of Lestock,  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3382 

 

Harris, Clavet, Esterhazy, Melfort, and Moose Jaw. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In accordance with 

the rules of this Legislative Assembly, I am proud to present 

here today a petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan 

residents. These petitioners are deeply concerned about the 

government’s erosion of health care services in our province, 

and they urge the government to stop eroding and underfunding 

our Saskatchewan medicare system. 

 

These petitioners are from a number of Saskatchewan 

communities including Prince Albert, Canora, Swift Current, 

Spiritwood, Maple Creek, and Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the rules of 

this Assembly I rise today to present the petition signed by 

several hundred Saskatchewan residents. These residents are 

concerned, and in some cases hurt by the new direction of 

medicare in the province of Saskatchewan. And just so the text 

is on the record, Mr. Speaker, I would read the text to you: 

 

To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

The petition of the undersigned residents of the province 

of Saskatchewan humbly showeth that it is not in the 

public interest for the Government of Saskatchewan to 

undermine medicare in our province; and 

 

that it is not in the interest of Saskatchewan children and 

Saskatchewan families for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to weaken the children’s dental plan; and 

 

that it is not in the interest of Saskatchewan seniors and 

Saskatchewan families to impose arbitrary, unfair and 

expensive changes to the comprehensive and universal 

prescription drug plan; and 

 

that growing hospital waiting lists have reached alarming 

levels causing great hardship to Saskatchewan people; and 

 

that the Government of Saskatchewan’s threat to impose 

unfair and arbitrary limits on insured medicare services, 

including chiropractic care and physiotherapy, constitute 

an unwarranted erosion of health care services in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Wherefore, your partitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the 

Government of Saskatchewan to stop its policy of eroding 

and undermining medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the rules and 

procedures of this Assembly I present a petition  

signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These 

petitioners are urging that the government stop its attack, its 

erosion, and its undermining of our medicare system. These 

petitioners representing our children, our future, our seniors, all 

our people in this province, are from the following 

communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

From Humboldt, from Melfort, from Regina, from Weekes, 

from Craven, Lestock, and Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I proudly rise in the 

Assembly today to present a petition that is signed by hundreds 

of Saskatchewan residents . These petitioners are deeply 

concerned about the government’s erosion of health care 

services and urge that it stop its undermining of medicare in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitions are from many communities in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, including Martensville, Saskatoon, Weyburn, 

Nipawin, Odessa, Kendal and others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like my other 

colleagues I too rise today in this Assembly to present to the 

Assembly, pursuant to the rules, a petition protesting, from 

several hundreds of peoples in this province, protesting 

particularly the erosion and attack on medicare, and in this case 

in particular, the children’s dental program. 

 

These people come from communities such as Wilkie, Bienfait, 

Unity, Wadena, Regina, and Estevan. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise in the Assembly to join 

my colleagues in presenting a petition signed by hundreds of 

Saskatchewan residents. These residents urge this government 

to stop its erosion of medicare in our province. 

 

Of the many communities represented in this petition, the 

following communities are included: St. Walburg, Langham, 

Saskatoon; the communities of Bethune, Biggar, and my wife’s 

home town of Perdue. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today in 

accordance with the rules and proceedings of this Assembly to 

present a petition signed by several hundreds of Saskatchewan 

residents. These petitioners are urging that the government stop 

its erosion of medicare in our province. 

 

These petitioners are from several different communities in 

Saskatchewan including Melville, Spiritwood, Semans, Climax, 

Frontier, and Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, pursuant to 

the rules of the Legislative Assembly, to present a petition 

signed by several hundred Saskatchewan people. These 

petitioners urge the Government of Saskatchewan to stop 

undermining and eroding medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from several communities 

including Vanscoy, Regina Beach, Kipling, Tessier, Harris, and 

Weyburn. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3383 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the rules of this 

Assembly, I am proud to present here today a petition signed by 

hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are 

deeply concerned about the government’s erosion of health care 

services, and they are urging the government to stop eroding 

Saskatchewan medicare. 

 

These petitioners are from a number of Saskatchewan 

communities, including Paddockwood, Balgonie, Moose Jaw, 

Shellbrook, Beechy, Wadena, and Estevan. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 

accordance with the rules of this Assembly to present here 

today a petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. 

These petitioners are very much concerned about the 

government’s erosion of health care services, and urge the 

government to stop eroding Saskatchewan medicare. 

 

These petitioners are from a number of Saskatchewan 

communities, including Landis, Goodsoil, Unity, North 

Battleford, and Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am privileged to 

rise today, pursuant to the rules of this Legislative Assembly, to 

present a petition signed by several hundred Saskatchewan 

residents. These petitioners urge the Government of 

Saskatchewan to stop undermining and eroding medicare care 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, represent people from the 

communities of Humboldt, Christopher Lake, Meadow Lake, 

Prince Albert, Swift Current, and Guernsey, to name just a few. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise a second 

time in the Assembly this afternoon, in accordance with the 

rules, to present here a petition signed by hundreds of 

Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are deeply concerned 

about the erosion of medicare in our province and, among other 

things, the unfair changes to the prescription drug plan, and ask 

that the erosion to medicare in this province crease 

immediately. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Carrot River, Lake 

Alma, my home community of Saskatoon, Arborfield, and 

Central Butte. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again for the second 

time this afternoon to present a further petition signed by 

hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are 

deeply concerned about the government’s erosion of health care 

services, and urge it to stop undermining medicare in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And these people that signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come 

from such varied communities as Esterhazy, Rocanville, 

Strasbourg, Bengough, Spruce Lake, Unity, and Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

the Assembly again to present a petition signed by hundreds of 

Saskatchewan residents who are concerned with the erosion of 

health care and medicare. 

These petitioners are from many different communities in 

Saskatchewan, and they include Watrous, Maryfield, Ituna, 

Yorkton, Springside, and Yellow Grass. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise with my 

colleagues to present yet another petition signed by several 

hundred more Saskatchewan people, with respect to the 

undermining and the erosion of medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

This petition, sir, is signed by citizens from, among other 

places, Watrous, Prince Albert, Humboldt, Outlook, Kenaston, 

and Hanley. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

pursuant to the rules of this House. The bulk of the petitions 

which I now present deal with the wish of the petitioners to stop 

the government’s policy of eroding and undermining medicare, 

in the petitioner’s opinion. There are also, Mr. Speaker, 

petitions dealing more specifically with the prescription drug 

plan and the school-based children’s dental plan. In order to 

save the time of the House I will put them in as group. 

 

They are signed by a good number of hundreds of 

Saskatchewan people resident in Maple Creek, Buchanan, 

Martensville, Watrous, Blaine Lake, Wilkie, and other 

communities. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to lay on the table a 

further petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents 

who have strongly expressed their deep concern about the 

attack that’s taking place on our medicare program and our 

health care programs. These people are concerned that a health 

care delivery system which has taken some 25 years to build is 

now being severely undermined. 

 

I do this, Mr. Speaker, and I bring to your attention that among 

the many communities which are listed here, included are the 

following: Saskatoon, Redvers, Wawota, Denholm, Edam, 

Sonningdale, and Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today 

to present a petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan 

residents. The petitioners are deeply concerned about the 

government’s erosion of health care services and urge that it 

stop its undermining of medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from different Saskatchewan communities 

including Regina Beach, Vanscoy, Colonsay, Redvers, 

Melville, and Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise according to the rules of this 

House to present a petition of many concerned people — people 

who are concerned about the eroding and undermining of our 

health care system. There are hundreds of names from various 

constituencies. They include the areas of Canora, Gravelbourg, 

Melville, Kincaid, Golden Prairie, and Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise in 

accordance with the rules of this Assembly to present petitions 

signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents who are voicing 

their concerns about the erosion of  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3384 

 

medicare, including the dental plan, prescription plan, waiting 

lists. 

 

These petitioners are very deeply concerned about the erosion 

of this plan, and they come from towns such as Fulda, 

Humboldt, Lang, Tisdale, Weekes, and Frontier. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again then 

in accordance with the rules and procedures of this Assembly to 

table a further petition signed by many Saskatchewan residents 

who are very concerned about the PC government’s erosion of 

medicare. In particular they’re concerned about cut-backs to the 

children’s dental plan, cut-backs to the prescription drug plan, 

long hospital waiting lists, and threatened limits on chiropractic 

care, and physiotherapy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These petitioners are from several different Saskatchewan 

communities including Sturgis, Unity, Wilkie, Lebret, Cupar, 

and Minton. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I rise again, in accordance with the rules of 

this Assembly to present another petition signed by several 

hundred more Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are 

asking that the Conservative government cease the gutting of 

the medicare programs in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from several different Saskatchewan 

communities including Wishart, Pense, Lumsden, Wadena, 

Saltcoats, and Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in accordance with 

the rules and procedures of this Assembly on behalf of several 

of my constituents from Prince Albert as well as on behalf of 

residents from North Battleford, Meadow Lake, Edam, Meota, 

Swift Current, and Herbert. All of these petitioners are deeply 

concerned with the erosion of medicare under the present 

government, and they ask the government reverse its policy. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with rules of this 

Assembly I am proud to present another couple of hundred 

signatures from Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are 

deeply concerned about the government’s erosion of health in 

our province. These petitioners represent people from across 

this province, but in particular, White Fox, Christopher Lake, 

Prince Albert, Warman, Saskatoon, and Aberdeen. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

a second time to present a petition. The petition is signed by 

hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. They are concerned about 

the undermining of the medicare system. Many of them have 

been hurt by the changes, and many others are angry about the 

changes to the medicare system in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These particular petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from the 

communities of Aylsham, Shell Lake, Lashburn, Lloydminster, 

Maidstone, Marshall, St. Walburg, amongst many others. 

 

And I would way to say that the first petition I presented, Mr. 

Speaker, I neglected to name the communities. I’d like to do 

that. They came from Nipawin, Weldon,  

Middle Lake, Crystal Springs, Smeaton, and Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, for the second time I rise in 

accordance with the rules and procedures of the Assembly to 

present a petition by several hundred Saskatchewan people. 

 

These petitioners are especially worried about the tremendous 

cut-backs which erode and undermine our medicare system. 

They are wondering why, Mr. Speaker, we are taking it out on 

the children of our province. And when you read in there it says 

that it is not in the interest of Saskatchewan children and 

Saskatchewan families for the Government of Saskatchewan to 

weaken the children’s dental plan, and that’s a very major 

concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So these petitioners come from the following communities: 

from St. Walburg, Lone Rock, Lloydminster, Lashburn, 

Melfort, and Cut Knife. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I feel privileged to rise again and 

present a petition on behalf of hundreds more of Saskatchewan 

residents — people who are deeply concerned about the 

government’s erosion of health care services and who urge the 

government to stop its undermining of medicare. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from a number of 

Saskatchewan communities, including Kenaston, Shellbrook, 

Dinsmore, Lanigan, Kindersley, Lestock, and others. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 

I’m pleased to be able to rise, along with the rest of my 

colleagues, to present, pursuant to the rules of this legislature, a 

petition from concerned citizens representing Spruce Home, 

Canwood, Choiceland, La Ronge, Saskatoon, Windthorst, 

Meadow Lake, and the constituency that I have the honour to 

represent, the constituency of Regina Rosemont. 

 

And these citizens, Mr. Speaker, are very, very concerned and 

are deeply angered by the cuts that the Premier and his 

government are making to undermine and erode the medicare 

system in this province. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again to present another 

petition signed by hundreds of residents of this province — 

young adults, working people, farming people, and seniors — 

representing communities like Langenburg, Prince Albert, 

Neudorf, Duck Lake, Drake, and La Ronge. They are concerned 

about this government’s cuts to medicare. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in 

accordance with the rules and proceedings of this Assembly to 

present a petition signed by several hundreds of people, many 

from rural Saskatchewan, who are upset and indeed willing to 

protest the erosion of medicare in our province. 

 

These petitioners are from communities such as Yorkton, 

Wynyard, Mozart, St. Walburg, Paradise Hill, and Meadow 

Lake. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3385 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today pursuant to 

the rules of the Legislative Assembly to present a petition 

signed by several hundred Saskatchewan people. These 

petitioners urge the Government of Saskatchewan to stop 

undermining and eroding medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from communities such as 

Bienfait, Meadow Lake, Loon Lake, Makwa, Gronlid, and 

Estevan, among others. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again in accordance with the 

rules of this Assembly. I’m proud to present here today more 

copies of a petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan 

residents. These petitioners along with all the others are 

strongly protesting the government’s erosion of our health care 

services. 

 

These petitioners are from a number of Saskatchewan 

communities including Midale, Melville, Regina, Ogema, 

Bienfait, Carnduff, and Estevan. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in 

accordance with the rules of this Assembly to present a petition 

signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These 

petitioners are very concerned about the government’s erosion 

of health care services and urge the government to stop eroding 

Saskatchewan medicare. 

 

These petitioners are from a number of Saskatchewan 

communities including Meadow Lake, Kerrobert, North 

Battleford, White Fox, Hafford, Landis, Tisdale, and Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today pursuant to the rules 

of this Legislative Assembly, to present a petition signed by 

several hundred residents of Saskatchewan. On the 25th 

anniversary of medicare in this province, these individuals 

express their concern about the unprecedented attack on 

publicly funded medical care. 

 

The petitioners represent communities such as Landis, 

Esterhazy, Outlook, Dundurn, Quill Lake, Neilburg, and 

Kipling. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise again to 

present petitions from hundreds more Saskatchewan residents 

who are protesting the erosion of medicare in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and among other things they’re expressing 

special concern about the growing hospital waiting lists in this 

province that have reached alarming levels and are causing 

great hardship for Saskatchewan people. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Carrot River, 

Rockglen, Wolseley, Kinistino, Smeaton, and Milestone. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the third time this 

afternoon to present further names of people who are 

petitioning this Assembly. These petitioners are deeply 

concerned about the government’s erosion of health care 

services and urge it to stop undermining medicare in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They come from a variety of communities in  

Saskatchewan such as Landis, Moose Jaw, Weyburn, White 

City, Sedley, Lumsden, and I might add, Mr. Speaker, from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Eastview who have no voice in this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition by several hundreds of petitioners from across 

Saskatchewan who have signed this petition to indicate their 

deep concern that the government’s undermining of the health 

care system in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from a number of communities across 

Saskatchewan including Moose Jaw, Hudson Bay, Blaine Lake, 

Laird, Carnduff, Maryfield, and Estevan. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to be 

able to do it, and I’m proud that these people had the 

determination to do it, to put their names on the petitions. 

 

But I must tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I’m saddened that I have 

to do it, and that is to table this health care petition which 

protests the savage attack on medicare in Saskatchewan. It 

comes, sir, from residents of Codette, Ernfold, Pangman, 

Central Butte, Whitewood, Prince Albert and Swift Current. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present another 

petition dealing with health care and dealing more particularly 

with the petitioners’ view that the Government of Saskatchewan 

should stop its policy of eroding and undermining medicare. 

 

The petition consists of 23 pages, bearing signatures of people 

from many points across the province including Carlyle, 

Riverhurst, Biggar, Martensville, Arcola, and Davidson. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise again 

to present a petition to the Assembly signed by further hundreds 

of Saskatchewan people who are concerned about the attacks 

that are being made on the health care program of this province 

by this government. They’re concerned about the future of our 

medicare program. They are so concerned that they have taken 

the time and made the commitment to sign this petition, along 

with the many thousands which have been presented here 

already today. 

 

The people are from communities from, among others such as 

Macklin, Leask, Foam Lake, McLean, Moose Jaw, and 

Radville. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise for the third 

time today to present a petition signed by hundreds of 

Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are deeply concerned 

about the government’s erosion of health care services, and urge 

that it stop its undermining of medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from many different Saskatchewan 

communities including Bredenbury, Biggar, Wakaw, Major, 

and Carrot River. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present additional  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3386 

 

names of petitioners who are concerned and have been 

adversely affected by the policies of this government in regards 

to medicare and hospitalization. 

 

These petitioners, several hundreds of them, come from 

communities such as Rabbit Lake, Humboldt, Prince Albert, 

Meacham, Wakaw, and Melville. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise in 

accordance with the rules of this Assembly to present petitions 

by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents, people who have, by 

signing this petition, added their voice to the public outcry to 

stop this government from undermining our medicare system. 

 

These people come from towns such as Plunkett, Creighton, 

Kincaid, Mankota, Swift Current, and Lewvan. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 

file in this Assembly, to present a petition to this Assembly by 

several hundred more Saskatchewan residents who are urging 

the PC government to discontinue their erosion of the medicare 

system in Saskatchewan. These petitioners come from several 

Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker, including Margo, 

Lestock, Foam Lake, Bankend, Medstead, and Milden. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I rise today for the third time, Mr. Speaker, to 

present another petition signed by several hundred more 

Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are asking the 

government, the Conservative government opposite to stop the 

privatizing of the dental plan, reverse that; to stop the 

privatizing of the drug plan; and to stop its erosion of medicare 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from several different Saskatchewan 

communities including Swift Current, Biggar, Vanscoy, Carrot 

River, Langham, Kindersley, and Lake Lenore. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the rules 

and regulations of this Assembly, I rise once again to present a 

petition on behalf of hundreds of residents of Saskatchewan. All 

of these signed a petition which urges the government to stop its 

erosion of health care services in Saskatchewan. 

 

The residents are from all walks of life, Mr. Speaker, and they 

come from the communities of Watrous, Mount Nebo, Fillmore, 

Loon Lake, Glaslyn, Weyburn, as well as other Saskatchewan 

communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in accordance with the 

rules of this Legislative Assembly for the third time today. I am 

proud to present hundreds of signatures signed by people across 

this province who are concerned about the government’s cuts to 

our health care system. These petitioners represent a number of 

Saskatchewan communities, including Spy Hill, Tramping 

Lake, Stockholm, Assiniboia, Indian Head, White City, Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Regina, Bangor, and Melville. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I rise for the third time today as well, Mr. 

Speaker, to present a petition concerning health care and  

people’s concern about health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And it’s again signed by hundreds of the 

residents of the province of Saskatchewan, including the 

communities of Asquith, Osler, Elrose, Harris, Gray, Regina, 

Indian Head, and Kronau. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again to present a petition 

from the following communities of Canora, Kipling, Bethune, 

Duval, Stoughton, and Estevan. Mr. Speaker, the residents from 

these communities are extremely . . . want to bring the message 

out especially in the area of our prescription drug plan. They 

feel that they do not have the up-front money that a lot of the 

people have in . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I’d like to bring the hon. member’s 

attention to standing order 11(3) which says: 

 

On the presentation of a petition no debate on or in 

relation to the same shall be allowed. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, so with that I present the 

petitions. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour for me to stand 

again and present on behalf of hundreds more Saskatchewan 

people, more petitions from people who care very deeply, Mr. 

Speaker, about the future of medicare in Saskatchewan. They’re 

from a number of Saskatchewan communities, including 

Turtleford, Nipawin, Codette, Humboldt, Lanigan, Lumsden 

and others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise to 

join with my colleagues to present to the legislature today, 

pursuant to the rules, a petition asking the provincial 

government to change its course, to stop undermining and 

eroding the medicare system in this province. There’s several 

hundred signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, and they come 

from as far away as Ile-a-la-Crosse and from Shellbrook, Leask, 

Kelvington, Borden, North Battleford, and from the community 

of Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again, for the third time, to 

present another petition from Saskatchewan residents — 

residents who are concerned about our children’s dental plan, 

the prescription drug plan, hospital waiting lists, and the general 

erosion of medicare under this government. And these citizens 

are from communities, including Melfort, White Fox, 

Martensville, Saskatoon, Wakaw, and Love. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today, pursuant to the 

rules and procedures of this Assembly, to present a petition 

signed by yet more hundreds of Saskatchewan residents who 

are concerned about this government’s direction in terms of 

health care in this province. These petitioners are from several 

different communities, including Maidstone, Edam, Cudworth, 

Tramping Lake, North Battleford, and Biggar. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again, pursuant to 

the rules of the Legislative Assembly, to present a petition 

signed by several hundred Saskatchewan people. These 

petitioners urge the  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3387 

 

Government of Saskatchewan to stop undermining and eroding 

medicare by eroding the children’s dental plan and the 

prescription drug plan. These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from 

several communities, including Tisdale, McKague, Melfort, 

Yorkton, Birch Hills, Shellbrook, and Margo, amongst others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the rules of this 

Assembly, I am proud to present here today 27 more copies of a 

petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These 

petitioners recognize it is not in the public interest for the 

government to undermine Saskatchewan medicare, and they are 

urging the government to stop. 

 

And these petitioners are from a number of Saskatchewan 

communities, including North Battleford, Estevan, Swift 

Current, Shaunavon, Regina, Central Butte, and Hepburn. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again in accordance 

with the rules of this Assembly to present here today a petition 

signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These 

petitioners are deeply concerned about the government’s 

erosion of health care services and urge the government to stop 

eroding Saskatchewan medicare. 

 

These petitioners are from a number of Saskatchewan 

communities, including Crystal Springs, Luseland, North 

Battleford, White City, Prince Albert, and Regina. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

pursuant to the rules of this Legislative Assembly to present a 

petition signed by several hundred Saskatchewan people who 

have exercised their democratic right to petition this 

Conservative government to stop their attack on medicare. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from communities as 

diverse as Carrot River, Nipawin, Glenavon, Leask, Tisdale, 

Marcelin, and Khedive. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to present another petition signed by 

residents of Nipawin, Wilkie, Mervin, Swift Current, Candiac, 

and Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

And these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are deeply concerned with 

the government’s erosion of medicare, and particularly with the 

decision to weaken the children’s dental plan and implement 

unfair changes to the prescription drug plan. 

 

I’m pleased to present the petition to the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today for the 

fourth time in this Assembly to present hundreds more names of 

people in Saskatchewan who are concerned about this 

government’s actions in the field of medicare and  

health care services. 

 

In particular, I draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to the section 

of the petition that says: 

 

That growing hospital lists have reached alarming levels, 

causing great hardship to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And some of the people that have signed this petition, Mr. 

Speaker, are from the city of Saskatoon, where the problem is 

most severe. Along with those people from Saskatoon, there are 

people from Elstow, Invermay, Maryfield, Admiral, Shaunavon, 

and Carlyle. I take great pleasure in laying their wishes upon 

the Table here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present for a fourth 

time a petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents, 

and these petitioners are deeply concerned with the 

undermining of health care in Saskatchewan. 

 

The petitioners are from a number of communities including 

Rocanville, Weyburn, Windthorst, Emma Lake, P.A. — Prince 

Albert, Meath Park, Preeceville, Carrot River, Watrous, 

Saskatoon, Sturgis, Melville, and Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I lay before the House another 

petition containing names of citizens from Delisle, Alsask, 

Fosston, Rose Valley, Melfort, Star City, and Estevan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to present on 

behalf of many citizens from communities such as Weyburn, 

Viceroy, Assiniboia, Humboldt, Rose Valley, and Estevan, their 

petition dealing with the eroding and undermining of medicare 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition with 

several hundred names on it, from many communities including 

Porcupine Plain, Eston, Rosetown, Saskatoon, North Battleford, 

Tisdale, Weyburn, and an additional 80 names from the city of 

Estevan. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to present a petition signed by 

hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are 

deeply concerned about the government’s erosion of health care 

services, and urge that it stop its undermining of medicare in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The petitions are signed by hundreds of different residents of 

Saskatchewan from the communities of Sturgis, Saltcoats, 

Springside, Shellbrook, and Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the fourth time to present 

the names of petitioners who are concerned about the eroding of 

health care in our province. They are from the areas of 

Kelvington, North Battleford, Langley, Aylsham, and Meota. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3388 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the rules of 

this Assembly, I present hundreds of more petitions from 

people from Saskatchewan representing towns such as Love, 

White Fox, Wishart, Shamrock, Cudworth, and Moosomin. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I also wish to file further 

petitions from residents of Fillmore, Earl Grey, Strasbourg, 

Montmartre, Francis, and Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker: I’d like to present another 

petition signed by several hundred more Saskatchewan 

residents. These petitioners are from Sturgis, Preeceville, 

Endeavour, Odessa, Montmartre, Kennedy, and many residents 

from the constituency of Regina North West. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I rise, Mr. Speaker, to present a petition 

from residents of Goodsoil, Glenavon, Warman, Martensville 

and Saskatoon, who are urging this government to stop its 

erosion of medicare. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I rise for the fourth time to present a petition 

concerned about the undercutting of our medicare system in 

Saskatchewan. They represent several hundred people from 

communities such as Cut Knife, Maidstone, Humboldt, Regina, 

Weyburn, Vonda, and Goodsoil. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Plunkett, Harris, Shellbrook, Unity, Lashburn, 

and Lloydminster residents have signed this petition. They hope 

it has some impact on the government in the province of 

Saskatchewan to stop their erosion of medicare system. And I 

so present it here today in the House, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition here from 

Biggar, Duck Lake, Assiniboia, Pense, Vibank, Cadillac, and 

Ponteix. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to raise a particular here. It says 

that hospital waiting lists have reached alarming levels causing 

great hardship. So with that I present. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to present 

hundreds more of the same petition from citizens from the 

communities of McLean, Preeceville, Ile-a-la-Crosse, 

Endeavour, Gainsborough, Tisdale, and others. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise to 

present to the Assembly a petition outlining the people’s protest 

against the cuts to medicare. These people . . . several hundred 

are from Humboldt, Kelvington, Estevan, Bienfait, Tisdale, 

Hudson Bay, Crooked River, and I happen to notice that there’s 

several members, the former members of the Legislative 

Assembly, have their signatures on this as well. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, for the fourth time I rise to 

present a petition of Saskatchewan citizens to this Assembly, 

these citizens from communities including Meadow Lake, 

Outlook, Conquest, Balcarres, Weyburn, Yellow Grass, and 

Wynyard — these citizens concerned about the erosion of 

medicare in our province. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise, pursuant 

to the rules of this legislature, to present a petition on behalf of 

several hundred Saskatchewan  

residents who are upset with the Premier and his government 

and the way they’re handling medicare. These people are from 

Yorkton, Calder, Moose Jaw, Lanigan, Marquis, and Mossbank. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again with the 

same petition that I present from the cities and towns of North 

Battleford, Watrous, Young, Preeceville, Sturgis, and Canora, 

in the hopes that these petitions will do some good to the 

members opposite. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to present here today 

more petitions from people protesting the erosion of medicare. 

These people are from Spruce Home, Watrous, Kindersley, 

Dorintosh, Prince Albert, Borden, Ernfold, Halbrite, 

Lloydminster, and Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again, in accordance 

with the rules of this Assembly, to present a petition signed by 

hundreds of Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are very 

much concerns about the government’s erosion of health carte 

services, and urge the government to stop eroding 

Saskatchewan medicare. These petitioners are from a number of 

Saskatchewan communities, including Nipawin, Fair Glen, 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and Melville. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, 

pursuant to the rules of this Legislative Assembly, to present a 

petition signed by several hundred Saskatchewan people. These 

petitioners urge the government to reconsider its measures 

against medicare and to re-establish the program. These 

petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from many communities such as 

Codette, Canwood, Meadow Lake, my own constituency of 

Saskatoon Sutherland, Conquest, and Nipawin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the final time in this 

Assembly to present petitions from residents in Qu’Appelle, 

White Fox, St. Louis, Central Butte, Weyburn, Estevan, 

Tisdale, Love, Wishart, Montmartre, Eastend and Shaunavon, 

in total, Mr. Speaker, close to 1,000 signatures from people 

protesting the cuts to the children’s dental plan, to the 

prescription drug plan, and to the funding of our hospitals, and 

the petition concludes: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the 

Government of Saskatchewan to stop its policy of eroding 

and undermining medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

I am pleased to lay these on the Table. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the fifth time in 

the Assembly today, and the final time I will rise on this 

petition, to present hundreds and hundreds of names; as a matter 

of fact, Mr. Speaker, twice as many names as I have presented 

to the Assembly at any other time I have arisen this afternoon. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3389 

 

Now these people from Leroy, Humboldt, Sedley, Indian Head, 

Regina, Loon Lake, Wadena, Canora, Francis, Yellow Grass, 

Estevan, and Fillmore and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, are 

concerned not only with the undermining of medicare in 

Saskatchewan but the weakening of the children’s dental plan, 

the unfair and expensive changes to prescription drug plan, and 

the long hospital waiting lists, especially in the city of 

Saskatoon, and other issues in the medicare area. 

 

It was with a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, I present this 

petition on behalf of the people of all of the places in 

Saskatchewan that I have named and many other names of 

towns and cities in Saskatchewan that I have not named but are 

on those petitions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise also for a final 

time to present the petition of several hundreds of people across 

Saskatchewan who indeed were prepared to sign the petition 

indicating their deep concern in respect to the undermining of 

the health care in Saskatchewan. These petitioners are from 

communities throughout Saskatchewan: Canora, Buchanan, 

Kenosee Lake, Moose Jaw, Regina, Lampman, Yorkton, 

Debden, Maple Creek, Green Lake, Lanigan, and Leask. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present further 

petitions, a very large number of them running to well over 95 

pages of names, coming from many different communities: 

Esterhazy, Rockglen, Moose Jaw, Waldheim, Davidson, 

Tisdale, Wishart, Kelliher, Saskatoon, Naicam, Biggar, 

Broadview, Holdfast, Penzance, and Choiceland, and Canwood, 

and Birch Hills, and Churchbridge, and Semans, and Rosthern, 

and Sintaluta, and Indian Head, and Beauval — all concerned 

with the erosion of medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again to present many 

hundreds of names of people who have signed the petition 

expressing their concerns about the cuts made to the health care 

programs in Saskatchewan by the government. They include 

people from the communities of Saltcoats, Candiac, Corning, 

Garrick, Lintlaw, and Raymore, Esterhazy, Langenburg, 

Bethune, Ormiston, Unity, and Qu’Appelle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to present 

to you several hundred other signatures from such communities 

as Whitewood, Broadview, Southey, Earl Grey, Nokomis, 

Kelvington, Yorkton, Norquay, Kamsack, Stornoway, Veregin, 

and Outlook. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I  

want to rise again to present to this legislature the names of a 

number of people who have been concerned over the last two or 

three or four months about the direction that our health care 

system has been taking, and particularly s it refers to the dental 

plan and the drug program. 

 

These petitioners are from constituencies and areas such as 

Nipawin, Kelliher, Spalding, Kipling, Watrous, Pilot Butte, 

Hudson Bay, Tisdale, Stewart Valley, Oxbow, Lake Alma, and 

Coronach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again, 

presenting the same petition from the communities of Biggar, 

Rabbit Lake, Melville, Spiritwood, Moose Jaw, Odessa, 

Nipawin, Arelee, Milestone, Wadena, Weyburn, and 

Whitewood, adding their names to the tens of thousands of 

people asking this government to change its policy of 

undermining our health care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to table several 

hundred more signatures of Saskatchewan residents who are 

protesting the PC government’s hurtful cut-backs to health care 

services and the erosion of the medicare system in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These residents come from several communities, Mr. Speaker, 

including prince Albert, Christopher Lake, Montmartre, 

Redvers, and Yorkton, North Battleford, Domremy, Oxbow, 

Davidson, Young, and Lucky Lake. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the fifth time today in 

accordance with the rules and procedures of this Assembly to 

present a 46-page petition signed by several hundred more 

Saskatchewan residents who are opposed to the privatization of 

the dental plan and the privatization and the gutting of the drug 

plan. They urge the Conservative government to stop the 

Balkanization of medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from several communities including 

Saskatoon, Cut Knife, Yorkton, Langenburg, Kinistino, 

Stornoway, Churchbridge, Wawota, Etonia, Spy Hill, 

Moosomin, and Fairlight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am privileged to rise on 

behalf of residents across Saskatchewan, hundreds of residents 

who have signed a petition protesting the erosion of medicare. 

These residents come from the communities of Outlook, 

Perdue, Smeaton, Lipton, Kindersley, Saskatoon, Swift Current, 

Estevan, Torquay, Oxbow, Hanley, Imperial, Carnduff, 

Rosetown, and my home town of Prince Albert. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to present hundreds 

and hundreds of signatures of people across this  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3390 

 

province opposing the government’s cuts to our health care 

system. These signatures represent people from the 

communities of Cut Knife, Livelong, Estevan, Turtleford, 

Maymont, North Battleford, Raymore, Melfort, Beatty, Moose 

Jaw, Gronlid, Ridgedale, Elbow, Biggar, Sonningdale, Hanley, 

Arelee, and Goodsoil. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have here some 40 

or 50 pages. If I had my preference I’d like to present them all 

individually, but they’re from residents of the province who 

have expressed great concern about the health care system in 

this province. They are petitioning the government to stop the 

erosion of the medical care system in the province of 

Saskatchewan. These people, as I said, are concerned; in some 

case, hurt; in some cases, very angry at what has happened to 

our health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I think that the hon. 

member should once again remember rule 11(3) which says 

that: 

 

On the presentation of a petition no debate on or in 

relation to the same shall be allowed. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I apologize for that, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been 

obviously carried away by the magnitude of the response on the 

petitions. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 

Warman, Delisle, Weyburn, Coronach, Bredenbury, Rosetown, 

Big River, Lake Lenore, Estevan, Ceylon, Senlac, and Macklin, 

amongst other communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, for the fifth and final time I 

present the petition from people from the following 

communities of Blaine Lake, Halbrite, Weyburn, Hodgeville, 

Big River, Forget, Melville, Carnduff, Radville, Eston, Keeler 

and Brownlee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are stating simply, stop the policy of eroding 

and undermining our medicare system. They’re saying, don’t 

weaken our children’s dental plan, our prescription drug plan. 

Our hospital waiting lists are alarming, and also our 

chiropractic care and physiotherapy. 

 

With that I present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is one of the proudest moments 

since I’ve been able to enter this Assembly that I stand on 

behalf of hundreds and hundreds more of Saskatchewan people 

to express their care and concern for the future of medicare in 

their province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And these hundreds of people, Mr. Speaker, are from 

communities such as Unity and Leask and Porcupine Plain; 

Wadena, Mayfair, Rocanville and Swift Current,  

Plenty, Kipling, Moosomin, Archerwill, Weyburn and many, 

many others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once gain I 

rise to join with my colleagues to present to you several 

hundreds of names of people of this province who are opposed 

to the government’s present course in regards to the health care 

system. 

 

These citizens come from Saskatoon, Foam Lake, Hafford, 

Tisdale, Moose Jaw and Kamsack, Biggar, Melfort, Regina, 

Wakaw, Arcola, St. Walburg, Meadow Lake. And for the 

information of the Premier, I see no Cuban communities listed 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The hon. member I’m sure 

realizes that he’s out of order, and I would like to once more 

read standing order No. 11(3): 

 

On the presentation of a petition no debate on or in 

relation to the same shall be allowed. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to the thousands and 

thousands of signatures already presented, I would rise to 

present, according to the rules of this legislature, several 

hundred, if not a thousand more, signatures of Saskatchewan 

citizens concerned with the erosion of medicare. 

 

Again, these citizens are from the community of Perdue, 

communities of Biggar, Mozart, city of Regina, Neudorf, 

Wynyard, Meadow Lake, Dundurn, Clavet, Warman, Borden, 

and from the community I am proud to represent, the city of 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 

accordance with the rules and procedures of this Assembly to 

present a petition signed by hundreds, to add to the thousands 

that have already been tabled today, of people who are 

concerned with the lack of commitment to medicare in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitioners are from Spruce Lake, Saskatoon, 

Martensville, Dalmeny, Biggar, Cochin, Dundurn, Plunkett, 

Aberdeen, Allan, Kindersley, and many more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with a list of 

petitions today, similar to the ones I’ve presented earlier. These 

petitions are from the people of Cut Knife, Oxbow, Wadena, 

Prince Albert, Battleford, Christopher Lake, North Battleford, 

Wakaw, Prince Albert, Macdowall, Spruce Home, Birch Hills, 

Big River, and Meath Park, as well as others. 

 

This is my fifth round with these petitions, but for the Minister 

of Health and the Premier and his colleagues, I’m sure it must 

feel more like the 10th round of a heavyweight fight. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3391 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the fifth time in 

accordance with the rules of this Assembly to present hundreds 

of more names to add to the thousands that are already here 

from petitioners who are strongly protesting the government’s 

erosion of our health care services. 

 

The petitioners represented in these petitions come from many 

communities including Harris, Biggar, Rosetown, Wakaw, 

Eatonia, Naicam, Waldheim, Wadena, Flaxcombe, Birch Hills, 

Weyburn, Semans, Raymore, Cupar, Punnichy, Prince Albert, 

and my town of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan residents 

who are concerned about the government’s erosion of health 

care services and urge the government to stop cutting back on 

Saskatchewan medicare. These petitioners are from a number of 

Saskatchewan communities. Some of them are Humboldt, 

Prince Albert, Birch Hills, St. Benedict, Saskatoon, Ceylon, 

Arborfield, Naicam, Wadena, Weyburn, Mortlach, Craven, and 

Whitewood. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 

the orders of this Assembly to present 47 pages of petitions 

signed by residents of Saskatchewan who are protesting 

cut-backs to health care services and who want to make sure 

that, as one woman put it, that their opinion is heard over more 

than just the backyard fence. These petitioners represent 

communities as diverse as Theodore, Leoville, Porcupine Plain, 

Kelliher, Parkside, Craven, Chitek Lake, Gladstone, Beechy, 

and Leross. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am really proud, 

Mr. Speaker, to present to you the last of over 60,000 signatures 

that have been presented to this legislature this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, people from across this 

province from the East to the West, from the North to the 

South, have sent a message that they do not want our health 

care system to be eroded and undermined in this province. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pride that I present the last of 

those signatures, and these people represent the communities of 

Delisle, Mankota, Weyburn, Bjorkdale, Turtleford, North 

Portal, Estevan, and I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, several 

hundred people from the constituency that I represent, 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — In total, Mr. Speaker, we have presented 

close to 100,000 signatures by the people of this province, in 

this legislature, since the end of June. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, a year and a half ago I had 

the opportunity of introducing Saskatchewan’s chief trade 

negotiator, and I want to take the opportunity to reintroduce him 

today as a result of the initialling of the trade negotiations, an 

agreement between the United States and Canada. 

 

(1515) 

 

In the west gallery, I would like to introduce Mr. Art 

Wakabayashi who has been a deputy minister of Finance in the 

Government of Saskatchewan, director-general at the federal 

level, and has worked very hard, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all 

Saskatchewan people to put together a comprehensive trade 

package between Canada and the United States with 

Saskatchewan’s interest at stake. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy 

to say, as a result of his work and work of people on his team 

and people across Canada, that we now see that approximately, 

Mr. Speaker, 49 to 50 per cent of Canadians think it’s a good 

idea. 

 

And for benefits for consumers and producers alike, I would 

like to thank Mr. Art Wakabayashi and have him stand and be 

recognized in the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 

deal of pride, Mr. Speaker, that I introduce to you and to other 

members of the Legislative Assembly several hundred people 

who are gathered here today who are representatives of 

community groups in our province, and in particular the city of 

Saskatoon. These people represent . . . or the city of Regina. 

These people represent senior citizens’ organizations, health 

organizations, non-government organizations, as well as unions 

in health institutions. These people have been involved in 

gathering the thousands and thousands of signatures that we’ve 

just presented to the Legislative Assembly. They have gone 

door to door, and for that we thank you from the bottom of our 

hearts. We hope that the government is listening and will get 

the message. Thank you for coming today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the 

legislature to welcome our guests, and I would ask these guests 

to rise. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sauder: — Mr. Speaker, today it’s with pleasure that I rise 

to introduce some special guests from my constituency of 

Nipawin. Those guests are Mr. and Mrs. Ted Azevedo. 

 

I’d like to tell you a little bit about Mr. Azevedo. He has served 

the senior citizens of this province for many years. In 1977 he 

was appointed to the Senior Citizens Provincial Council as a 

member, and in 1983 became its chairman. He’s presently the 

president of the Saskatchewan Senior Citizens Association, and 

I believe I  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3392 

 

have that name right, and I also believe first vice-president of 

the Canadian Seniors Association. 

 

In 1980 he was appointed chairman of the heritage 

subcommittee of the Celebrate Saskatchewan group. As well 

Ted has a life membership in the Nipawin and district 

Agricultural Society for over 20 years of dedicated service to 

that organization. He’s also serving in his 14th year as treasurer 

of the Nipawin & District Living Forestry Museum. Over the 

years he has been deeply involved with the Saskatchewan 

Association of New Horizons Projects, and I would personally 

like to commend him at this time for the contributions that he 

has made over these years to that very important sector of our 

society — our seniors. 

 

And I would invite all members of this Assembly to afford Mr. 

and Mrs. Azevedo a warm Saskatchewan legislative welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 

to you, and to members of this House, a former member of this 

Assembly, a person who served the constituency of Moose Jaw 

for a good number of years and had the distinction of being 

minister of Health during the period in 1962 which saw the 

introduction of medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

I introduce to you the Hon. W.G. Davies. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in 

introducing a very prominent member of the agricultural 

community who’s seated in the west gallery today, that being 

Mr. Ken McDonald of Indian Head. Mr. McDonald is the 

president of the Saskatchewan cattle feeders association, which 

association supports our actions and our moves with trade with 

the U.S. They understand and realize the importance of access 

to that very important market for their product. 

 

Mr. McDonald operates his farm . . . pardon me, the Three Bars 

Ranch at Indian head, with his brother Don, and his wife Karen, 

and his father as well. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in welcoming Mr. 

McDonald. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great deal of 

pleasure today for me to introduce to you and through you to 

this House, Mr. Boyd Anderson, who is seated in the west 

gallery. 

 

Mr. Anderson is currently the chairman of the Beef 

Stabilization Board in Saskatchewan and has always been 

deeply involved in the cattle industry. He has served in many 

capacities, including president of the Saskatchewan 

Stockgrowers Association. As well, Mr. Anderson has had a 

long and distinguished career as a municipal politician and has 

contributed untold hours in dedication to serving both his 

community and all of  

Saskatchewan. That dedication was honoured with an honorary 

doctorate degree from the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Anderson is a man of deep conviction, and one of the issues 

of the day is trade, and he has many thoughts on that. And with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with him after question 

period to discuss those issues. I would like all members of the 

House to please welcome Mr. Anderson to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would like at this time to 

intervene to inform our honoured guests in the galleries that the 

tradition and practice of this House is that guests do not 

participate in any way in the proceedings of the House. And 

therefore, I would respectfully ask them to refrain from 

clapping or any other forms of demonstrations. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

my colleague from Thunder Creek in welcome Mr. Anderson to 

the Assembly. It was my pleasure to work with him s a director 

with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) while he was the president, and I want to extend 

a welcome to him from the Assembly here and on my behalf 

 

I also want to welcome, and have you as members of the 

Assembly welcome, a gentleman who I’ve gotten to know in 

the past few years. He is the chairman of the animal health 

committee for the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association. He 

operates a farm at Cut Knife, Saskatchewan. They have a 

commercial cattle operation and a feedlot. The gentleman is a 

strong proponent of the trade that we have in the livestock 

sector with the United States, and I want to have the Assembly 

join me in welcoming Mr. Lynne Biggert from Cut Knife, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Care Cuts 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, we have just presented the 

signatures of more than 60,000 Saskatchewan residents who 

oppose your health care cuts, added to the 36,000 people who 

signed similar petitions this past summer, this means that nearly 

100,000 Saskatchewan people have formally protested your 

health care cuts. And we have petitions, Mr. Premier, coming in 

daily. 

 

My question is this: in view of the fact that nearly 100,000 

Saskatchewan citizens have sent you a clear message to reverse 

your harmful and hurtful health care cuts, will you now listen to 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I thank the hon. member for the question, 

Mr. Speaker. I would point out, if I may, the truth with respect 

to health care expenditures in the  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3393 

 

province of Saskatchewan this year and the last five years. If I 

could, Mr. Speaker, the health budget in the province of 

Saskatchewan has increased 63 per cent in the last five years, 

which is the largest in the history of the province, and the 

second largest in Canada. 

 

And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition has voted 

against every health care budget that we’ve introduced in the 

last five years, with the largest increases we’ve seen in 

Saskatchewan’s history. Now that’s the truth. You voted against 

it, and we’ve provided the increases. 

 

And if I could, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to point out to the 

hon. members that we reduced — and removed, pardon me, Mr. 

Speaker — we removed extra billing in the province of 

Saskatchewan, which had an impact in the neighbourhood of $1 

million on people, particularly seniors, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

been removed. 

 

In our health care budget, Mr. Speaker, we have provided in the 

neighbourhood of $275 million in brand-new hospital 

construction — particularly in acute care, Mr. Speaker — in 

hospitals, Pasqua Hospital, University Hospital, St. Paul’s 

Hospital, Regina General, the new City Hospital which is to be 

built, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will point out that for the seniors, which obviously use health 

care significantly, the new Saskatchewan heritage program 

provides about $40 million, Mr. Speaker, in new money to 

seniors on their discretionary income, whatever they would like 

to spend. I could add, Mr. Speaker, that we are looking at the 

fact that we have now something like 2,190 new special care 

home beds that have either been constructed or about to be 

constructed since 1982, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I point this out, and I have a list of about 12, Mr. Speaker, 

to be fair, that we have introduced annually in the budget, and 

increased the budget 63 per cent in this province — the largest 

in its history, the second largest in Canada — and every single 

measure was voted against by the opposition. And when we 

remove extra billing, Mr. Speaker, and we provide these kinds 

of economic benefits, at least the opposition, Mr. Speaker, 

could vote for the people and see these significant increases 

take place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, the people of the province are 

interested in the truth, and the truth is that your government cut 

health spending by $18.6 million this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The truth is that people are making decisions 

on whether they buy prescription drugs or whether they buy 

groceries. Mr. Premier, that’s the truth. And, Mr. Premier, let’s 

talk about the truth. People don’t want your speeches; they 

don’t want your evasions; they want to know, will you now 

listen, in view of the fact that 100,000 people in this province 

have sent you a message and they do not want your version of 

the truth. They want you to rescind and change your health care 

cut-backs. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the truth will speak for 

itself. Sixty-three per cent increase in health care expenditures 

and the budget up 63 per cent. Every increase in health care 

expenditures that we have done, like the new chiropody 

program, Mr. Speaker, and particularly senior citizens have 

encouraged us to have a chiropody program to help them be 

more mobile. Every single issue that we’ve put in our health 

budget has been voted against by the NDP — and that’s the 

truth, Mr. Speaker, because it’s on the record in this Assembly 

— every single, solitary budget in Health, and the increase of a 

63 per cent since 1982, has been voted on against by the NDP 

— every single one, Mr. Speaker. And I am going to take the 

opportunity to get that information to senior citizens across this 

province, and to other people, Mr. Speaker — every single, 

solitary one that they have voted against. 

 

And when we talk about a new chiropody program and we talk 

about the fact that extra billing has been removed, Mr. Speaker, 

and the new nursing home construction, and the fact that the 

new leader of the NDP would not only have a moratorium but 

he would say, new hospital construction for senior citizens is a 

waste of money — and he’s on the record of saying that, Mr. 

Speaker — there’s going to be an awful lot of Saskatchewan 

people are going to like to know the truth about the NDP and 

what they really believe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Cuts to Health Care 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a question to the 

Premier. And my question addresses the matter of how 

Saskatchewan people’s trust has been betrayed by this 

government. Mr. Premier, you didn’t say a thing about the cuts 

to health care during the provincial election of last October, not 

once. And at that time you were promising to improve and 

expand health care services. Those are the facts, Mr. Premier, of 

the situation. 

 

And you did the same thing in past elections. I bring to your 

attention a campaign brochure which you personally signed — 

you personally signed — and I quote from it in part: 

 

A new PC government will place great emphasis on 

improving the delivery of health services by expanding the 

drug plan. 

 

That’s what you said, sir. That’s the truth. Why did you betray 

that promise, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we said that we would 

provide the very best health care program in Canada, and the 

best health care facilities, and increase expenditures 

dramatically, regardless of economic conditions, Mr. Speaker. 

And the truth is, that has happened. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3394 

 

The largest increases in health care expenditures, more hospital 

beds, more cancer clinics, more nursing home capacity, Mr. 

Speaker, more CAT scans, more new facility, more operations, 

more dollars per capita than ever in the history of the province 

of Saskatchewan, and every one of those measures was voted 

against by the NDP. They refused to vote for increases in health 

care, and they’re on the record here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they can stand in their place today and say . . . If I might, 

Mr. Speaker, if you take the last five years, the last five years of 

our administration versus the last five years of the NDP 

administration, Mr. Speaker, their increases in health care 

expenditures were two percentage points, ours were 9.7, almost 

a five-fold difference, Mr. Speaker, in the percentage increase 

and the percentage encouragement for health care. And when 

we do increase it, they vote against it, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 

on the record of doing so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 

Never before in the history of Saskatchewan has there been a 

petition of over 100,000 names presented in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I ask the Premier to deal with the truth. I 

ask him: does he deny — in my supplementary — does he deny 

his own brochure that said a new PC government will place 

great emphasis on improving the delivery of health services by 

expanding the drug plan, but instead has cut it back so that 

people are suffering like they have never had to suffer before in 

the purchase of their prescription drugs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Canada and 

the people of Saskatchewan are not going to buy make-up 

stories by the opposition with respect to the facts in either 

funding or on programs, Mr. Speaker. If I can quote the leader, 

the new leader of the NDP on . . . the member from Riversdale, 

Mr. Speaker. He says: 

 

Underfunding in the sense of failure to fund treatment has 

not been substantiated. (That’s what he says.) Indeed there 

is evidence of significant remaining inefficient and 

effective care, suggesting that underfunding argument is 

primarily aimed at increasing physicians’ incomes and 

expanding their access to publicly provided capital 

equipment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were in government, they didn’t 

fund it nearly as high as we did. When the NDP had a chance, 

they didn’t remove extra billing, Mr. Speaker. When the NDP 

had an opportunity to build new nursing homes, they stood up 

and said, no, that’s not the answer. And the new leader of the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale, has said we 

can’t ever get into the trap of building new facilities. And that’s 

why they don’t vote for new facilities and health care 

expenditures because they don’t believe in it. They just talk a 

good story, and that’s  

why they have been defeated twice on the health care issues as 

well as many others, because the people know they just talk; 

they don’t deliver. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, I have here another promise which 

your party made to the people of Saskatchewan regarding health 

care. This promise, Mr. Speaker, has the heading, and I quote, 

“Guarantee,” and I want to read to you what it reads in part. It 

says that: 

 

The PC party of Saskatchewan is committed to continue 

the medicare system. The PC party of Saskatchewan will 

abolish the unfair deterrent fees for prescription drugs. 

 

Mr. Premier, this guarantee was signed by your Minister of 

Finance, the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden who brought 

in this budget that we’re debating now. I ask you, Mr. Premier, 

why did your party and your Minister of Finance make this 

promise when you never intended to keep it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the members 

opposite have this position of the NDP. Certainly, the NDP 

have across the province, and I believe that the media have. 

And I just point out, Mr. Speaker, that their record is clear and 

our record is clear. Their record in terms of expenditures is 

there and ours is here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the new solution is this: the member from Riversdale says 

we have to ration medical technology, Mr. Speaker. Then he 

goes on to say, building more institutions for the aged is a road 

to disaster. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s precisely why they vote 

against these kinds of increases for seniors. That’s why they’re 

against the new drug and rehabilitation centre at Yorkton. They 

are afraid, Mr. Speaker, to spend money on health care. The 

new leader of the NDP is on record as saying, don’t build it for 

seniors, ration technology, Mr. Speaker, ration it. That’s why 

they vote against the budget increases. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you give them the truth, when you 

give them the truth they sit over there and they laugh, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re ashamed of the truth; they’re ashamed of their 

record; they’re ashamed of their voting patterns. And indeed, 

Mr. Speaker, one year ago today, they’re ashamed of their 

electorate record because, Mr. Speaker, they weren’t successful 

for the second time in a row, and the fourth time in the last two 

decades. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Drug Abuse by Senior Citizens 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, a few days ago on the Premier’s 

free-time TV political broadcast, he suggested that it was his 

plan to make it more difficult for Saskatchewan people to buy 

prescription drugs as a way to avoid drug abuse. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3395 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: is it really your 

position, Mr. Premier, that the sick and the elderly are drug 

abusers, and that their doctors are wrong in prescribing them 

their medication? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, this is a classic case where 

the NDP are hidebound by their philosophy and have to live in 

the past. Physicians are telling us, and I believe you have seen, 

Mr. Speaker, research by specialists that are dealing with senior 

citizens, and it’s been quoted in major newspapers across the 

country, the research that’s coming forward, and saying, by the 

pailful — by the pailful — senior citizens have access, Mr. 

Speaker, to prescribed drugs, and it can cause problems. 

 

Now the NDP won’t face the youth problem with respect to 

drug and alcohol abuse. They turn their minds away from it. 

They won’t recognize the problem with drug abuse with senior 

citizens. They won’t recognize the fact that it is the number one 

social problem facing North America today, associated with 

drug and alcohol abuse, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then when we allocate new money to it in our budget — 

new money — what do they do, Mr. Speaker? The members 

opposite vote against the new money for health care. They’re on 

the record. Every single time they voted against the increases, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re going to make it public to all citizens, and 

particularly senior citizens and the youth, so they know the 

record of the NDP with respect to health care expenditures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Premier, I want to get this very clear. Are 

you saying that the people who take prescribed medication on a 

regular basis really don’t need it? Are you saying that every 

family doctor is a drug pusher? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — See, Mr. Speaker, how they don’t tell the 

truth to the people and they give them half-truths. The NDP 

have been doing this all their lives, Mr. Speaker. They will not 

recognize there’s a drug problem in society. They won’t 

recognize it. 

 

And over there, Mr. Speaker, each and every one of them will 

stand up and say, oh no, that’s not the case. You better turn 

your head, you better put your head in the sand and not deal 

with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the courage to deal with today’s 

contemporary problems. They might like to live in the past, but 

the families and the parents and the children of senior citizens 

who notice drug abuse are saying yes, somebody should deal 

with it. and thank goodness the NDP aren’t in power because 

they would be afraid to deal with it on one hand; secondly, they 

wouldn’t finance it, Mr. Speaker, because they didn’t in the 

past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cuts to Children’s Dental Plan 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier, and it deals with the destruction of 

the school-based children’s dental program which has thrown 

hundreds of people out of work and meant hardships for the 

families, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, your own figures, latest figures that I have seen 

show that you have cut 330 rural communities serving 392 

schools with the drug plan. You have cut that back to 93 

dentists in 71 communities. I want you to tell those rural 

families just how that represents an improved system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if you go into rural 

Saskatchewan and you ask them what the number one problem 

is, facing farmers in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to listen to 

the truth. You ask farmers the number one problem. You listen 

— you listen. You ask them the number one problem in 

Saskatchewan and it isn’t the one-time visit to the dentist, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s not the number one problem. 

 

The number one problem is farm income and the price of 

wheat, Mr. Speaker. And the NDP have even got that confused. 

They think the number one rural problem is the single visit to 

the dentist on an annual basis. That’s their rural solution. I 

mean, they just stood up. The Agriculture critic for the NDP 

just said the number one agriculture problem in rural 

Saskatchewan is the visit to the dentist. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have agriculture specialists all across 

this province, and I would venture to say that most likely, Mr. 

Speaker, they wouldn’t agree with the hon. member, and he 

should be ashamed of himself to even stand there and say that 

he represents agriculture for the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me say this. Rural people appreciate the fact 

that they can receive deficiency payments, Mr. Speaker. They 

can receive up to $10,000 per family as a result of things that 

the Progressive Conservative government has done in the 

province and nationally, that the NDP never, ever did for rural 

families. In fact what they did, and the member from Riversdale 

did, was succession duties, land bank, death taxes, and high 

interest rates, Mr. Speaker. And that’s their legacy to 

agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Free Trade Adjustment Mechanism 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. It has to do with the proposed free trade agreement. 

I want to ask the Premier about the proposed adjustment 

mechanism that will be required for Canadian producers and 

exporters in the wake of any such agreement. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3396 

 

The Government of Canada has of course talked about that, but 

to date has not provided any detail about any such mechanism. 

The Premier has said there will be, for example, such a 

mechanism specifically related to the two-price wheat program, 

but again, as yet we don’t have any detail. 

 

I would like to ask the Premier when the precise details of this 

program with respect to two-price wheat and all the other 

adjustment programs are gong to be published; and can we have 

the assurance from the Premier that there will be full details of 

all and any adjustment programs published publicly and 

available in this legislature before Canada is called upon to 

ratify any treaty with the United States? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have till 1989, in 

January, to begin the whole process of trade-related activities 

with the United States, and then a 10-year program of phasing 

down tariffs, so eventually tariffs will go to zero. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now over that period of time, and certainly between now and 

1989, January, which is over a year, they will be, and I believe 

federally and provincially, fleshing out adjustment mechanisms 

that will apply, new mechanisms that will apply to individuals 

that may have to adjust because of resource allocations and 

adjustments. 

 

So I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that the Prime Minister has said 

that there will be new money allocated to adjustment 

mechanisms, and the process would be in co-operation with the 

provinces and with the industrial SAGITS (Sectoral Advisory 

Groups on International Trade), the general economic analysis 

that has taken place sector by sector, and saying this is the kind 

of money that you may need here; here’s a kind of adjustment 

process you may need here, and so forth. 

 

So it’s a question of time, and it will be available over a 10-year 

period as we move into . . . gradually move into it. and the 

specific details of it, I think, will take some time to be 

developed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Increase in Nursing Home Fees 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question and it is 

addressed to the Premier. It will be short, concise, and based on 

fact. Mr. Speaker, my question has to do with the hardship that 

your fee increases are causing senior citizens and the disabled in 

Saskatchewan. On November 1, nursing home fees will 

increase again, and that makes an 18 per cent increase in the 

course of this year. This last summer you raised home care fees 

over 66 per cent. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question is this: why are you attempting to 

solve your deficit problem with the savings accounts and the 

pensions of Saskatchewan seniors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, since the question deals 

with a detailed response in terms of the charges in the nursing 

home . . . to nursing home residence, I will be pleased to 

respond to the member’s question. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the 

following: the maximum old age security, GIS (guaranteed 

income supplement) and Saskatchewan income plan benefits, 

the maximum of those benefits will provide for $103 of 

disposable income for any resident of a nursing home in 

Saskatchewan now. There will be $103 of disposable income. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you must have some type of fair way to deal 

with this, and we have that formula in place now. And that 

formula is such that 85.7 per cent of OAS (old age security) 

GIS (guaranteed income supplement), and Saskatchewan 

income plan, which is the amount that is available to the person 

most in need, to the person most in need — 85.7 per cent of that 

goes for the resident charge. and if we go back, Mr. Speaker, to 

1981, the time before we were in the government, when they 

were in the government, the amount that was charged was 85.6 

per cent of those same three benefits. Mr. Speaker, that is a 

reasonable formula. That’s a formula that’s been kept up over 

this period of this amount of time. It’s reasonable, and it stands 

the most important test, Mr. Speaker, and that is the test of 

fairness, and it stands that well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Waiting Lists for Saskatoon Hospitals 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, my question deals with your 

announcement that you made the other day on your TV show 

that you would deal with the long waiting lists in Saskatoon. 

and let me remind the Premier that the waiting lists in 

Saskatoon are still over 11,000. 

 

Mr. Premier, you said that the doctors and nurses and the 

operating staff people would have to now work overtime, 

weekends, and in the evenings in order to perform the extra 

operations. These people, Mr. Premier — these people, Mr. 

Premier, object very strenuously to this assembly line operation 

type that you’re setting up, and they are telling you that fatigue 

has no place in the operating room. Mr. Premier, can you tell 

me now how many staff have you made available to those three 

hospitals to do those extra operations? How many staff have 

you made available now? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out very 

clearly to the member from Saskatoon South — I might add 

who was the former minister of Health — let me just quote 

from May 13, Hansard of May 13, 1980, when that member 

who just took his seat was the minister of Health. And I quote: 

“I think it would be irresponsible of this government if there 

weren’t a waiting list,” said the minister who was the minister 

at that time. That’s what he said, I think it would be 

irresponsible. Now he stands in a different mode and tells us 

this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the most important aspect of this, and I have 

said it on several occasions in this House before, and I will say 

it again for the member from Saskatoon South and his 

colleagues, there are two approaches that must be taken to the 

waiting list problem in Saskatoon,  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3397 

 

and we have acknowledged the fact that there is that problem. 

 

Long-term, which is the plan which has been in place for some 

time, and there is the regeneration of those hospitals and the 

construction of those hospitals that’s going on in Saskatoon 

now, and has been going on since this government took office, 

Mr. Speaker. That was the legacy that we were left by them — 

the need for regeneration of the major hospitals in Saskatoon. In 

good years they did not regenerate those hospitals. That was the 

legacy we were left. That was the challenge that we undertook, 

and we rose to that challenge and those hospitals are being 

built. 

 

And as it relates to the short term as a waiting list, Mr. Speaker, 

we have various measures in place and more will be there in 

terms of the day surgery unit which you’ve heard about before 

at City Hospital in Saskatoon — 2,500 more surgeries, many 

others. And there will be $1 million into directed money at the 

specialty areas which are causing the log-jam, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I rise 

to table a document . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. We’re not at orders of the day. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Before orders of the day I rise to table a 

document signed by 165 residents of Saskatchewan. This 

documents calls on the Minister of Health to stop punishing 

elderly people and low income families with cuts to the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan and the Saskatchewan 

dental plan. It states that these changes are an extreme hardship 

to thousands of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has not been prepared in a formal way 

for presentation to the Legislative Assembly under rule 11. This 

petition is signed by residents of many of Saskatchewan’s 

communities including Christopher Lake, Anglin Lake, Prince 

Albert, Saskatoon, Bruno, Yorkton, Viscount, Plunkett, 

Aberdeen, Warman, Osler, and Asquith. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Privatization of Government Services 

 

Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to rule 16 I 

move, seconded by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster: 

 

That this Assembly recognizing that all partners in the 

legislature have endorsed the concept of privatization of 

some government services, now encourage the 

government to pursue the provision  

of government services . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Allow the member for Regina 

Wascana to continue. 

 

Mr. Martin: — I will move my motion at the end of my 

remarks, if that’s acceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . recognizing that all parties in this legislature have 

endorsed a concept of privatization of some government 

services, now encourage the government to pursue the 

provision of government services through the use of public 

participation in the private sector in order that these 

services can be provided to the public in a more efficient 

and cost-effective manner. 

 

I make this motion, Mr. Speaker, because it gives all members 

an opportunity to make their views on the whole question of 

privatization clear. There’s much discussion in the media, and 

even in this Assembly, by members of the same party giving 

out quite different positions on exactly where they stand. 

 

So I would begin the debate by making a direct and special 

invitation to the yet to be, but soon to be new leader of the 

NDP, the member from Riversdale, to participate in this debate. 

He especially has an obligation to let the people know where he 

stands on such a fundamental issue, since he clearly aspires to 

be in our province’s highest political office. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I would invite the member of Regina 

Rosemont to pitch into the discussion, since I for one would 

like the confirmation of his statements that massive government 

intervention is a solution to our economic challenges. He has 

been reasonably forthcoming in the past about this position, and 

I would hope that he would be forthcoming in this debate. 

Perhaps at the end of the debate then, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be 

able to figure out exactly how the conflicting positions of the 

NDP are able to co-exist; the position of those who say 

privatization’s okay so long as the people are in favour, and that 

of those who say privatization is wrong anywhere; that it is 

even remotely possible to have the government doing whatever 

it is that is being done. So I invite particularly those two, Mr. 

Speaker, to get into this debate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak a bit about the concept of 

privatization itself. Maybe one useful approach would be to do 

a “before and after.” The first before and after we can look at, 

Mr. Speaker, is the NDP position itself on private ownership. 

Now the NDP would certainly rank Tommy Douglas as an 

authority they respect. His before is the Regina Manifesto. The 

manifesto, Mr. Speaker, the founding document of the CCF and 

later the NDP, states, and I quote, that: 

 

(State) Planning by itself will be of little use if the public 

authority has not the power to carry its plans into effect. 

Such power will require the control of finance and all 

those vital industries and services, which, if they remain in 

private hands,  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3398 

 

can be used to thwart or corrupt the will of the public 

authority. (The state) Control of finance is the first step in 

control of the whole economy. 

 

That was before Tommy Douglas exercised power in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. What did he do when he gained 

power? What was his afterthought? Well as premier of this 

province, in this Assembly on February 22, 1950, Mr. Douglas 

had this to say: 

 

We have taken the position that for a government in this 

province to take huge sums of money and invest it in 

looking for minerals would put this province in a financial 

position which would jeopardize its security. Therefore, 

we will allow private enterprise to come in here and look 

for minerals . . . That, if they come in, we will give them 

security on two points: one, that if they find certain 

resources, they will be allowed to develop them; and 

secondly, that if they set up the machinery for developing, 

they will not be expropriated. 

 

Those two categorical assurances have been given, and I 

repeat them here this afternoon. 

 

Well what happened there, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Douglas 

says that there was a need for capital in the province, a need for 

investment dollars, and a need for someone willing to take the 

risk. He recognized the risk and was unwilling to have the 

taxpayer assume that risk. He also recognized that no private 

investor would take that risk under a threat of government 

take-over, so he provided assurances such as a take-over . . . 

against such as a take-over. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s another after, and that is the after 

Tommy Douglas was no longer the leader of the NDP — the 

after when the member from Saskatoon Riversdale held sway 

over the resource policy of this province. They figured that 

Tommy Douglas was wrong somehow, and they did in fact 

provide the mechanism for expropriating the private owners of 

minerals in this province. They forced the potash industry to 

sell out to the government or face a gruelling expropriation 

procedure. 

 

So that was after Tommy Douglas, but it was also before, Mr. 

Speaker. It was the before of that government because they too 

had a change of heart. Mr. Speaker, while we were still in 

opposition in 1982, we had a document leaked to us. It was a 

copy of the minutes of a board meeting of the Crown 

investments corporation of the NDP government. And surprise, 

surprise, Mr. Speaker! It provided for a plan to implement 

privatization in Saskatchewan. 

 

The government of that day also came around to realizing that 

capital is a scarce resource indeed and that risks are part and 

parcel of investment. They came around to that realization too 

late to save the people of this province from the horrendous 

losses incurred by the state-owned potash corporation and the 

other state-owned enterprises, but at least they did come around. 

 

The minutes of that meeting, Mr. Speaker, state, and I quote, 

that “Capital rationing for Crown investments has  

become a reality.” And because of that and other things, Mr. 

Speaker, they agreed to create “a program to provide 

Saskatchewan residents an opportunity to make equity 

investments in Saskatchewan enterprises.” 

 

So we can see that even that government, the NDP, endorsed 

privatization, although to what degree and in what manner, it is 

fair to say, we are uncertain. For before they could proceed with 

their own privatization plans, an election intervened and new 

management was put in place in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think some other history might be helpful to the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg might 

like to note of the position of one leader of the Liberals, and 

someone, I understand, who is philosophically quite close to 

that hon. member, Mr. Davey Steuart. 

 

May 25, 1975 edition of the Leader-Post stated the position of 

the Liberal Party, at least at that time. He said, and I quote: 

 

Once the oil producers begin stepping up production and 

exploration in the province, a Liberal government would 

either phase out Saskoil or restructure it as a research and 

trading operation. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now that is not quite the same kind of privatization that we 

have practised, but it is a most thorough one. Because to phase 

out the company, the government would have to sell off all of 

its assets. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can see that the part of the motion that 

says, “All parties in this legislature have endorsed the concept 

of privatization of some government activities,” is absolutely 

100 per cent accurate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our democratic system it is indeed possible to 

have both private ownership and public accountability. This is 

accomplished quite simply through government regulations, 

through policies on taxation, through direct consultations with 

business. It is also accomplished rather directly, Mr. Speaker, 

through the passage of laws to which businesses are as 

accountable as any other entities in our society and arguably 

more so than government institutions. 

 

Let me refresh the memories of members, Mr. Speaker, 

regarding the accountability of state-owned business. You will 

recall a time under the previous administration, the NDP 

administration, when there was a significant spill of tailings at a 

uranium mine in which the government had ownership. You 

will recall that that spill was covered and that the public was not 

informed. That is an example of state-owned business 

accountability, as shameful as it was at the time. 

 

Because what happens is that the same people who are breaking 

laws or hiding things are the people charged with enforcing 

those laws or making those things public. So, Mr. Speaker, 

privatization is a positive tool for ensuring the greatest possible 

efficiency while at the same  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3399 

 

time ensuring the most effective accountability. 

 

Now when we speak of privatization, we must be reasonable. I 

know that it is difficult for certain members of this House to 

have a reasonable discussion on the issue, but in fairness they 

must do their best. There’s no rationality in saying, because I 

support privatizing the commercial operation owned by the 

government, that somehow by extension, I support privatizing 

my local elementary school. That would be absurd. And I 

caution the members who are apt to make those kinds of claims, 

that the people have worn weary of those scare tactics. 

 

I will ask the members opposite, is there anything, even one 

thing that you still think there should be public participation in? 

Or have you changed your minds yet again since January of ’82 

when you had developed your own privatization program? If 

you haven’t changed your minds, then do us the service of 

telling us what services you would allow. In the words of your 

ministerial board — Saskatchewan residents, an opportunity to 

make equity investments in. Perhaps the member from Regina 

North East might like to address that question since he was a 

member of the board that approved the privatization plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am excited at the prospect that privatization 

offers our province. We have seen just tremendous results in 

Saskoil. That firm has become a truly major player as the result 

of its entry into the market, and it will grow more in the future. 

That means more jobs, more wealth for this province, more 

opportunity across the board, and more opportunity for our 

young people. 

 

I’m anxious to see a number of other areas explored for 

privatization as well. I think the approach of getting private 

sector auditors involved, for example, is an excellent approach. 

And while I’m on the matter of private auditors, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d just like to remind the member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

of his own observations in April of ’81, recorded in Hansard. 

And again I quote: 

 

My perception is that the provincial auditor is to make 

sure that the expenditure of the public dollar is carried out 

according to the statutory and other dictates of the 

legislature. I think in some areas such as a proliferation of 

Crown corporations, we have in the province of 

Saskatchewan a different kind of nuance involved, if you 

will, a degree of financial accountability perhaps not 

directly through the provincial auditor; otherwise, you 

would have to have a massive provincial auditor’s 

bureaucracy. And even at that you would never be able to 

just run through the family of Crown corporations, plus 

the big spending departments. It can’t be done. 

 

That was said by the minister from Riversdale . . . rather the 

member from Riversdale, and I close that quote. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all of those were the words of the member 

for Riversdale, the heir apparent to the NDP leadership. 

 

I’ll tell you that I’ve never heard a better argument for  

privatizing some of the auditing services performed for the 

government as the one that he gave in that speech in 1981, and 

so I strongly urge the government to accept the member from 

Riversdale’s assessment of the situation and to proceed with 

that privatization as quickly as possible, hopefully with the full 

co-operation of the opposition in light of the soon-to-be leader’s 

strong stand on this specific case for privatization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I expect that I likely would favour a greater degree 

of privatization than members opposite. I believe in fact that 

every government activity that is not a direct social service, 

such as education or health care, is a reasonable candidate for 

examination. 

 

This does not mean that they are all suitable for privatization. 

But we need not be apolitic and say that they cannot even be 

looked at. If we do not look, we can never know, and I am not 

one who advocates hiding from knowledge. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition lost all 

control of its senses when it was announced that the 

government would investigate privatizing the Prince Albert 

pulp mill. They cried out as if the sky were falling in. Don’t do 

it, they said. Don’t even think about the possibility. Only 

terrible things can result if we do. 

 

Well the government did think about it and studied it, and the 

government found an interesting buyer that offered just some 

tremendous advantages for the province, one of which was a 

construction of an all-new paper mill which would open up new 

markets for us in the States and provide a new source of jobs 

and incomes for this province. 

 

What do the NDP say to that, Mr. Speaker? Well, they said it 

will never happen; you’ve been taken in by a bunch of — what 

is it they call them? — oh yes, a bunch of rapacious capitalists. 

You’re being taken in by a bunch of rapacious capitalists, they 

said. I’m not even sure they could spell the word, but they said 

it none the less. The paper mill will never be built, they said — 

said the ever-pessimistic NDP. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is a bit behind schedule, but I challenge 

the NDP members from Prince Albert to ask their constituents 

if they think that they are hallucinating. Is all that construction 

work a mass fantasy? Are all those people working on the job 

site dreaming? Mr. Speaker, of course it is being built, and it is 

a great benefit for Prince Albert and an important contribution 

to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would like to remind the hon. 

member that his time is running out and he should put his 

motion before his time runs out — move his motion. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Okay. 

 

That this Assembly endorse the concept of public 

participation and/or privatizing in the area of the 

commercial Crown sector and in the area of the provision 

of government services, where it can be demonstrated that 

those services can be provided in a more efficient and 

cost-effective manner. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3400 

 

I move it, seconded by the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me an absolute pleasure to be able to stand in this 

Assembly and speak to the motion in rule 16. As we all know in 

this Assembly, and indeed the people all throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan, we definitely know that the NDP, 

the opposition in this House, is totally opposed to privatization 

and free trade in Saskatchewan, and indeed all across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that due to the fact that they are 

so opposed to free trade and privatization in this province and 

across Canada, this is now a theatrical performance by the NDP 

in this House that we have seen now for 99 days, opposing all 

these incentive programs that we have to build in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I way to say I have a fairly extensive speech 

written here, but basically, you know, there’s so many different 

avenues a person can speak on as to what these people have 

said in this Assembly over this last 99 days that it is totally 

appalling that anybody across this province would even listen, 

let alone vote for these individuals — radical, left-wing 

individuals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that when I look at 

privatization I look at economic benefits for all people of 

Saskatchewan — for the youth. And this is what life is all 

about, Mr. Speaker. It is the youth of this province, the youth 

that is going to support the seniors of this province. 

 

We have had an indication this afternoon of an NDP 

manipulated bunch of petitions presented to this Assembly. And 

let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, if I added up all the names that 

were presented here in this Assembly today, it would be 

probably in the neighbourhood of about 50 per cent of the total 

population in this province that have backed the NDP in the last 

. . . in the 1986 election. They scraped and they turned every 

rock in this province to get a petition presented here in this 

Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on the privatization, on the privatization Bill 

. . . or on the privatization that we are trying to institute in this 

province to give these incentives to our young people so as to 

support the seniors in this province in their health care and in 

making life easier for them, they vote against every single 

positive thing that we seem to bring into this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know I don’t often get upset and mad; I seem 

to be able to hold my cool, but sometimes, Mr. Speaker, 

sometimes you know we have to talk to kids in kind of a 

different way. I would say that the children in our schools act a 

whole lot more adult-like than the contribution we have had 

from the NDP opposition in this legislature. For 99 days they 

talk about privatization; they want to talk about privatization 

and the jobs. I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are wasting our 

time in this Assembly by putting up with their type of rhetoric 

and waste of the precious Assembly time — 99 days where I  

could be out telling the people about our incentive programs; 

what free trade and privatization is going to do for this 

province. 

 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have countless, numerous 

phone calls from my riding, of people that are totally interested 

in this movement. Forty-nine per cent in the last national poll, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, were in favour of free trade and 

privatization across this country, and they are opposed, 

absolutely opposed. And I will tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that being opposed to that, as they were opposed to our 

provincial budgets throughout, since 1982, that they are 

opposed to us being able to support the senior citizens in this 

province by being able to collect through the privatization, by 

privatization, being able to create these jobs so that we can, as a 

government, collect tax to give the seniors that support they 

need in future health care problems so that we can extend . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member to 

keep his comments on the motion that is before the Assembly. 

The member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Well, thank you. I’ll accept your ruling, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Like I said, it’s very seldom I get upset, but I 

want you to realize I was trying to relate it to privatization. But 

I hope that when the opposition stand up, you will not allow 

them to relate things to privatization. That is their silly little 

tricks that they try to use in this House, and I appreciate your 

ruling. 

 

I would like to say though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it used to 

be that proponents of privatization were viewed much the same 

as supporters of nationalization. And that has been driven by 

ideology. Today, Mr. Speaker, we find the concept of 

privatization being championed by governments of every 

political stripe — other than the fact of the members opposite, I 

should say — from the conservative to other socialist parties 

and as far as the communist parties are concerned. 

 

(1615) 

 

Why is this happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you may ask? It’s 

happening because in almost every case privatization makes 

good economic sense. It definitely creates an optimism for our 

youth. It gives all sorts of opportunities and spin-offs to help in 

the realms of job creation, as I had indicated earlier. 

 

That is why we see the curious cases presented by the Labour 

governments of Australia and New Zealand. In both countries 

we see government services being turned over to the private 

sector, departments turned into Crown corporations, and public 

participation being invited through sale of Crown corporations 

shares. Here we have two very socialist governments doing 

what would have once appeared to be a very anti-socialist thing 

to do. 

 

I make this point, Mr. Speaker, since members opposite like to 

paint our privatization efforts as being driven by ideology. This 

is not the case, Mr. Speaker. Since our party come to power in 

1982, we have made it clear that we would be re-examining the 

role of Crown corporations and the function and delivery of  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3401 

 

government services. 

 

This was not a secret, Mr. Speaker. We said that cost 

effectiveness would be the primary consideration in our 

decisions, and yes, we made some changes. Road construction 

is now done by private contractors because it made economic 

sense, not because of ideology — it made economic sense, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because it created a competition out there. It 

drove road construction prices down because of the 

competition, and we are building today more miles of highway 

for least dollars that were spent under the previous 

administration’s government. 

 

Cable TV operators now own their transmission hardware — 

something that the member for Saskatoon Riversdale was 

strongly opposed when he was in government, but I suspect that 

he may have softened his views since the light of his recent 

statements. It seems that for him, at least, ideology is taking a 

back seat to a pragmatism of sorts. Unfortunately for him, I 

doubt that all of his colleagues share that view, and it is very, 

very . . . it shows very clear that that caucus opposite is split on 

this issue and many others. 

 

But the people of Saskatchewan can see that privatization 

presents a number of interesting opportunities — a more 

effective, efficient delivery of government services, for 

example, and an opportunity to participate in the development 

of Saskatchewan through buying bonds and shares in Crown 

corporations; these are very real, very exciting opportunities . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the government has an 

obsession. It has an obsession to pursue the dogma of 

privatization. This PC government has a fanatical obsession to 

privatize, and I say that that is both immoral and impractical, 

and it’s hurting thousands of Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Following my remarks today, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving an 

amendment to this motion, and the amendment which will ask: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 

and the following substituted therefor: 

 

. . . condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its 

narrow, impractical and ideological plan to sell off 

Saskatchewan public assets and public services, which 

will cost Saskatchewan jobs, reduce services to 

Saskatchewan people, reduce Saskatchewan people’s 

control of our provincial economy, and thereby harm the 

interests of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s and this 

government’s narrow, ideological, and unwise position to 

privatize Saskatchewan is nothing more than a scorched earth 

policy. I charge the Premier — I charge  

him with plundering and ploughing under the carefully nurtured 

and flourishing social and economic growth that we were so 

fortunate to inherit from the work of many generations of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

By doing this, Mr. Speaker, the Premier is telling me that he 

does not believe in a Saskatchewan as we know it. By 

embracing privatization dogmatically he is telling me that 

Saskatchewan is no good. He is telling me that Saskatchewan 

must be changed. He is saying that he does not believe in the 

Saskatchewan system that we have in place. 

 

Instead of adopting a positive approach to fine tuning and 

improving our widely accepted government services, our 

Premier is taking a fanatical approach for political purposes. 

And I say that instead of being sensitive to and practical about 

the needs of Saskatchewan, we are just getting more and more 

of the Premier’s ideological propaganda and patronage through 

privatization. 

 

But why is it — why is it, Mr. Speaker, that this government is 

so dogmatically hidebound to the privatization strategy? Why is 

it that this government has chosen to yield to the advice of 

outsiders — the right wing ideologies of the Fraser Institute and 

the extremist plots of Madsen Pirie, the guru of the Adam Smith 

Institute, that centre of outmoded economic theory, that theory 

which, when put into practice, has resulted in hardship for all in 

the past, Mr. Speaker. This was evidenced by the stock market 

crash in 1929, and that foolish theory of the Adam Smith 

economics is even partially evidenced once again today in the 

stock market crash we are experiencing currently. 

 

Why is it that our Premier is pursuing this unpractical, 

dogmatic, privatization ideology? I say it’s a dismal solution 

put forward by a Premier who is now reacting in terror to a $3.4 

billion provincial deficit of his own construction. He 

desperately looked for a solution to his own mismanagement, 

and this government is desperately looking for a way to recover 

from its unpopularity. 

 

So what are they doing? Well simply put, Mr. Speaker, they are 

selling out Saskatchewan assets to private interest to obtain 

operating capital. Remember that the interest alone on the 3.4 

billion debt amounts to $340 for every man, woman, and child 

in Saskatchewan, or for an average family over $1,000 per 

family per year. 

 

And to make this policy of privatization appear popular, they 

sell off the shares of a chosen Crown corporation at a fraction 

of the market value. In other words, they dump the shares in the 

market. And I say it’s not right, and it’s a blatant betrayal of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — While Saskatchewan people are given the 

opportunity to buy shares in the Crown corporations, the reality 

is most Saskatchewan residents can only afford to buy small 

amounts of this stock. Large amounts of this stock are sold to a 

small number of institutional or corporate investors and 

out-of-province Tory friends. 

 

These investors gain quick profits on a far larger scale.  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3402 

 

The assets which the people of Saskatchewan now own 

collectively are sold off only for a fraction of their real value. 

And Saskoil is the best example to date of this favouritism in 

their privatization. 

 

The PC government offers tax breaks to its friends buying 

already undervalued Saskoil shares. Two-thirds of these shares 

were sold to out-of-province residents while many 

Saskatchewan people were not even able to get their orders 

filled. Out-of-province Saskatchewan residents got a major 

bonus from the Saskatchewan treasury. The Saskoil share 

offering just proves the government gives away too much to the 

rich when it privatizes. 

 

Meanwhile the poor are left to service the rising debt caused by 

the loss of equity. This government believes ordinary taxpayers 

should suffer major tax increases and major cuts in service, 

while at the same time bonuses are given to investors. Now that 

is one example of privatization in the commercial field. 

 

And I say selling Saskatchewan assets to gain favour with 

friends of the Conservatives at cost to the ordinary taxpayer is 

immoral, Mr. Speaker, but what is even more cruel is the 

privatization of our social and health services. And I’m talking, 

Mr. Speaker, about the privatization of services to the mentally 

retarded, the privatization of our school dental program, the 

privatization of the drug plan, the prescription drug plan. 

 

Let me elaborate first of all, Mr. Speaker, on the dogmatic 

privatization of services to the mentally retarded. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, at North Park Centre, an institute in Prince Albert, 

there were 180 mentally retarded senior residents who loved 

that, and used that as their home — 180 residents are now being 

forced to move against their wishes. They were not . . . this 

dogmatic approach led to their government now asking them to 

find a place to live, or the doors will be closed at the end of 

February in 1988. 

 

What will it lead to? It will lead to no respite care for these 

people. It will lead to dislocation, displacement. It will lead to a 

loss of jobs for a hundred workers in Prince Albert. And worst 

of all, Mr. Speaker, it was dogmatic and it was not asked for. 

And what we’re hearing, Mr. Speaker, is that not only are they 

going to stop at privatizing North Park Centre but some of these 

people who will not have homes found are being moved to 

Valley View, and in the long run those people in Valley View 

will also be asked to move and be privatized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from that one example — I want to bring my 

remarks to a conclusion — from that example we can see that 

this government’s dogmatic approach to privatization is not 

practical. What could be practical about forcing mentally 

retarded seniors out of North Park Centre? What could be 

practical about forcing parents of children in the rural area to 

drive miles and miles and take days off from the children to 

school to drive them to dentists? What could be practical about 

forcing people to pay hundreds of dollars up front for the 

prescription drug plan? 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, and seconded by the member 

from Prince Albert-Duck Lake: 

That all the words after the “Assembly” be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

. . . condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its 

narrow, impractical, and ideological plan to sell off 

Saskatchewan public assets and public services, which 

will cost Saskatchewan jobs, reduce services to 

Saskatchewan people, reduce Saskatchewan people’s 

control of our provincial economy, and thereby harm the 

interests of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gave me a 

great deal of pleasure to second the amendment by the member 

from Prince Albert, and with good reason. As I read through the 

motion under Rule 16, the end of the motion reads that: 

 

(They want to privatize) . . . where it can be demonstrated 

that those services can be provided in a more efficient and 

cost-effective manner. 

 

Well, let’s have a look at the record in Saskatchewan thus far. 

This government has been guided and run by Madsen Pirie and 

the Fraser Institute; there can be no doubt that that’s the 

direction of the government. And because of the kind of 

direction that this government has embarked upon, they’ve hurt 

a lot of small-business people in this province. And it now 

seems that they’re willing to divert their eyes to the Crown 

corporate sector, Crown corporations, and that’s on the list for 

the privatization. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now some people have said to me, perhaps it’s not even that 

bad of an idea that we should get rid of the Crown corporations, 

given the kind of management that these people have thrust 

upon those corporations — they’ve been losing money for the 

most part. And I think there might even be a feeling out there 

that the sooner they get rid of these corporations, the sooner 

they’ll quit losing more and more of the people’s equity that 

they’ve built up over the years. 

 

And I said I wanted to talk about some examples of 

privatization, and I want to make some remarks about a 

comment made by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster in 

terms of this privatization venture they’re embarking upon 

being the creator of jobs for the young people. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Exactly. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well the member says, exactly. Maybe 

he can explain to the members of this House and the people of 

this province why we’ve lost so many of our young people. And 

you’ve already been on some of the privatization deal that you 

want to pull. 

 

Well let’s have a look at one of your privatization operations. 

Let’s have a look at the Department of Highways. You sold $40 

million worth of equipment for $6 million. Now that might 

mean good business sense to you, but I tell you, I’ll tell the 

member from Cut  

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3403 

 

Knife-Lloyd it doesn’t mean good business sense to the people 

of this province. And I’d like him to tell me how the sale of $40 

million worth of equipment for $6 million has created 

employment, Mr. Member? Well I tell you, you start looking in 

the rural communities and look at all of the young people that 

are actually out trying to find work, and how many of those 

people have been employed because of your privatization of the 

Department of Highways? I can show you the reverse scenario. 

I can show you a bunch that used to be employed by that Crown 

corporation who are sitting on unemployment right now. 

 

But my colleague from Prince Albert indicates it’s an 

ideological thing that you’re about; it’s a philosophical bent 

you’re on; you’re listening to Madsen Pirie, and you’re 

listening to the Fraser Institute. You’ve got absolutely no 

concept of what has built this province and the fact that we’ve 

used three different sectors to build this province and to create a 

stable economy. 

 

We’ve used the public sector and the private sector and the 

corporate sector and the co-operative sector. We’ve used all of 

those. And I want to tell you, Mr. Member, we’re going to 

continue to use all of those when the people of this province 

turf you people from government. And the reason, I say, is 

because we want to create a stable environment for working 

people and for business people, for young and for old. And we 

can do that by a mixed economy that we once had, we still 

have, but I’m afraid we won’t have if you’re bent on this 

privatization journey of yours. 

 

And he can yip and he can yap. If he wants to talk about 

Saskoil, let’s talk about Saskoil. You sold off shares of Saskoil, 

and you know as well as I know that 60-some per cent of those 

shares are no longer owned in this province. And I want to also 

tell that member that he should also note that that corporation, 

instead of investing in this province where it was designed to 

invest, invests in our neighbouring province of Alberta. Has that 

created jobs for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you want to call him to order, he might be able 

to listen, instead of yapping and chirping, and he might better 

understand what’s happened to the Crown corporations in the 

province under the hands of this government and privatization. 

 

You tell me, Mr. Member, how many people have in this 

province, how many people in this province have benefited by 

the privatization of Saskoil? How many young people has it 

employed? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Lots. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — The minister says, lots. Forty thousand 

unemployed in this province, up from 20,000. Tell he how it’s 

helped. I say to you, you’re hell-bent on an ideological course. 

You aren’t looking at the economics of what you’re doing. It’s 

a philosophical bent you’re on, and I say you’re wrong, and the 

people of this province are going to say you’re wrong. 

 

You’ve privatized the dental plan, and you’ve put 400 dental 

nurses out of work. And has that created  

employment? You’ve taken services away from 338 

communities and it’s no longer available. You’re looking at 

something like 75 communities where that service is available. 

So your privatization has created no jobs. In fact it’s lost jobs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s misleading the House again. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well he says I’m misleading the House. 

You sat in here the say day I did, Mr. Member, when all of 

those people were in here that you had fired, and all of them 

were in here looking for some help from you, and you sat there 

on your hands. And I tell you that there are some 400 people 

out of work that shouldn’t be and wouldn’t be if it wasn’t for 

you. 

 

Saskoil — 70 per cent of the shares that were privatized are out 

of the province now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well how 

do you see that as being good business? It’s not Saskatchewan 

people that any longer own that. It’s out of province. And I say 

to you, it’s not creating any jobs in this province. 

 

So let’s look at the future a bit, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at SGI. 

The minister and the members may not know why SGI was put 

in place, but I’ll tell you that there are a lot of seniors in this 

province who remember when SGI was put in, when people 

couldn’t afford insurance in this province. And there are a 

number of them that are still out there today and that are 

looking at this government’s performance in terms of Crown 

corporations. 

 

It provided cheaper insurance over the years. It provided 

insurance to a lot that couldn’t have afforded it otherwise. And 

why sell it? I don’t understand. Do we want the Ontario rates? 

And their government was soundly defeated in Ontario, and one 

of the reasons was because of insurance rates. I say to you, 

blind ideology and no return. 

 

They talk about the privatization of Weyerhaeuser. Well they 

can call it what they want. I’ve called it a give-away and I’ll 

continue to call it a give-away. And until you can show, and 

members opposite can show where the people of this province 

have gotten their money back from that give-away, then we’ll 

start listening to you. But I tell you the people of Prince Albert 

didn’t believe you, and they still don’t. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province understand 

what happened under a New Democrat government when we 

used the Crown corporations as a vehicle and as a tool to 

deliver health care, not cut-backs to health care but expansion to 

health care. The people of this province remember and 

understood that the New Democrats understood what the 

province of Saskatchewan was about. 

 

And now that they’ve had a chance to compare it to this group, 

I suggest to you that they’re not going to follow that ideological 

bent that these people are on. There’s no benefits to the people 

of this province. All we have to do is look at the record of the 

privatization since you’ve been in power, and I can’t suggest 

that there’s been one instance where you can show me that there 

have been jobs for young people because of privatization. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3404 

 

And I can’t tell you that I believe small business has benefited 

by any of the privatization. You can talk in terms of highways 

— the road construction industry have had enough of you, the 

independent truckers have had enough of you in terms of 

deregulation, and you can call it whatever you want, but 

whatever word, it’s all the same. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I will be supporting the 

amendment because I think the people of this province are not 

believing this resolution, and they don’t believe the 

privatization has been able to provide more efficient and a more 

cost-effective direction in terms of Crown corporations. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 

a pleasure to join in the debate today and to voice my support 

for the content of the speech put forth by my colleague from 

Regina Wascana. 

 

This motion addresses some very important issues — the use of 

public participation in the private sector to provide services to 

the public in the most efficient and cost-effective manner. And I 

think we should look at those words for a minute. You 

underline “service to the public” because that’s what it’s all 

about here; that’s what we as government, what we as taxpayers 

in Saskatchewan, are looking for and what we’re demanding — 

service to the public. 

 

And what does the public want? The public wants the same 

thing from government, or semi-government institutions, that 

they want all through society. They want fast, courteous 

service. They want it to be delivered in the most cost-effective 

means possible, because no taxpayer, no citizen in our province 

likes tax increases. No citizen likes to see sloth and waste in any 

area of society. So when we’re debating this particular issue, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must keep on those particular issues 

because that is what the public expects from us as members of 

the legislature, as governments, and as opposition members. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have witnessed the popularity of some 

of these initiatives in the last few years because they are 

providing exactly those things. And I think about people in our 

home province of Saskatchewan and the issue of Sask Power 

bonds. And even though I wasn’t a member of this House when 

that particular issue arose in 1984, I do well remember the 

outcry from the members of the then opposition over this 

particular initiative. And this initiative was put forth by Sask 

Power to raise money in the province of Saskatchewan to 

enhance the electrical services which all our citizens demand, 

which they expect to have, and which they expect to have at the 

most cost-efficient method possible. 

 

In that very first issue of Sask Power bonds, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there was over $90 million raised when the issue was 

sold out. And I’m sure if that issue had been carried on for a 

longer period of time, more people would have subscribed to it. 

 

And I don’t know each and every person in this province  

who has subscribed to a Sask Power bond issue, but I do know 

that people in my riding and the cross-section of people that 

they represent — and I can honestly say that all walks of life in 

the riding of Thunder Creek, and I’m sure other ridings are no 

different, bought Sask Power bond issues because of the idea 

that their money was going to do service in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The rate of return was in line for them with 

other types of lending institutions, and they felt good about 

being able to provide funds for their own particular province. 

 

And as we know, every Sask Power bond issue since then has 

been sold out. They have become something which the public in 

Saskatchewan expect to have at their disposal as an investment 

tool. And they have benefited our province because we are not 

now borrowing money in New York or Toronto or the other 

places that we traditionally, prior to some innovative thinking, 

used to have to go borrow our money. 

 

Another example, Mr. Speaker, is . . . and I think it is a success, 

is the Saskoil bond issue . . . or Saskoil shares. And though the 

members of the opposition may decry that Saskoil is now 

beyond the reach of the residents of Saskatchewan, I take issue 

with them because that particular company wasn’t doing the 

service to the people of Saskatchewan that it potentially could. 

 

And the fact that Canadians — and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take 

great pride in being a Canadian, a western Canadian, and the 

fact that Saskoil is now a Canadian oil company doing business 

throughout the oil basin, the energy basin in western Canada, 

and I believe successfully, and down the road with continued 

initiatives will be more successful. 

 

(1645) 

 

I believe that that was in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan because as that company grows, as that company 

develops, as that company proves up its reserves and moves 

into other parts of the energy spectrum, it’s going to provide 

jobs here in Saskatchewan, in western Canada, for the good of 

our province and for the good of Canadians. 

 

And I can only see Saskoil as being a major benefactor now 

when we talk about trade, with all the realm of possibilities for 

the energy sector. And that particular company is now in a 

position to go in and be a benefactor in that trade issue, to use 

those hundreds of millions of dollars which will pour into the 

energy sector for north-west Saskatchewan, for Alberta, and for 

Canadians. And we, as a whole, will benefit as taxpayers in this 

country of Canada and in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government is aware that you must allow the private sector 

to participate in order to keep them growing. And though it may 

be a small part of the bigger picture, I like to think that the 

recent legislation to allow private auditors to do the books of 

Crown corporations is a good move, because every year we 

graduate many people from the College of Commerce, from 

business administration here in Regina. They’re competent 

people. They serve in firms that have some of the best 

economic minds in western Canada. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3405 

 

And even though it will mean a smaller staff for the provincial 

auditor, the private sector are now going to have a way of 

bringing their expertise, bringing their new young people into 

the management of Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. And I 

mean, there are Saskatchewan people who we graduate from 

our universities. They aren’t some foreign devil from off-shore. 

These are people who have gone to school and developed their 

expertise to provide the best service possible to their clients. 

And these people are not going to be providing that particular 

service to Saskatchewan Crown corporations, and I can only see 

it as an enhancement of that particular task rather than a 

liability. We are only adding, strengthening, not taking away. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many other areas, and some of 

my colleagues have touched on them, that privatization could 

lead to cost savings for the taxpayers of this province — greater 

efficiencies. And I’d like to think the fact that we are open to 

ideas. We do not have a closed mind. The mind-set is not struck 

on one particular direction. We do not adhere totally to the past 

in the direction that we are going, but that we are allowing 

people out there with initiative to think, to try and achieve, can 

only be good for the people in this province. I’m not saying that 

we are moving totally away from government involvement, but 

where we have, it has proven beneficial in many areas. 

 

Now the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake just took great 

issue with one of my colleagues as far as the road building 

industry. And I can’t believe for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that the private contractors who are presently at work in this 

province are any less qualified, do sloppier work than was 

provided with the Department of Highways previously. the only 

thing that I’ve been able to notice is that usually the . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

a pleasure to enter into this very important debate, a debate that 

is just beginning in the Legislative Assembly today and that I 

predict will be a key part of the deliberations of the members of 

both sides of this House in the months and the years to come. 

 

I find it a bit amusing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the member 

from Thunder Creek talks about cost efficiency. And I don’t 

think there’s anyone in this House who’s opposed to cost 

efficiency, but I would point out to the member from Thunder 

Creek and all of the members opposite, that there was the most 

cost-efficient government that Saskatchewan had ever know, 

from 1971 to 1982, when there were 11 consecutive balanced 

budgets delivered by the administration of the New Democratic 

government prior to 1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Now the member from Thunder Creek quite 

correctly says that we have to have in Saskatchewan private 

sector participation. Correctly he says that, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

truth that in the province of Saskatchewan,  

in which we have a large geographical area populated by a 

small number of people, that for the economy to function and to 

generate jobs and employment and economic activity, the 

reality is, and any government that has ever been responsible to 

the people of Saskatchewan knows that what is required in this 

province is the public and the private sector working hand in 

hand. 

 

And what the whole thrust of privatization is all about, Mr. 

Speaker, what it’s all about, is taking the responsibility to 

provide economic and employment leadership for the province 

of Saskatchewan, and thrusting it to the private sector and 

saying, we wash our hands of our responsibility, it’s your job. 

And the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, know that it 

won’t work. 

 

And let’s call privatization, let’s call privatization what it really 

is, the real term that we should be using in this House, Mr. 

Speaker. And the member from wherever he is — Cut 

Knife-Lloyd — he says, what is it? The word, Mr. Speaker, is 

this — the word is piratization. Piratization is what this debate 

is all about. 

 

And what is piratization? You know that’s privatization 

tailor-made for PC patronage. And what do we hear them 

talking about, Mr. Speaker? What do we hear the piratizers 

talking about? They use phrases like selling off Saskatchewan, 

and under-valued shares, and deregulation, and user-pay, and 

contract out. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is a formula for 

PC patronage and that is clearly piratization in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And let me predict, Mr. Speaker, that when this 

session comes to an end and behind closed cabinet doors the 

Premier of this province says it’s time for a cabinet shuffle and 

it’s time to reveal our real plan to the people of Saskatchewan 

and names a new minister of privatization — whether that’s the 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley or whoever it is — when 

he names the new minister of privatization that minister will 

become known around the province of Saskatchewan as the 

minister or piratization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And we’ve seen the evidence of PC piratization 

already, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen the evidence already. We’ve 

seen the evidence of the consultation with the Fraser Institute, 

with the on-the-board one P.H. Pocklington — and I wonder 

who that might be — that gives the consultation and advice to 

the Government of Saskatchewan. And is there any government 

in Canada that has used the advice of the Fraser Institute more 

than this Tory government of Saskatchewan? And the answer is 

no. The answer is no. 

 

And we’ve seen the privatization take place already. We’ve 

seen it in our highway system, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen it in 

Highways. We heard the former member from Wilkie, Jim 

Garner, the member of Highways, who loved to fly. We heard 

him talk about taking hundreds of Saskatchewan highway 

workers and transferring them to the private sector. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3406 

 

And that was followed up then, Mr. Speaker, by one of the 

biggest scams in the history of the province in which $40 

million worth of highway equipment was auctioned off at fire 

sale prices for $6 million — piratization, PC style. 

 

And that was followed, Mr. Speaker, that was followed more by 

contracting out — and contracting out to Saskatchewan firms? 

No, no, Alberta firms do a better job to take taxpayers’ money 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and to do road work, and to 

employ Alberta employees, all of whom take Saskatchewan tax 

dollars and do what little road work is being done, and they go 

home and pay their income tax in other provinces. And that’s 

piratization, PC style. 

 

And what has maintenance of highways become as a result of 

this piratization of highways, PC style? What has it become? 

What we have in the province of Saskatchewan, we now call 

highway maintenance, Mr. Speaker. What you get into a truck 

with a bunch of sticks with red or orange flags on them and you 

run around the province and you stick them on the road, on the 

side of the road beside the pot-holes and the soft spots. And 

then, and then to top it all off, you go across the province of 

Saskatchewan and every few miles you put up a sign that says, 

slow down and save your windshield. And that’s highway 

maintenance — PC piratization style. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — We’ve seen the piratization of our prescription 

drug plan here in the province of Saskatchewan. We saw in this 

Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, people who are concerned, who 

have worked hard, and who have produced, to be presented in 

this Assembly, nearly 100,000 signatures of people who are 

concerned about the piratization of health care in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And here comes walking into the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is the 

— what I will predict, the next minister of piratization in the 

province. And listen carefully, Mr. Minister, because you’ve 

got your work cut out for you. 

 

What’s happened with the piratization of the prescription drug 

plan, Mr. Speaker? We took, oh, that scary notion of socialized 

medicine where people of Saskatchewan went through this 

strange ritual. They got sick, they went to their doctor, they got 

a prescription, they took $3.95 or less to their pharmacy, they 

got their medicine, and they got better. What a strange 

socialized notion of the ritual of socialized medicare. But this 

band opposite, Mr. Speaker, said there is no socialized medicine 

that cannot be improved by piratizing it, by privatizing the 

prescription drug plan. 

 

And now we got a new system, a new piratized system of 

prescription drug plan in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. 

Where you get sick, you go to your doctor, you get a 

prescription and then you get to make the big decision — then 

you get to make the big decision as to whether I can afford to 

take my medicine to get better or not. 

 

It’s user-pay, it’s user-pay, Mr. Speaker. And what a betrayal of 

the traditions of the Saskatchewan people who  

believe firmly and strongly, and 100,000 people have said to 

this Legislative Assembly that they believe in the security of a 

medicare plan and that they don’t want to see it piratized and 

privatized by the government opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Is it better, is it better, and I ask for whom — 

that the sick shall now have to pay more? User-pay, user-pay 

for the prescription drug plan, and that’s privatization and that’s 

privatization in anybody’s language. 

 

And why is this going on, Mr. Speaker? Why is this going on in 

the province of Saskatchewan today? And I don’t think that we 

have to consult with the university doctorates. We don’t have to 

consult with the high-priced consultants that this government 

loves to employ. Mr. Speaker, if we want to know why this is 

happening we need only go out to talk to the constituents in 

every constituency around the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And what are they saying? Are they saying we love 

privatization, give us more? No, they’re not saying that. What 

they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is that they see the signs of a 

desperate government. They see the wild ideological 

commitments of a desperate government. They’re saying in the 

province of Saskatchewan that we have a Premier who knows 

he’s serving his last term and before he goes he’s going to take 

the province with him. That’s what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, 

around the province of Saskatchewan, the wise people in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a hundred thousand of them have signed petitions to bring 

to this Assembly their concerns about the piratization of 

medicare. The wise people in this province, Mr. Speaker, are 

the real people of Saskatchewan. They’re the citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are saying, we don’t want a blind 

ideological ramming of the future of Saskatchewan by 

committing this province to the piratization and the 

privatization of our present and our future. That’s what they’re 

saying, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the people that we have an 

obligation to listen to in this Assembly. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, I say that the blind ideological 

commitment of the government opposite cannot be allowed to 

continue. We must, all Saskatchewan citizens, stand fir, 

shoulder to shoulder, arm in arm, defending the people of 

Saskatchewan against the piratization of the initiatives of the 

government opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And so in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, in 

conclusion, I will say that I am proud to support the amendment 

before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Time has elapsed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I am very pleased to have the 

opportunity to get into this debate. I am also very happy, Mr. 

Speaker, to have now, I think, four or five positions of that 

caucus in that party on the question of public participation and 

privatization. 

  



 

October 20, 1987 

3407 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I move the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


