













































September 17, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 17, 1987 

 

 

2643 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 36 - An Act respecting the Potash Resources of 

Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the Minister of Energy and 

Mines to introduce her officials as soon as they are ready and 

seated. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Tonight I 

have with me Mr. Bob Reid, the former deputy minister of 

Energy and Mines; and behind Bob, I have Mr. Ray Patrick 

from the department of Justice; and immediately behind me, I 

have Mr. Gary Cooper, who is our senior analyst on potash; and 

to my immediate left, I have Mr. John Reid, the associate 

deputy minister of Energy and Mines. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

during second reading of the Bill, members on this side had 

asked a number of questions on the Bill, and I am hoping that in 

committee of the whole, in order to accomplish the objectives 

that we want to accomplish here tonight, that we can get some 

of those answers this evening. 

 

Madam Minister, before we begin on any detail on the Bill, I 

want to reiterate again concern that I have had ever since you 

introduced this Bill with, as I use your words, with some 

urgency. Tomorrow it will be three weeks that you asked 

permission to introduce this Bill, and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s not true. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, it’s true. Tomorrow is three weeks that you 

first asked to introduce this Bill, and I think the Minister of 

Finance makes my . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Let’s begin the 

discussion in committee here on a leisurely, calm level, please. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, it is true the Minister of Finance 

does make my point. There were two speakers from this side on 

the Bill, and the main reason, Mr. Speaker, was that the minister 

indicated to us that there was some real urgency to get this Bill 

through. And we wanted to co-operate with the government so 

that they couldn’t accuse us of not permitting them or letting 

them solve the problem that for many months they should have 

been addressing — which they didn’t do. 

 

I want to go back a little bit, just a few years back into history, 

to remind the minister that this problem didn’t come about in 

the dark of the night. In 1983, Madam Minister, the New 

Mexico mines put a complaint, or lodged a complaint with the 

Department of Commerce at that time, which was turned down. 

The complaint was very similar to the one that they lodged this 

year, and that was, they accused the Canadian government and 

Saskatchewan government of dumping the potash on the  

United States markets. 

 

That wasn’t the last time. In 1984, the New Mexico mines 

again, Madam Minister, lodged another complaint with the 

Department of Commerce, which was turned down. I remind 

the minister that’s four years ago, when you should have been 

aware that there was a problem foreseen by the New Mexico 

industries and foreseen in the United States, and you certainly 

should have been alerted, and your government certainly should 

have been alerted, to this problem. Now I’m not going to blame 

the minister for this, particularly, because she wasn’t the 

minister at the time. But you are the minister now and you have 

to bear the responsibility for your government’s inaction and 

incompetence. 

 

And Madam Minister, in 1987, over seven months ago, the New 

Mexico potash industries again lodged a complaint with the 

Department of Commerce. This time they were successful, and 

the Department of Commerce made their preliminary findings 

in their favour. 

 

And I want to underline the word “preliminary findings,” 

Madam Minister because preliminary findings were also issued 

some years ago against the Russian government, where the 

Department of Commerce at that time lodged a . . . not lodged a 

complaint, but had a preliminary finding of anti-dumping 

against the Russians of, I believe, about 97 per cent. It may 

have been more than that. It may have been more than that. 

 

And I want to tell the minister that those tariffs and those 

anti-dumping tariffs were mitigated at that time to, I think, less 

than 2 per cent because the Russian government simply said to 

the Americans, well you can do whatever you want but we’re 

just not going to co-operate, and there are other ways that we 

can use in order to deal with the situation. And the Department 

of Commerce . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, that’s exactly 

. . . The Deputy Premier said, exactly what they did. Except this 

government waited for a whole seven months after it came 

down and did nothing — sat on their hands and did nothing. 

 

If I am wrong, Madam Minister, I want to ask you tonight to 

table for us, to table for us any correspondence that you have 

had with either the New Mexico potash industries or with the 

Department of Commerce in the United States, or any senators 

in the United States that are concerned about this, or any farm 

organizations in the United States that you have dealt with — 

not, I don’t mean, in the last week or two; I mean seven months 

ago, a year ago. I would like to have that information. And you 

can prove me wrong . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, we 

did, we weren’t sitting on our hands; we took action but to no 

avail. I’d like to have that. 

 

I want to say to the minister that I don’t believe she did 

anything because the three farm organizations that we contacted 

on the day that you introduced . . . no, the day that you made 

second reading of this Bill, knew nothing about the situation. In 

fact, they weren’t even aware of the preliminary findings of the 

Department of Commerce. 

 

I want to point out to the minister that a Mr. Rawlins, I  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2644 

 

 

believe it is, of the farm bureau of the United States, said the 

other day that they weren’t aware of what was going on. And 

I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, that you were neglect in 

your duties in protecting the potash industries of Saskatchewan, 

and the workers by not going down to the United States, 

lobbying the farmers there, lobbying the senators there, and at 

least discussing this with the New Mexico potash industries. I 

say you were neglect in your duties and consequently must be 

held responsible for that neglect. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to say to you that if you think that 

anybody is going to buy the argument that you couldn’t act 

because you didn’t have a Bill, that is nonsense. I refer you to 

the regulations passed by premier Ross Thatcher in 1969. I have 

those regulations before me here and I remind you that the 

premier passed those regulations, orders in council, without the 

legislature being in session and did exactly what you did. He 

put in prorationing, and he set a floor price, which I know you 

didn’t do; but that’s exactly what he did. And they came to 

some resolution on the problem. They didn’t need the 

legislation. 

 

Furthermore, Madam Minister, I refer you, unless you were not 

aware of it, I refer you to The Mineral Resources Act of 1984 or 

’85 — I forget which year it is. And under that piece of 

legislation, Madam Minister, you had all the authority you 

needed, all the authority you needed. 

 

Madam Minister, you shake your head. You tell me one thing 

that you have done to today, up till today, that gave you 

additional powers. And I’ll tell you why. You didn’t even have 

second reading of this Bill when you increased the price. Why 

couldn’t you have done that before? Why couldn’t you have 

done that before? It doesn’t make sense. You sat on your hands; 

you did nothing. You didn’t need this legislation. The Leader of 

the Opposition told you some time go and told your government 

some time ago, if the problem is as seen in the United States 

that you’re dumping the potash, then increase your prices. He 

told you that some time ago. But no, you wouldn’t listen. You 

sat, did nothing. 

 

And I’ll tell you, Madam Minister, you brought this piece of 

legislation before us because you wanted a show-case. You 

tried to embarrass the NDP, and that was very clear in the 

message that we got from the Premier in this House, and 

outside this House, where he tried to say, the seeds — as he said 

to the press — the seeds of this dispute were sown in the middle 

1970s when the people of this province took ownership of their 

resources. That’s what he was saying. And, Madam Minister, 

what a ludicrous argument. 

 

I hear the Minister of Health saying, hear, hear. And I say what 

a ludicrous argument. Who took over resources in the softwood 

lumber when the United States took action? Who’s to blame for 

the uranium when the United States took action? Who’s to 

blame for the hog industry when the United States took action? 

And I want to tell you, Madam Minister, I have before me here 

CanWest Foundation, CanWest Foundation lists a number of 

U.S. trade actions against Canada from 1980 to 1987, and there 

are a whole slough of them. 

 

And, Madam Minister, the argument made by the Premier  

is simply unfounded. It is a ludicrous, spurious, political 

argument, and that is why you brought the Bill to the House. 

There is no other reason. There is no other reason. There is no 

other reason. And I want to tell you, Madam Minister, for that 

you must be held responsible. And I’ll tell you, Madam 

Minister, I want to tell you again that if one single job is lost in 

the potash industry due to your lack of action, your government 

will be held responsible. Your government will be held 

responsible. 

 

And I want to tell you that this Bill has absolutely nothing, 

nothing to do with the reduction of the tariffs if those should 

take place, because those arguments could have been made in 

the United States. And as I indicated to you, when the Russians 

made their argument, Department of Commerce backed down 

and reduced those tariffs. That is what you should have been 

doing. Why you didn’t raise those prices a long time ago is 

beyond me. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to refer to one other nonsensical 

argument that the Premier made. Madam Minister, I want to 

make one other argument or one other statement about the 

Premier’s argument. The Premier says, the Premier says and he 

condemns, the Premier says and condemns the existence of PCS 

(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan). He doesn’t want it. He 

wants to do away with it. And he criticizes the people of 

Saskatchewan for having the audacity, the audacity to own their 

own resources. And yet, Madam Minister, at the same time he 

says that, he uses PCS as a vehicle, he uses PCS as a vehicle to 

solve his problem, to solve his problem. 

 

Let me explain, Madam Minister. If he did not have PCS and 

did not have 40 per cent of the production capacity in the world, 

could he have the kind of influence on price setting that he now 

has? And the answer is no - no. He condemns PCSA and at the 

same time, uses PCS to solve his problem - to solve his 

problem. I would think the guy is suffering somewhat from 

schizophrenia. And I say to him that he’s doing a disservice. 

He’s doing a disservice to the people of this province. And, 

Madam Minister, he’s arguing; he’s arguing in favour of what 

the Americans have done to the detriment of the people of 

Saskatchewan and the workers and the industry, the potash 

industry here. And that, Madam Minister, is simply 

unacceptable. 

 

(1915) 

 

Madam Minister, you said when you introduced this legislation 

that it was to address the world oversupply. That is what you 

indicated. You at the time, if you did, very secondarily 

mentioned the anti-dumping duties instituted by the Department 

of Commerce. You made your argument in second reading that 

it was world oversupply that you were concerned about. 

 

And I’m saying to you again, Madam Minister, what is in this 

Bill that was not in The Mineral Resources Act that would not 

have allowed you to control production as Ross Thatcher did in 

1969? And he at that time — and I’ll show you the regulations 

if you haven’t got them, but I’m sure you have them also. He 

didn’t need a Bill. He used The Mineral Resources Act of 1969. 

You updated it in 1984, I believe, and you had all the power, 

legislative power, that you needed to do exactly that. Again 

simply not the argument, the wrong argument used. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2645 

 

 

And I want to say tot he minister that if that was her problem, 

then why again did you not act in 1986? By your own statistics, 

the inventories were the highest in 1986, the prices were the 

lowest. Inventories now are coming down, prices now are going 

up. Before you increased them by $35, they were coming up 

already, and you made no action; you took no action. You sat 

on your hands; you did nothing — absolutely nothing. But I say 

to the minister that those arguments that you are making simply 

don’t hold water. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to, I want to now ask you if you . . . 

Let me, before I ask you . . . Madam Minister there are some 

other areas of the Bill that I have some concerns and will be 

addressing those later on. 

 

I want to say that in section 6, I am concerned, as I indicated in 

my second reading speech, I am concerned about the 

composition of the potash resources board. I will address that 

problem as we get to section 6, but I want to tell the minister 

that my concern basically is about the membership and who you 

can appoint, and who you cannot appoint. I’m concerned it will 

purely become a political board, and will not have the interest 

of the workers and the industry at heart. 

 

Section 18, Madam Minister, I’m also concerned about 

compensation. Your officials are quoted in the Globe and Mail 

some time ago as saying that there may be, due to the 

legislation, some loss of jobs. 

 

And I want to ask you: what guarantees have you for your 

workers in the - the potash industry workers to compensate 

them for a loss of their livelihood, and possibly the loss or the 

adverse effect on families and communities because of inaction 

of your government a year or two ago when you should have 

taken action and you didn’t? What compensation are you will to 

make for the workers who will be so adversely affected? 

 

Lastly, Madam Minister, although I have some other concerns, 

these are the ones that I will address tonight — in section 23. 

And that concerns me that anybody that is adversely affected or 

is aggrieved by the decisions made by the board has no recourse 

to the courts. I think that is simply unacceptable. As I indicated 

to you, that the board could certainly be a very political board. 

We have no guarantees that it will not be. 

 

I have some concerns, Madam Minister in the Bill also about 

discriminatory action that the board can take vis-à-vis industry 

by . . . pardon me, company by company, or mine by mine. I 

have some real concerns about that. 

 

I also have some concerns, Madam Minister, as to how is the 

board going to carry out its functions, its duties as it relates to 

the production that is going on right now. We know that PCS 

. . . I’m not sure and I will ask the minister  

to comment on that. What rate is the PCS producing at right 

now and what are the rates that various companies are 

producing at at the present time and how is the board going to 

regulate the production? 

 

Does it mean that PCS, because it is working at, I believe, 54 or 

57 per cent capacity right now, will have to stay at that rate, 

whereas IMC (International Minerals and Chemical 

Corporation) is virtually producing at 90 or over 90 per cent, I 

believe — and will they be allowed to continue to produce at 

that rate and consequently PCS will have to bear the brunt of 

the action under this Bill? 

 

Madam Minister, with those words I would ask you to respond. 

I know there are other members on this side who want to also 

get into the debate some time this evening, but if you could, I 

would appreciate a response from you at this time. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, if I can go back to the 

beginning of the hon. member’s comments, his first question, or 

perhaps it was more of a criticism that he raised, was one of 

myself determining the Bill to be urgent, and I would only say 

to the hon. member that that in fact was not used. 

 

What was said from this side of the House, and it has been that 

side that has used the word “urgency”, was that, in fact, the 

legislation is indeed important — that I agree to — but that it 

would be dealt with in the normal course of the process within 

this Assembly. And he shakes his head, and I can only ask him 

to go back and review Hansard. During question period and any 

other time that I was on my feet, that will be in Hansard. And I 

know that it was said at least once in this House that it would be 

in the normal course of events as it pertained to the process of 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Chairman, he is quite right that it didn’t start in the dark of 

the night, and that it’s been there for some time. The 

observation, or perhaps the rumour that the member has stated, 

about 1983-84 and a complaint being lodged and was turned 

down, I can only say that the hon. member is wrong on that. 

The law in the United States is that there is a petitioner, or a 

petition to the Department of Commerce and once that is put in, 

it is only the petitioners that can withdraw it. The Department 

of Commerce does not turn it down. They must see it through 

its course of events. 

 

We are not aware . . . I know that there is rumblings often on 

many commodities as it pertains to the United States and trade - 

uranium being one of them. I know that there is rumours on oil 

presently, and those are often ongoing. So it could well be that 

the rumblings were there that pertain to potash, but what the 

member said is wrong in that the department turned it down; 

they can’t turn it down once it’s put in in the petition. I’m well 

aware of the issue of the Russian one, Mr. Chairman. I believe 

that the incident that the member is talking about was where the 

preliminary figures were about 187 per cent levied against 

Russia and he’s quite right that the final determination was 2 

per cent. 

 

However, I think the member should realize that the 

Department of Commerce in bringing down that  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2646 

 

 

preliminary had absolutely information. There was no 

information submitted by the country of Russia and the 

Department of Commerce, in determining their preliminary 

figures, had nothing. I suspect that Russia, perhaps, in 

consultation after the preliminaries — as our industry has done 

— submitted some information and that, in turn, was brought 

down. The difference, I can submit to the member, is that most 

of our industry did in fact submit much of their information 

before the preliminary figure was set, which is totally different 

from what Russia did. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the issue once again was raised about lobbying 

with the farm group. It’s been raised by the hon. member from 

Saskatoon South several times. I know that the hon. member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale has been quoted in the paper as 

saying: forget the Bill; just lobby the farmers. And I have some 

difficulty as a government in another country and, in particular, 

another province, in looking at that. 

 

The member has asked me: why didn’t we deal with New 

Mexico? He wants correspondence in dealing with New Mexico 

and the good senator. And I answered that, Mr. Chairman. And 

I invite him to go back and read Hansard, once again, when I 

wrapped up the debate on second reading. And I’m sure that the 

member will recall I said there was a distinct difference 

between the situation today and the situation in 19690 when, in 

fact, the government of the day back then did make a deal with 

New Mexico. And the difference was that then the government 

was not owner, or part owner of any potash mine. Today they 

are. And under the anti-trust laws of the United States, we 

would run at a great risk violating those laws within the United 

States because we are, in fact, owner of potash mines. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in terms of who we’ve consulted with in the 

industry, we took the approach in trying to first of all resolve 

the anti-dumping issue long before this legislation . . . that there 

was three levels of it. The Saskatchewan Department of Energy 

and Mines officials held meetings with the U.S. government 

officials as soon as the petition was brought down, and that was 

in the week of February 19, 1987. That carried on through till 

August 5, 1987, and shortly before the preliminary duties were 

made public. 

 

There was also another course of consultation, Mr. Chairman, 

and that was with the Saskatchewan trade officials and the legal 

advisers, and they were dealing also with their United States 

counterparts. 

 

And then of course, Mr. Chairman, there was the federal 

government, through the embassy and on to the United States 

government. And I believe that’s a proper process for 

governments. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, there are other opportunities long before 

that for our government to express its concerns with the rising 

issue of protectionism in the United States, most particularly on 

the agriculture situation, and that’s basically what impacts on 

our potash industry here. 

 

And I would refer the hon. members across the floor to take a 

look, in particular, the hon. member from Estevan,  

our Premier, and the message and the number of times that he 

has spoken in the United States, and the issue was raised. Well, 

the member raises his eyes upwards. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did it do any good? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — He says it doesn’t do any good. I would 

suggest that, if fact, it does — and one reason why today you 

are seeing the American farmer lobby his or her own 

politicians. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Chairman, beginning June 17, 1986, the Premier was at the 

mid-western governors’ conference in Columbus, Ohio. The 

issue of agriculture, trade as it related to potash, uranium and 

some other major commodities that we deal in, was discussed. 

 

On August 23-24 of 1986, it was the National Governors’ 

Association committee on international trade and foreign 

relations in Georgia, and again, Mr. Chairman, the concerns of 

this province were expressed. On February 21 of 1987, it was 

the young farmers’ association which was in Lincoln, Nebraska. 

On July 2, ’87, the Montana border advisory commission, 

which was in Regina, and it was again discussed. In July of this 

year again, Mr. Chairman, we had the national governors’ 

conference in Michigan, and again we expressed our concern 

about the growing barriers, and the issue of the anti-dumping 

suit on potash. On August 4 and 5, Mr. Chairman, was the 

American agriculture economics association — one of 

agriculture, one of farm management — and it was very 

important, Mr. Chairman, and again the issue was raised. 

 

Along with that, Mr. Chairman, we have met with the central 

farmers’ industry; perhaps the hon. member from Saskatoon 

South has not heard of them. I would remind him they are 

important in that they distribute 25 per cent of the total needs of 

the potash. They have, I believe, it’s well over 1 million 

members. It’s a co-operative within their organization, and they 

have contacted them directly — one on one, Mr. Chairman — 

also the Corn Growers’ Association, which has a very large 

number of membership. 

 

The Central farmers’ Industry Incorporated, Mr. Chairman, is 

an interesting one in that it touches on 46 states, and they have 

ample opportunity to discuss it with the people that this impacts 

on and that’s the consumer of potash within the United States. 

 

I was also, Mr. Chairman, invited to address the issue of trade 

barriers, particularly as it pertained to potash and uranium, to 

the western governors’ conference in June. And Mr. Bob Reid 

took that speaking engagement on my behalf. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the consultations have been extensive and 

they’ve been ongoing, and we have tried to reach those areas 

that we thought was appropriate. And we also feel that in 

touching base with some of those organizations that they have 

memberships, and that includes the American citizen, and that 

that is much more appropriate than the Saskatchewan 

government going down and doing a one-on-one lobby with the 

American farmer. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2647 

 

 

The member from Saskatoon South, Mr. Chairman, has said, 

why not The Mineral Resources Act, again, and that’s another 

issue that I dealt with in the closing debate on second reading. 

And the answer hasn’t changed much, Mr. Chairman, since 

about a week ago when I told him why it was Bill 36 and why 

not The Mineral Resources Act. I think the member knows full 

well that The Mineral Resources Act, when it was done by 

regulation in 1969 under then Premier Thatcher, was found to 

be ultra vires by at least one court. I think he’s well aware of 

that. 

 

I think also, Mr. Chairman, that . . . And the member raises the 

constitution, and we’ll get to that, Mr. Chairman, when we 

looked at the situation of the potash industry and some time ago 

we said, there are several options. One is to do nothing; one is 

to do nothing, Mr. Chairman. Let the industry handle itself, and 

I believe, everything being equal, that that’s in fact what should 

happen. The government should stay out of it as much as they 

can, and that’s if the market-place has a relatively even 

playing—field - but, Mr. Chairman, that didn’t happen in this 

case. And that’s mainly because of the anti-dumping levies 

within the United States. 

 

So we said if the industry — with the preliminary duties that 

came down ranging as high as 85 per cent — are going to have 

some difficulty in coping with this, themselves, what are our 

options? Well we looked at The Mineral Resources Act, as the 

member from Saskatoon South has suggested. Mr. Chairman, 

The Mineral Resources Act, while it allows for development, 

conservation management, in general terms of the mineral 

resources, does not deal specifically with any one resource. In 

order to address specifically the potash situation, we would 

have had to amend substantially The Mineral Resources Act. In 

fact, it would have been so substantial that we believe we would 

have not been as clear and direct as we are with Bill 36. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we also believed that when it comes to putting 

controls on an industry — production controls, specifically — 

that the issue is of the magnitude that it should be dealt with in 

this House; that it’s not an everyday occurrence, and nor should 

it be, now or in the future. 

 

Industries can usually operate on their own. In this case, 

because of some government rules, you might say government 

intervention south of the border, we were left not a lot of 

options with it. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, that’s why Bill 36. The Mineral Resources 

Act does not deal specifically with potash, and the issue, when 

it comes to the control of production limits, we feel was 

important enough to be dealt with in this House on its own 

merits. 

 

The member has said or suggested that without PCS we would 

not be in a position to give direction nor leadership in the world. 

And I suppose, according to the member from Saskatoon South, 

that that may very well be true, if I’m thinking at it in his way. 

But I believe without PCS, Mr. Chairman, there still would 

have been potash there; it may not be called PCS as the member 

has suggested, but  

the industry would still be of the size that it would — by far, by 

far — be the larger exporter of potash. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Would you have set the price? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The member says, would we set the price. 

Would we? 

 

First of all, Mr. Chairman, government doesn’t set the price, 

that’s non-government. I would ask the Leader of the 

Opposition, who’s chirping from his seat, perhaps he would like 

to stand up and tell us if he had a say every time PCS upped its 

price. I don’t believe that he did; and if he did, I would say he 

shouldn’t have; that if, in fact, there’s a board of directors put 

into place to operate that company, Mr. Chairman, they would 

make those decisions. Why would you appoint them? Why 

would you appoint them? 

 

I believe the industry, and certainly the number of resources, 

Mr. Chairman, particularly potash that we have in this province, 

would indicate that with PCS or without it, the industry is large 

enough and it has a large enough share in the world, that yes, in 

fact, there would have been some direction and some leadership 

shown within it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to turn to a couple of the specific sections 

that the hon. member from Saskatoon South ash raised, one in 

particular being section 6 as it relates to the appointment of the 

board. I can say to the member that it is our intent to look at a 

small board, three to five members. I’m not sure what the 

member means when he says a political board. I think what 

we’re looking at in this case is some expertise and some 

common sense as it relates to the mining industry and to the job 

that has to be done. 

 

To refresh the member’s memory, there is a clause within the 

legislation, a conflict of interest clause, Mr. Speaker, that does 

not allow anyone that has a direct benefit, or indirectly out of 

the potash industry, to sit on the board. And I believe that that’s 

a fair clause and that, in fact, is in the best interests of everyone. 

 

The other section that he raised was section 18, the guarantee of 

jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, again that has been dealt with a couple 

of times in this House, and I am always the first to say I would 

love to be able to guarantee as many jobs as possible. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, how do you guarantee jobs? I have stated 

and I will state again, Mr. Chairman, the intent of this Bill was 

try to preserve jobs, not lose jobs. However, that does not mean 

that in the normal course of events such as the . . . I believe it’s 

an annual maintenance shut-down period. That will still carry 

on. But, Mr. Chairman, we do not foresee massive lay-offs 

because of this Bill. In fact, it is the opposite. This Bill will 

preserve some of those jobs that would have been lost without it 

in light of the anti-dumping that came down. 

 

Section 23, I believe the member . . . and correct me if I’m 

wrong on the issue of appeal. There is no appeal to a court. 

There is an appeal to cabinet, but we felt . . . Well if the 

member would listen to the rationale, perhaps he will  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2648 

 

 

find a little bit of room for an agreement on it. To put it into the 

court system, Mr. Chairman, you would be waiting for a very 

long time to know whether . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 

he says maybe that’s too bad. In the meantime, what do you do? 

Do you then make a decision that the mines should be on close 

until the court deals with it? I don’t think so, Mr. Chairman. 

And if there’s other options, I would be pleased to hear what 

they are from the member from Quill Lakes. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I believe that covers most of the areas that the 

member from Saskatoon South has raised. If I have missed any, 

I would be glad for him to remind me. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, let me first of all make the 

comment, and I certainly don’t make it facetiously - if that’s the 

kind of success that the Premier is as a lobbyist, I wouldn’t 

bother sending him across the border again. Because of all the 

things that you have listed, all the things that you’ve gone to 

and you’ve lobbied against, the restrictions on free trade, and 

you come up empty, that’s not being very good at your 

particular job. And maybe, Madam Minister, you can’t just 

cheer-lead your way through, you have to be on their level of 

discussion on this whole thing. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to ask you if you will table for us, 

since you listed a whole number of occasions where you did 

lobby people, supposedly, in the United States specifically on 

potash, would you list, first of all, the correspondence that you 

had with these people. Secondly, would you list for me the 

agenda of those meetings where it specifically, I would assume, 

is listed potash industry of Saskatchewan and as it relates to fee 

trade or restrictions. 

 

You know, if that was on the agenda, then surely there must 

have been correspondence to that effect. So would you table 

those in the House for us? If you can table all that 

correspondence, then I will apologize to you for being so rough 

on your lack of lobbying in the United States. 

 

Madam Minister, I find it rather difficult that the American 

farm bureau — I believe it’s called the American farm bureau 

— Mr. Rawlins was unaware, was unaware of any lobbying 

done by this government with the American farmers. It would 

seem logical to me that if you could convince the American 

farmers that they would have to pay an extra 40 or 50 per cent 

on their fertilizer, that you would have a very strong lobbying 

group in the United States. 

 

But I’ll tell you, Madam Minister, they weren’t even aware of 

it, and consequently they haven’t started their lobbying until the 

beginning of last week when you increased the price. That is 

when they started their lobbying in the United States. Now they 

are going to their senators, they’re going to their politicians, and 

they’re going to the Mexican potash industries, and are 

complaining of the preliminary dumping duties that have been 

put on. 

 

(1945) 

 

And I want to say to you, Madam Minister, that I don’t  

believe you. I don’t believe that you’ve done all that lobbying 

or did all that lobbying. I think you simply sat there, you 

ignored it, and didn’t do anything. And so I’m asking the 

minister, would she please table the correspondence for us in 

this House? 

 

Madam Minister, I find it rather curious that you said that this 

issue is important enough to be dealt with on its own in the 

legislature. And I don’t disagree with that. Why then, Madam 

Minister, didn’t you go to the Premier and say: Mr. Premier, we 

can’t delay the House sitting till June 17 because I have a very 

important issue that I want the legislature to debate, and it 

involves the protection and welfare of 3,800 workers in the 

potash industry. It relates to the families of those workers, and a 

number of communities. It is imperative, Mr. Premier, that we 

call the legislature and we deal with this, and I will have a Bill 

ready for you. 

 

Madam Minister, I don’t believe you. Where was your Bill on 

June 17? Where was your Bill on June 17? If that issue was so 

important to you that it should be dealt with by the legislature, 

why didn’t you introduce it? Why didn’t you introduce it at that 

time so we could deal with it immediately after the budget? 

 

Because I’ll tell you, Madam Minister, you hadn’t even thought 

about it until the anti-dumping tariffs were put in by the DOC 

(Department of Commerce); that’s when you started to panic. 

That’s when you were caught flat-footed and embarrassed and 

came up with this grandiose scheme - we can now embarrass 

the NDP by bringing a Bill into the House which we really 

don’t need. And the Premier proved this very clearly in second 

reading that that is what he had intended to do, was to . . . he 

ranted and raved in this House that the seeds of this whole thing 

were sown in the ’70s, but he ignored the whole thing of the 

hundreds of restrictions that have been put on by the United 

States on trade agreements with Canada, and has nothing to do 

at all with the people taking ownership of their resources. 

 

Madam Minister, you’ve failed in your endeavour to embarrass 

the NDP; now you’re trying to work your way out of an 

embarrassing situation. I say to you, Madam Minister, you 

failed in that attempt. You didn’t do your job as a minister in 

lobbying in the United States, and now you’re going to have to 

suffer the consequences. 

 

Madam Minister, you didn’t address one very important item 

that I talked about and that was the discriminatory aspects of the 

board, the resource board in potash industries and individual 

mines. I would very much appreciate it if you’d address that 

problem now. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I’m somewhat disturbed 

every time the member from Saskatoon South raises this issue 

of trying to embarrass the NDP. 

 

I want to invite you to go back and look at my comments from 

day one, Mr. Chairman. I invite him to do that, and let’s see 

what he can find in it. I would suspect he’s feeling a little 

uncomfortable and that’s unfortunate. I think if he reviews the 

remarks on it, he will find that it was done in the most 

non-partisan way in presenting the legislation on my part that 

he can ever find. 

 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2649 

 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, he wants to talk about what others say on 

the debate. I also invite him to go back and review the history. 

While he thinks I’m a very poor history students, as an old 

history teacher, I ask him to go back and look at some of the 

comments as it relates to government taking over potash mines 

and a few other factors. And the reality is, Mr. Chairman, that 

those are on record, and they will stay on record whatever the 

good senator in New Mexico had to say about socialism and a 

few other facts. Because the member from Saskatoon South 

does not like them is not going to make them go away. They are 

there, and they will remain there for the next hundred years or 

more. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we’re back to the lobby thing again. I want to 

remind the member that this process of anti-dumping is a legal 

one in the United States, and it’s a quasi-judicial hearing. And 

all the lobbying in the world, once a petitioner puts it in, Mr. 

Chairman, doesn’t change it. It is only the petitioner that can 

withdraw that; so the lobby does not change. 

 

Now he says you got to do more than cheer-lead, but that’s 

precisely what you’re asking us to do when you keep talking 

about this lobby. That’s basically what he’s asking us. It’s 

contradictory once again. and That’s where we’ve been from 

day one with the opposition, Mr. Chairman, with all due respect 

to the member from Saskatoon South. It has been one of 

contradiction and confusion from day one with the potash 

situation. 

 

He’s asked me again, why didn’t I present this Bill on June 17 

or a few days after the budget. Well, Mr. Chairman, the 

preliminary figures did not come down until, I believe, August 

20. Well he says, why do we have to wait. Why would we want, 

Mr. Chairman — just think about it — why would we want 

government intervention into the industry if it was not needed? 

And we had stated at that time, Mr. Chairman, that the industry 

was having problems. There was no doubt about that. And 

when we talked to the industry, they said no, we can manage 

this on our own, even good old PCS. But, Mr. Chairman, when 

the preliminary figures came down, they were much higher than 

what anyone had anticipated. In fact, most of the figures were 

double from the worst scene that we could possibly picture in 

coming out of those preliminary figures. 

 

Now, I don’t know . . . You know, this side of the House is not 

ready to take government intervention into the private sector, 

Mr. Chairman, into the market-place unless there is a very good 

reason as to why we should be there. And I quite frankly think 

that in normal circumstances the industry can operate and run 

their industry much better than the member from Saskatoon 

South. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in terms of the Bill, I would ask the member to 

look at page 5 of the Bill which deals with the question that he 

has raised and it’s: 

 

In making a determination . . . the board shall take (into) 

account of the following factors . . .  

 

(a) the productive capacity of the mine; 

(b) the rate of primary production of potash from the mine; 

 

(c) the inventory or stockpile of potash produced from the 

mine, and future inventory and stockpile requirements for 

the mine; 

 

(d) the portion of demand for potash that has been fulfilled 

by the primary production of potash . . . and 

 

(e) any additional factors that may be prescribed. 

 

I think I have stated publicly — and I know that I have stated it 

to our producers in the province — that the two main factors 

that would be taken into consideration is the historical market 

share and also the productive capacity. And we’ve also stated 

very clearly, Mr. Chairman, that the allocation would be done in 

the fairest manner possible, that the exercise was not going to 

be one of penalizing anyone nor of rewarding anyone, that they 

were in this together and they would be treated in an equal 

manner. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have a question to the 

minister as a result of her answer just a few moments ago, 

which I would appreciate if the minister would clear up for the 

House and for me. 

 

The minister took great pains to explain to the critic from 

Saskatoon South that this is a judicial proceeding, and lobbying 

has no impact . . . no effect on the judicial proceeding. That 

being the case, will the minister explain to the House how it is 

that what American senators might say or might not have said 

about what Saskatchewan has done in potash would be relevant 

to a judicial proceeding? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I believe you have misinterpreted or 

misunderstood what I said. What I said was that lobbying would 

not change the legal process of the petitioner once it had been 

put into the Department of Commerce on the anti-dumping. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I ask the minister: if that’s the case, how 

does lobbying affect the legal process in its beginning? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, and I’ve stated that 

before, the only way that a petition of anti-dumping can be 

pulled back is by the petitioner, not the lobbying to the 

government. It must be the petitioner that withdraws the 

petition. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Chairman. I know that the 

petitioner has to withdraw the petition; I don’t deny that. I do 

dispute the minister’s comments a few moments ago that the 

appropriate United States Department of Commerce agencies 

cannot kill the petition. I argue they can in the first instance or 

any time during the course of the proceedings. But that’s a word 

argument between myself and the minister. 

 

My question is this on the matter of lobbying. I want to clear 

this up. Is it the contention of the minister and the government 

that lobbying by United States politicians, or Canadian 

politicians, in this matter has an impact or has  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2650 

 

 

no impact? What is your position with respect to this process 

and lobbying? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I think, Mr. Chairman, it’s only a lawyer 

that can stand up and say a moot point. However, I won’t 

dispute that with the legal hounds across the floor. 

 

I think there’s room and reason to lobby, but in of itself. And 

that’s the point to be made, and that is the point, my good 

friend, that you raised from day one, as I recall. Forget the Bill; 

do the lobbying. And that wasn’t about to happen. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think if you take a look at lobbying, and who 

one lobbies and why, certainly I would think that lobbying 

particularly by the American farmer in the United States has the 

potential to have the greatest impact . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well, the member said exactly . . . No, the point the member 

was trying to make earlier was that we should be doing this 

lobby. Mr. Chairman, I’d stated earlier that we have informed 

many, many times over to various organizations and gatherings 

in the United States of what was coming up, the growing 

difficulties as it related to trade and potash. And I said what we 

met with was apathy, Mr. Chairman — was apathy. 

 

(2000) 

 

Now I think in this particular case, the laying on the Table of 

Bill 36 raised a level of awareness that was not there before, 

and perhaps one could say that it removed the apathy and 

removed it in short order. And if that’s what it takes, Mr. 

Chairman, then that’s fair ball. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, just lobbying for its own sake, I do not 

believe is the total answer as the member has alluded to. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the minister will know better 

than anybody in this House that her answers in this House are 

obviously going to be widely read here and in Washington and 

elsewhere. I don’t need to remind her of that. 

 

And I would therefore ask her whether it is her position, and 

that of the Premier of this province, that this decision, 

preliminary, by the international trade administration import 

agency of the Department of Commerce was instigated because 

of political pressure by United States senators as the result of 

the establishment of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

12 years ago. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can say in simple terms 

to the members from Saskatoon Riversdale, no. Although — 

and I think you would agree — as I stated earlier certain things 

have been placed on the record, the public record, some time 

ago. I think it’s also fair to say, with all due respect to the 

Leader of the Opposition and his members, that the existence of 

PCS has been an irritant in this matter, and I would refer you to 

the petition itself, in that it makes several references to PCS. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the hon. 

member this question: she says the petition itself makes several 

references to PCS. I would acknowledge that. Would the hon. 

member also acknowledge to me  

that the petition also makes several references to the non-public 

corporations involved in potash, such as CCP (Central Canada 

Potash) and IMC (International Minerals and Chemical 

Corporation) and the like? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the others are 

mentioned also. But I think, Mr. Chairman, that we have to be 

realistic and we have to accept that the Congressional record in 

this case is very critical in its comments of PCS. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Chairman. I’m trying to be helpful 

here to the minister, and I want the minister to answer my 

question. I think she has, but I’ll give her one more chance. 

 

Madam Minister, this is a serious Bill with serious 

consequences for the entire industry and for the credibility of 

your government here and in Washington. Let’s take this step 

by step. Just give me, if you will, a simple yes or no: is the 

proceeding in the United States, which resulted in the 

anti-dumping position taken a few weeks ago, a judicial 

proceeding, as you told me a few minutes ago that it was and 

that lobbying was not a factor? Is that still your position a few 

minutes later? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that I have 

answered the member’s question; however, he may not like the 

answer, but that’s not going to change it. 

 

He’s quite right; it is a serious Bill, and I’m glad he looks at it 

that way. Quite frankly, we on this side of the House, we 

weren’t too sure which way he was looking at it. I believe this 

is more or less the first time that I’ve heard anything from him 

on the potash. 

 

Mr. Chairman, as I’ve stated before, it is a quasi-judicial 

proceeding within the United States. Lobby does not determine 

the outcome, but we believe that it is important that our side and 

its impact be told and be heard, Mr. Chairman, particularly in 

the current environment; and I don’t have to remind the 

members of what that environment is as it relates to trade. I 

would think that any influences, particularly on the part of the 

petitioners, is important on the outcome of this, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I wish to refer the minister 

specifically to a copy of the Department of Commerce 

preliminary ruling. No doubt the minister has read this and fully 

understands it. 

 

I ask this question simply of the minister: is it correct to say, as 

I contend, that the basic and in fact sole criteria, in general 

principles, for the decisions taken in this Commerce department 

decision evolves around something called fair value 

comparisons on sales of the class or kind of merchandise in the 

United States — in this case potash — between the period 

September 1, 1986 through to February 28, 1987, and that no 

other consideration other than the mandate of the legislation in 

the United States is at issue in that award? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I think if the member is 

asking, did the preliminary determination follow from the 

application of the legislation, then the answer is yes, and that’s 

how we understood your question. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2651 

 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, that’s a partial 

answer. Perhaps on reflection I might even concede a full 

answer of the question, but let me come back at it this way. You 

have read, have you not, Madam Minister, this award? You nod 

your head in agreement. I want you to agree with me that in this 

award there is no mention in the actual award — and your 

officials have surely perused the American law under which the 

award is based — there is no mention, for example, of publicly 

owned potash corporations. Isn’t that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And is it also correct, Madam Minister, that 

there is not one word of mention of world oversupply in potash 

in this award, the one that we’re talking about? 

 

(2015)  

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I believe the member is 

quoting from the Department of Commerce preliminary 

determination. Am I correct? He’s quite right, it is without 

specifics. However, if he were to read the International Trade 

Commission’s preliminary injury, which comes first, he would 

find ample evidence and reference to PCS and he would find it 

unfavourable. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps the hon. member, 

having made reference to this, would be kind enough to table 

that document with those references for my elucidation. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have it with us 

tonight but we can table it for you. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You will provide that for us? Okay. 

 

Isn’t it correct, Madam Minister, that what we’re talking about 

here in terms of the decision making process is the United 

States Department of Commerce decision, the one that we’re 

referring to? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, as I understand the U.S. 

procedure, there is two parts to the decision making process, 

and one is the dumping and the other one is the injury 

determination. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the minister is 

making this needlessly difficult for the committee, with all great 

respect. 

 

Madam Minister, I can forward this document over to you but 

you have it. This is a document which sets the extra financial 

obligations on Saskatchewan potash companies, ranging all the 

way from the potash corporation, sorry, from International 

Minerals and Chemicals at 9.14 per cent, all the way to Central 

Canada Potash at 85.2 per cent with the various numbers of 

corporations in between at various levels. This document 

articulates and makes the preliminary ruling from which all the 

other legal and other activities flow. And it is this document 

which is the deciding document and upon which I base my 

questions to you. 

 

And I am saying to you that in this regard - and if I’m  

wrong you correct me — in this regard, as you admitted, there 

is no reference to a publicly owned potash corporation; there is 

no reference to world oversupply of potash or fertilizer; that the 

considerations are, as I said at the very beginning, pursuant to 

the American legislation, fair value comparisons of sales for a 

period certain of September 1, 1986 through February 28, 1987. 

Isn’t that a generally correct summary? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, what the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale says is all true. However, he ignores some 

parts of it and I don’t believe that that is fair, nor is it right to 

ignore the rest of the process. What he says, it is the 

Department of Commerce that sets out the duties. And he’s 

right in that it doesn’t specifically talk about PCS. However, I 

think he ignores the fact that we would have never got to this 

point if the International Trade Commission had not found 

injuring on our part. And that again goes back to what is 

specifically mentioned in that. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, let’s just stop and examine 

that. How in the world does PCS figure into the — as you 

would describe it — first step for causing the injury? Would 

you please explain that. Why is PCS any different than any of 

the other corporations that produce potash in Saskatchewan in 

the determination of the causing of injury? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we can continue for 

a long time to discuss what’s on the public record and what 

isn’t. And I’ve always, I’ve already stated that I’m quite willing 

to provide the ITC (International Trade Commission) ruling 

which I’ve indicated to the member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

that, as it makes reference to PCS, he would not find it in his 

favour. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this Bill before us is for the entire industry, and 

while I find some of the thrust of the questions and the 

arguments interesting, I also find it rather narrow. And I think 

that the Bill is intended for the industry and that all of them, all 

the workers whether they work in a public mine or a private 

mine, I believe, deserve the same kind of equal treatment, and 

that’s what the Bill will be looked at, and when it comes to 

implementation, Mr. Chairman, fairness — fairness based on 

the factors that I’ve already given to the member from 

Saskatoon South would be the main points. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister just said a 

minute ago that she didn’t like the thrust of my questions 

because they were too narrowly focused. I find that interesting, 

given the fact that she takes lots of liberty in narrowly focusing 

the political justification based on potash. It’s okay for her to 

make those statements, but for us to explore how relevant and 

accurate they are, all of sudden become a little bit too narrow 

for her. I’m sorry that I offend the minister if I explore and 

engage her in this aspect of the debate. But I’ll move off. 

 

Is it the minister’s position that this Bill, therefore, as she has 

just said a minute ago, deals with the entire industry, and that 

being the case that this Bill does not address the United States 

anti-dumping action? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, this Bill is directed  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2652 

 

 

towards Saskatchewan’s entire industry. The intent of the Bill 

has not changed from day one and it is to in fact try and help us 

address the supply situation. Now as I indicated several days or 

a couple of weeks ago, that the anti-dumping action that is 

against our producers is a symptom of a bigger problem, and 

one of the problems was the oversupply, and that has not 

changed. 

 

The secondary impact of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, is obvious, and 

that has to do with price. But the main intent and the objective 

of the Bill, Mr. Chairman, was first to try and bring into a better 

balance the question of supply and demand. And in doing so, 

Mr. Chairman, we believe that we will, in fact, be protecting 

some jobs that would otherwise be at risk. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I find that interesting 

and somewhat confusing, to put it mildly. In fact, the 

government’s intentions with respect to this Bill are very 

muddled, to understate it. 

 

On the one hand the minister says that the main purpose of the 

Bill is to deal with the question of the “supply situation”. That 

is the purpose of the Bill. Then she gratuitously adds on what 

appears to be almost an afterthought, that the anti-dumping is “a 

symptom of oversupply,” notwithstanding the fact that she 

admitted to me a few moments ago that nowhere in the ruling, 

the preliminary ruling, is oversupply at issue. Notwithstanding 

that she admitted to me that nowhere is the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan, and the publicly owned corporation at issue. 

Notwithstanding the fact that she admitted to me just a few 

moments ago that PCS is not singled out by virtue of the fact 

that both the private and the public corporations are named. 

 

This is a muddling of objectives. And that being the case, I 

want to ask you specifically, Madam Minister: how do you and 

the Premier of this Province expect to address, specifically — 

let’s take these just parcel by parcel — the problem of the 

United States anti-dumping preliminary ruling? How will this 

Bill help that situation specifically, please? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That’s unfortunate that the member finds 

the Bill muddling. I guess I wonder why he voted for it on 

second reading if that’s the case. However that’s his choice, Mr. 

Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I’m sure as the 

member from Gull Lake says. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we have stated from day one with the release to 

the public of what this legislation was, that there was a 

secondary impact of the Bill, or the by-product, and that, 

indeed, was the price. 

 

Now, I’m sure the member is aware that, in fact, the price has 

gone up in the last week or so. Mr. Chairman, I believe that 

rising prices certainly is going to help our Saskatchewan 

producers when it comes to trying to eliminate, eliminating the 

dumping margins. And that’s very clear. 

 

(2030) 

 

I think if the member would like to hear, perhaps, from some of 

the analysts within the field, I would be willing to  

send over a couple of statements for him to have a look at. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I want to ask the minister two questions 

again, and ask her to think carefully of the answers of this. 

 

Is it her position that the price increases recently experienced in 

potash are the direct result of this legislation, and that was the 

purpose of the legislation? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, that was not the main purpose of the 

legislation, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — So the answer which you just gave me to 

the preceding question is incorrect in implying that price was a 

factor in this Bill? Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, that isn’t. He wasn’t listening, and I 

said very clearly, and I will say it again, it is a secondary 

impact. 

 

The main objective, Mr. Chairman, in this Bill, was to deal with 

the basic problem of the overhang within the industry — the 

issue of supply and demand. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we have effectively stated to the world that our 

productive capacity is no longer going to be available — our 

productive capacity, the overhand within the industry. In doing 

that, Mr. Chairman, there is a by-product that takes place, and 

that is the raising of a price. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, that is what I mean by a 

muddled, confused government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And a minister. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I don’t want to personalize it against the 

minister, but the government clearly is lost as to what it intends 

to do with this legislation. 

 

Let me tell you why I say that, Madam Minister. If you tell us 

that the purpose of this Bill is to deal with a so-called overhand 

of potash, namely, a large volume of potash in the world, and 

Saskatchewan being a major player — which I would certainly 

admit to — and you developed an argument to that effect and to 

that extent, period, you’d be on a logical course of action and 

political position, which I think might make some sense to the 

people of Saskatchewan and perhaps the world outside. 

 

But you confuse it when you tie that objective in — with the 

greatest of respect — to the other problem which we are 

currently facing, namely, the United States anti-dump, which, 

by your own admission in the first series of questions and 

answers you gave me, don’t deal with overhang but deal with 

fair pricing or dumping, according to the tests of this document. 

 

The pricing isn’t the objective of this Bill either, although 

there’s some confusion about your intentions there. Now if the 

purpose is dealing with overhang on a world-wide basis, my 

question still is relevant. How in the world does this Bill deal 

with the immediate problem to be decided before January 8, 

1988 at the other end, namely the United States anti-dump 

action? Please give us a clear-cut answer. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2653 

 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The member seems to be concerned that 

this Bill does not address the issue of the anti-dumping action. 

I’m sure that the member is aware that an anti-dumping action 

out of the United States is not government to government, that, 

in fact, it is a problem within the industry. Government 

legislation by Saskatchewan is not going to change the legal 

process, and both he, as I see, and the Leader of the Opposition 

agree. 

 

He’s quite right. The petition doesn’t address the issue of 

oversupply, Mr. Chairman, but when you look t the events that 

lead up to such actions as the anti-dumping and other actions 

that have been taken within the United States, including the one 

on uranium, plus rumours of other ones, Mr. Chairman, and you 

look at the common thread that runs between most of them, and 

you will find that it is one of surplus, and that in turn creates 

some fear, understandably so, because job lay-offs come with it, 

whether it’s in the United States, or perhaps West Germany, or 

in Canada, and closer to home, Saskatchewan. 

 

So the protectionist barriers go up when it get into that type of a 

situation. And I think all of us being humans, whether it’s U.S. 

or Canada, have a tendency to want to keep what is ours and 

make sure that those jobs are in place. We may not always 

agree on the mechanisms or the methods that one does that, but 

I think that in understanding human beings, Mr. Chairman, that 

it’s easy to understand why these events do in fact happen. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to refer to a gentleman by the name of 

Dr. John Douglas, who managed the United States Fertilizer 

Development Centre for 38 years. He is well-known in the 

United States. He knows the potash industry, the market-place, 

the fertilizer business inside out. And what he says about this 

Bill is that its greatest asset is that it addresses the surplus 

production capacity problems that has plagued the industry. 

That’s the first problem. And no, you’re not going find it 

mentioned in the petition that the hon. member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has referred to. But, Mr. Chairman, that’s the main 

problem — the oversupply. By dealing with it in this Bill, we 

have admitted that by pulling back the productive capacity, 

there will be a secondary impact, and that, Mr. Chairman, will 

be the price increase. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has, in effect, 

admitted that this Bill will have no direct . . . Let’s put it this 

way. The main purpose of this Bill is not to deal with the 

United States anti-dumping situation. That was her admission at 

the beginning. She does argue, however, that there is an indirect 

— or I’ll put it another way — there may be an indirect 

consequence over the longer period of time by some form of 

supply-management under this legislation. 

 

So we’ve cleared away the most immediate problem, which is 

the issue of the United States anti-dumping, and that this Bill is 

not a direct response to the United States anti-dumping 

provision of January 1988 when the final determination 

presumably is to be made. And I think that’s a fair and honest 

answer by the minister, and I accept that.  

I’ll come to the other side of the problem, namely, the overhang 

as it impacts on the industry in the world in a moment. But I’m 

just concentrating for the time being on the United States 

anti-dump, and as I say, I welcome her admission. 

 

I will ask the minister, therefore, this question: will the minister 

not agree with me that almost all of the corporations, if not all 

of them named in that preliminary order dispute, not only the 

finding but many aspects of the methodology in getting the 

finding that the Department of Commerce made, particularly 

the notion of constructed cost, or constructed value? Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, they do as we do. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And is it also correct, Madam Minister, that 

they intend, like I presume PCS intends — you’re not the 

minister in charge of PCS, but you would know what is 

intended there — but they intend, the corporations, all of them, 

public and private, to fight this issue vigorously on, amongst 

other things, this notion of constructed value? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, all the producers in 

Saskatchewan, public and private alike, have indeed fought the 

issue, and we hope they’re successful when it comes to the final 

determination. 

 

But in the event that they are not, Mr. Chairman, increases in 

prices, we believe, in the interim are going to perhaps help them 

over the review period until the final determination. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — By the way, is it correct to say, Madam 

Minister — I might have missed the answer; I was here all 

evening, but I might have missed this answer — is it correct to 

say that this is the first time since 1975-76 that the United 

States Department of Commerce, the first time in 12 years, has 

made this kind of preliminary ruling as against the 

Saskatchewan potash industry? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, that’s true, if you mean the 

Saskatchewan potash producers, yes. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — So we have a situation that from 1975-76, 

since the beginning of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

at least, to 1987, a period of 12 years, Mr. Chairman, there has 

been no such action. And to state the obvious, will the minister 

agree with me that the anti-dump provisions apply to both the 

publicly owned PCS and the private potash companies in 

Saskatchewan? It’s a self-obvious question, I suppose, which 

should be answered by a yes. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That’s right, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Is it also fair to say from the . . . Would the 

minister be fair - and as she’s trying to be, and I appreciate this 

- this evening with me in admitting that if this Bill had not been 

introduced, in the opinion of the Government of Saskatchewan 

and the Crown corporation, PCS, and from the information that 

the government has gleaned in the dealings with the private  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2654 

 

 

potash corporations, that if this Bill had not been introduced, 

there were pretty good chances that at the end of the day, we 

could convince somebody at the appropriate decision making 

level in the United States that their computation of constructed 

values and other factors for this anti-dumping figure should be 

mitigated, if not relieved. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s a possibility. 

That’s a maybe, I grant you that. But I also believe that there is 

a pretty good chance that, in fact, that would not have 

happened. I think if you were to just sit idly by and wait to see 

what would come out of it, the risks would be far, far too great 

for the producers and all that that entails within this province. 

Given the level that some of them are at, when you take a look 

at that kind of a risk and what would have to happen, they 

would have to be reduced substantially. 

 

The other factor that it does not address, and that is the issue of 

the oversupply which I’ve already stated has been plaguing the 

industry for some time, that issue would still be there. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I realize the oversupply, but please, Madam 

Minister, as you admit yourself, this is a long-term problem. All 

of your figures on oversupply that you gave to the press 

briefings are related, but remotely or indirectly, to the issue. 

You say that as much in your statements. 

 

So let’s leave the question of oversupply aside for the moment 

because the fat of the matter is — is it not? — that since this 

Bill does not directly speak to the U.S. anti-dumping action, 

which you admit indirectly only as much as supply is affected, I 

may admit, isn’t it a fact, Madam Minister, as a consequence, 

that whatever happens at the end of the day with respect to the 

United States anti-dumping will not be as the result of the 

introduction of this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it may not. You 

know, the member might be right that the Bill may not affect it 

in the end, but I think it is very clear, Mr. Chairman, abundantly 

clear that it will, in fact, directly affect our industry to be able to 

handle whatever final determination will come out. And from 

our perspective, that’s the key. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And thank you, Madam Minister, for that 

statement which more or less concurs with mine, if I may 

interpret it that way. 

 

I want to ask you another specific question: would you also not 

agree with me that there was no need for this Bill to have a 

price increase in potash effected by, say, the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan as, in fact, has been done a few days ago 

without this Bill being law? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the member and I do not 

agree. I think this Bill was very necessary, and we are simply 

going to have to agree to disagree on that point. 

 

The reason I state that, Mr. Chairman, I believe is very  

clear. And that is, that without dealing with the issue, and I 

come back to the same thing — and I know they’re getting tired 

of hearing it, but it’s the issue of oversupply — fair prices 

would not be realized. And that is the intent of the Bill, Mr. 

Chairman, and that was why it was absolutely necessary. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I want the House to be clear, 

and I think my line of questioning is more or less clear about 

what I see are two separate issues, although they’re related; I 

acknowledge that. I’ve been trying to ask questions about the 

United States anti-dumping action because we have heard in 

second reading speeches a variety of comments made by 

members opposite that this was going to show the Americans 

what to do on this United States anti-dumping situation. So I’ve 

been directing a series of questions on that and the public will 

know the answers. 

 

I would say that a fair summary of your answers has to be that 

this Bill will have a minimal, if any, impact on the immediate 

problem which is facing the Saskatchewan potash producers 

and their workers and families — the United States 

anti-dumping law. I think there’s no other conclusion about 

that. Let’s leave that aside for the moment. If you wish to rebut 

me on it, fair enough, but let’s leave that aside. 

 

I want to now address your point that you make in the last 

comment, and that is the larger overhang of potash. Now I may 

concede to you that the overhang may have some impact on the 

United States anti-dump action for the moment. But again, 

that’s not answering the question that I direct to you. 

 

The question that I direct to you, Madam Minister, is this, and 

I’ll make it very clear and very specific. We know, don’t we, 

that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan increased the price 

for potash approximately 60 per cent just a few days ago. And 

we know that most of the industry has followed just a few days 

ago. And we also know that this Bill is not yet law, otherwise 

we wouldn’t be here considering it. And my question for you, 

therefore, is as follows: in the light of those, I think, 

indisputable facts, is it correct to say that this Bill was not 

needed to have price increases in potash by virtue the 

mechanism that you have just implemented through your other 

agency of PCS that I’ve described? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, that’s not 

true. The Bill is necessary and the member from Saskatchewan 

Riversdale keeps coming back to why, you know, this Bill we 

don’t need. And that simply isn’t true. 

 

This Bill will, in fact, have a very fundamental effect for the 

industry to be able to manage the anti-dumping issue. That’s 

number one. 

 

Number two, Mr. Chairman, and again I’m back to oversupply. 

By removing — or the removal of the access to our productive 

capacity, in fact, forces the issue. And I think the member 

realizes, though he may have a difficult time in admitting it, 

that, in fact, the price increases that he’s talked about would 

have not happened and will not happen or nor will they be 

sustained if the oversupply continues to be there. They will not 

be sustained. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2655 

 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, the Bill, the oversupply, and removing the 

productive capacity has, in fact, been very positive and been 

successful, and that is needed in order to ensure that it is 

sustained. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to slightly shift 

the thrust of the questions to the minister, but they’re still 

related on topic of price. 

 

Will the minister advise the House whether or not her advisers 

— department officials or legal advisers on contract — have 

raised with her and the Premier of this province the possible 

problem of United States anti-trust action through price 

leadership, either as a consequence of this Bill and/or through 

the actions of PCS, and what that anti-trust possibility would 

have to potash producers in Saskatchewan and consumers in the 

United States? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, in regards to the 

member’s question as it relates to government companies 

setting prices, it’s very clear, and I think the member would 

agree that action cannot be taken by producers collectively. 

That’s very clear. Individually they can set their prices. There’s 

nothing illegal about that. And the market-place being what it 

is, some either follow or they don’t. 

 

In terms of the government and their rights, the government 

clearly under the constitution of 1982 has the right to manage 

its resources. And I believe that the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale was involved along with the Government of Alberta 

seeing that that, in fact, was put into the constitution. And that 

also included setting the rate of primary production, which is 

basically what this Bill is all about. 

 

The action taken, Mr. Chairman, with this Bill, is taken by the 

government, and the producers are simply required to comply 

with it. And I believe that answers the members question. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, I appreciate it’s the government that is 

introducing the legislation and proposing it and defending it. 

Therefore, in the light of the minister’s answer, is it correct for 

me to assume that there were no prior consultations with the 

potash producers prior to the introduction of this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, that’s not correct to assume that, and 

I think that’s already on the public record that, in fact, the 

producers were consulted with and they were informed, Mr. 

Chairman, the intent of the legislation, and that in fact that there 

would be legislation, and that it would basically address the 

issue of volume controls. The legislation was not solicited, if 

that’s what the member is getting at, but I did inform the 

producers individually that the legislation would be introduced 

in the House. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I want to just ask a few more questions 

before I take my place on this piece of legislation, and it’s still 

relating to price and the meetings and in this direction. Thank 

you very much. 

 

My question was whether or not — you answered it a couple of 

questions back — whether or not the government was 

concerned about the American anti-trust provisions and the 

actions of the Justice department and Commerce people there, 

in the consequence of price leadership through either 

corporations such as PCS, in the 60 per increase announced a 

few days ago, and/or the intended consequences of increasing 

price which you have admitted to me is one of the side-effects 

of this legislation. 

 

I put it to you, Madam Minister, that without having researched 

this at law — and I hope that I’m sincerely wrong in this — that 

the United States farmers and farm lobby groups and others, if 

they see the price rise from Saskatchewan to such high rates and 

levels that they themselves oppose that action, that the United 

States anti-trust legislation and other judicial and legal 

mechanisms available to them could very well be resorted to by 

the farm lobby in the United States, if the price gets beyond 

reach, to the point that the very objective that the government is 

seeking to achieve by this legislation — one of them; waking 

the farmers up, as you describe it, to get them on the side of our 

potash industry — gets perverted or subverted through the price 

leadership argument if the United States Justice or other 

political atmospheres dictate some pursuit of the Saskatchewan 

action. 

 

And my question is to the minister this way. I hope that that 

genuinely is not the result. I want to ask the minister, however, 

whether or not she has received legal advice, she and the 

Premier of this province, on this specific issue; whether or not 

that advice indicates that it is a danger to be concerned about; 

and, if so, who it is that is legally providing that advice to the 

Minister of Mineral Resources and to the Premier of this 

province, both in Saskatchewan and in Washington. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we have been informed 

and counselled, received legal advice on the laws as they 

pertain to the United States, and the counsel has been 

Department of Justice. It’s also been the law firm of Davies 

Ward & Beck, Toronto; and in Washington it’s been the firm of 

Arnold & Porter. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Madam Minister, I want to raise just two 

other areas before I take my chair, Mr. Chairman, with your 

permission. Will the minister admit that an embargo of the 

export of Saskatchewan potash to the United States is not part 

of the mix of this legislation or the potash resources Bill? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I’ve already stated 

that. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And the second area which I wish to just 

very briefly touch on is the question of the necessity of this Bill. 

 

Now let me just take a moment to set out what I believe to be 

the legal and factual history about this legislative capacity of 

the government. In 1969, or thereabouts, when the potash 

proration regulations were enacted by the former government of 

the former premier — late premier Ross Thatcher — the result 

of which was a legal  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2656 

 

 

challenge ultimately in the ’70s period and a declaration that the 

regulations and portions of the law were beyond the capacity of 

a province to enact that kind of legislation, the consequence of 

that was under the leadership of the former premier Blakeney 

and former premier Lougheed, a new section 92(a) of the 

Canadian constitution — which section strengthened the power 

of the province of Saskatchewan to control and manage its 

resources as it has for Alberta, and for every province, indeed in 

Canada — that became constitutional law in 1982. 

 

In 1985, I submit, Madam Minister, that as a result of that early 

ultra vires — as the lawyers say — or unlawful declaration 

about the potash proration regulations and appropriate 

legislation thereunder, your government, using the newly 

gained powers of the constitution — which if I may say so 

premier Blakeney negotiated for us and for you — enacted a 

new mineral resources Act. 

 

This Mineral Resources Act is the current law of the land, and it 

says among other things, pursuant to the constitutional authority 

under 92(a): that the cabinet has the right to decide a variety of 

things ranging from the orderly exploration and development, 

the prudent and proper management of mineral resources — 

note those words — prudent and proper management of mineral 

resources which is surely another way of stating what this 

purported Bill is all about, giving you the power to establish 

one or more conservation boards in pursuit of the mineral 

resource. And by the way, please don’t give me any of the 

jargon that this Bill doesn’t cover potash because the definition 

of mineral resources and mineral involves anything of the 

normal and natural consequence of the legislation. You could 

have very easily, Madam Minister, and very quickly, enacted a 

conservation board and enacted regulations under that 

legislation and had done what you purport this Bill would want 

to do without the ballyhoo of coming in with this legislation, 

dragging your feet in the debate on this legislation, and giving 

us all these peripheral side matters. 

 

So I put it to you, Madam Minister, with the greatest of respect, 

that since you didn’t need this Bill to increase the price — you 

did that to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; you didn’t 

need this Bill to do the conservation resources Bill; you’ve got 

that under the authorities of The Mineral Resources Act — that 

this Bill will have no direct impact on any of the U.S. 

anti-dumping provisions. There’s virtually very little reason for 

this Bill except to give your department officials credit. The 

problem of the overhang in the potash industry in the longer 

run, which I think is a consideration for all of us and one of the 

reasons why we have voted for this Bill in second reading. But 

short of that, short of that, there is no absolute any other reason 

for the introduction of this legislation since you have all of the 

legal and other commercial tools available to you to at when 

you did. Why don’t you admit that that’s the real purpose and 

that’s the real facts behind this situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale is quite correct in his history in  

terms of the constitution. However, he also neglected to give 

credit where it was also due, and that was to Premier Lougheed 

at that time. And I believe that the issue, the main issue of the 

day was probably the national energy program which prompted 

the issue, particularly as it related to oil and gas. 

 

However, Mr. Chairman, as I have stated earlier, that the 

premier of the day for Saskatchewan at that time did in fact 

have a hand in changing the resources for Saskatchewan and 

indeed other provinces. And I’ve always recognized that and 

given credit where it was due. 

 

The member wants a specific answer. That’s unfortunate. He 

seems for some reason unwilling to accept the answers that are 

given to him, Mr. Chairman. I can only go back again to what I 

have said twice now — twice now, Mr. Chairman — as it 

relates to why this Bill. Why not The Mineral Resources Act of 

1985? And I want the member to clearly understand, based on 

very clear, direct legal advice, that we were told that The 

Mineral Resources Act does not authorize the creation of 

production controls, production controls on any mineral, nor 

does it contain, Mr. Chairman, the necessary regulation-making 

power to enable the Lieutenant Governor in Council to 

implement such controls by regulation. That has been stated 

previously in this House, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Accordingly, the potash production controls could only be 

implemented through the introduction of legislation. And I had 

also stated, Mr. Chairman, previous to this, that we felt the 

issue, when you were looking t control of production with any 

given sector, industry in this province is important enough to 

bring before this House and its members. 

 

I’ve also talked about some of the options that we looked at 

besides doing nothing, and that had to do with amendments to 

The Mineral Resources Act, Mr. Chairman. We stated at that 

time, and again I state tonight that the amendments would have 

to be so substantial and even then, they would probably not 

address the issue of potash by itself. We on this side of the 

House, we’re not about to put in an amendment where it was 

production controls that could apply to any without very good 

reason, Mr. Chairman. 

 

That is the answer and I stay with that answer, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to just make a 

few comments with respect to this line of questioning and the 

answers which the hon. minister has given the House, and invite 

the members of the House and invite the public of 

Saskatchewan who might be watching these proceedings and, 

indeed, invite the journalists who have been watching the 

questions and answers to ask themselves this question: — why 

is it that this Bill is introduced? I offer the suggestion that this 

Bill is introduced for two reasons. 

 

One, I think has a legitimacy to it, namely the question of 

overhang and production management. I’ll say a little word 

about the form of the Bill in a moment. The other reason for 

introducing this Bill, I think, is summarized by  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2657 

 

 

what I must only characterize as one of the depressing 

addresses of this Assembly that I have heard in a long time by 

the Premier, given on September 11, 1987, and that is for pure 

political reasons and pure political window-dressing — no other 

way. 

 

My whole line of questioning was to see whether or not the 

minister, in her answers when it came to the hard questions of 

this Bill, would be able to support this kind of a statement made 

by the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, namely when 

he said on September 11 in talking about the Bill the following, 

quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take much imagination to realize, 

in fact, that that’s the very reason today that we’re faced 

with these kinds of anti-dumping conditions (referring to 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan). The man who 

led the charge, Mr. Speaker, is looking up across the 

border and saying: well for heaven’s sake, the socialists 

are going to nationalize the entire industry, therefore, 

they’re not playing by the rules and we’ll show those 

people in Canada. 

 

Precisely and precisely the very reasons that your minister 

rejected tonight in all the answers that I directed to her in 

questions I directed to her. She admitted precisely as she had to 

admit. 

 

She admitted precisely that this Bill has nothing to do except 

with the quasi-judicial proceedings, that the lobbies don’t affect 

the Bill; that the statements made by the senators don’t affect 

the Bill, the petitioners decide those; that the application of the 

American laws is done according to the American provisions. 

 

She admitted that the decision of the United States 

anti-dumping procedure may be to the favour of the potash 

industry notwithstanding this government’s actions. She danced 

around the high danger of prices and United States 

anti-combine situation. She has strewed everything that the 

Premier said in this speech in what I can only describe as one of 

the sorriest attempts by the most incompetent government in the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan on a very important 

issue like potash. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — She argues, the Bill was needed — needed 

for what? All you have to do is take a look at the mineral 

resources Bill. You had all the power to do everything that you 

had to do then without introducing this piece of legislation. 

 

You can’t even defend with the greatest of respect any of the 

specific questions which are put to you because your mission is 

to confuse the political objectives with the policy objectives, 

Madam Minister. If you stuck to the policy objectives and you 

told us there was a crisis, that part of it makes sense, to which 

we’re prepared to lend some support and credence and to give 

you a chance. But you start to mix the policy with the politics, 

and you get the spectacle of the Premier and the Deputy 

Premier and the minister who doesn’t show up for question 

period, and all of those silent back-benchers, jumping to the  

politics of it and ignoring the very real issue which faces 

Saskatchewan potash workers and Saskatchewan families. 

Shame on you! And shame on the government opposite. Shame 

on you! Shame on you! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You don’t give us any consideration; you 

don’t give the potash workers any consideration whatsoever — 

nothing whatsoever on the major concerns as their jobs. What 

you do is you introduce this Bill when you don’t need it and 

you can’t affect the result in this operation. 

 

I’m glad to see that the minister from Consumer Affairs is 

finally showing up. I invite her to show up for question period 

tomorrow . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Members know 

that they’re not supposed to make reference to absence or 

presence of any members in the House. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that 

direction. I thought you were interjecting because you wanted 

to tell the member from Maple Creek to quieten down so that I 

can make my remarks, but obviously she wasn’t quite loud 

enough for the Chair to hear. But that’s fine, I understand that, 

and I won’t make references in that regard. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Chairman, as I close my comments with 

respect to this legislation, this legislation is going to be judged, 

not today — it won’t be judged by you, and it won’t be judged 

by us; it’s going to be judged by the people of Saskatchewan, 

and it’s going to be judged, Mr. Chairman, on three or four 

tests. 

 

It’s going to be judged, first of all, whether or not it relieves the 

United States anti-dumping action. Note the words that I use. 

Not mitigate — I think that it might be mitigated, 

notwithstanding the ham-handed, clumsy, flat-footed response 

of the Premier in New York and your defence of this Bill in this 

House. I think it could be mitigated in any event. But that’s not 

the issue; the issue is whether or not there is relief from the 

United States anti-dumping. That’s going to be a test that we’re 

going to be looking at. 

 

We’re also going to be checking as to whether or not this Bill 

maintains Saskatchewan’s portion of the potash sales to the 

United States and the world, and increases it. By the way, I 

would say that this is going to happen, or might happen, in spite 

of this Bill, and in spite of your incompetence and clumsy and 

ham-handed attempts to manage the resource. It will be judged 

by that basis. 

 

It’s also going to be judged about whether or not you administer 

the Bill fairly, whether you do it in a fair way as between the 

mines and the companies. I invite you, Mr. Chairman, in 

particular, to take a look at what this legislation does. It allows 

a potash resources board to do what? By the way, a potash 

resources board . . . We don’t know the numbers; we don’t 

know who’s going to be appointed; we don’t know who’s going 

to chair it. It’s going to be appointed by the cabinet. We know 

that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2658 

 

 

This potash resources board will have the power to decide not 

only what companies live or die, Mr. Chairman, what 

companies live or die, because this board can decide that the 

minimum or the maximum production is zero per cent, not only 

can it decide what companies live or die but what mines within 

the companies can live and die, and we’re asked, on the current 

history of this government, to believe them, to trust them, that 

they’re going to administer anything fairly. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that the history of this government 

in this province is one of unfairness. This history of this 

government is one of favouritism and patronage, and every 

potash producer and potash worker ought to be frightened silly 

about the way the administration of this Bill is about to take 

place. 

 

I hope I am wrong. I hope that I am wrong, but based on the 

past record of this government, Mr. Chairman, I think that there 

is cause for concern, and I find it also, if I might say so in 

passing, rather strangely ironic that this Bill is probably the 

most massive intervention in the free market-place of any 

legislation in the history of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. I say 

to the Minister of Consumer Affairs: — this Bill is the largest 

intervention of the potash industry in the free market-place in 

the history of Canada; I say that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say that this Bill, Mr. Chairman, which 

allows, which allows a political body, Mr. Chairman, to cut 

down IMC to zero production, is a take-over Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say this Bill which can cut back Central 

Canada Potash to zero production is a take-over Bill and worse 

than that, Mr. Chairman, it’s a take-over Bill without any right 

of recourse or any right of compensation whatsoever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — How do you like that coming from a free 

enterprise government? How do you like that, Mr. Chairman? 

How does the Deputy Premier like that? How do all those silent 

back-benchers, who simply come to vote whenever their whip 

calls on them to vote, how do they like it when this free 

enterprise Government of Saskatchewan, so-called, introduces a 

Bill of this nature? 

 

By the way, I don’t know how the journalists and those outside 

this legislative body who would take a look at this legislation 

and the way it’s drafted and gives the entire power in the hands 

of the Premier and his minister and the other front-benchers to 

decide the very fate of every potash corporation. 

 

My goodness, where are your principles? The member from 

Redberry, where are your principles on free enterprise? Where 

is the member from Rosthern? Where are the principles of her; 

where is the principles of the  

Minister of Consumer Affairs? Were you in cabinet saying that 

you defend the market-place and the free place? Were you in 

there or not? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d ask the Minister of Consumer 

Affairs to allow the member to make his point. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am saying 

to the government here: where are these voices of free 

enterprise? Where is the sense of the drafting? 

 

We’ll be introducing some amendments to try to mitigate, 

mitigate the most worst features of this legislation, Mr. 

Chairman, the features of legislation which allow this potash 

resources board — which, by the way, allows no workers on the 

board; does not allow any potash producers who know 

something about the industry on the board. Who in the world 

are they gong to put on the board? They’re either going to put 

on the George Hills of the world on this board . . . 

 

An Hon. Members: — Paul Schoenhals. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Or the Paul Schoenhals — no, Mr. 

Schoenhals cannot be on the board because he has a direct 

interest in potash. 

 

Who are they going to put on this board? One possibility to put 

on the board is officials of the Department of Mineral 

Resources. That has some merit perhaps in doing so. 

 

But how is the interest of the worker, how is the interest of the 

corporation involved in this situation? How do we get the voice 

of the public put into this Bill? 

 

So I say, Mr. Chairman, that there is a legitimate concern that 

we all might have, and should have, about whether or not the 

Bill can be fairly administered, given the history of this 

government and given the massive power that this government 

has been given by its own legislation, which, by the way, it 

already had in another way. Whether or not this Bill can be 

administered fairly, we’ll be watching that very carefully as 

well. 

 

And finally, Mr. Chairman, I would say that in terms of this Bill 

the big test is going to be whether or not the jobs of potash 

families and workers are going to be maintained; that’s the big 

test. At the end of the day, it doesn’t matter whether the 

minister and I agree that this legislation is needed or not needed 

in the sense of other legislation; it’s not needed at the end of the 

day, whether or not this is going to help the U.S. anti-dumping. 

I think her answers today, as the record will show, and as it will 

reverberate through Washington and elsewhere, will show, cast 

some serious doubt about that. 

 

But what does count at the end of the day is about those potash 

workers. Are they going to face more unemployment? There’s 

already 1,000 or so, by your own figures, that have lost their 

jobs since 1982, approximately. The test is going to be: — are 

we going to sentence more of them to unemployment? Are we 

going to sentence more of the Lanigans and the Vanscoys, and 

the Viscounts, where Kalium is located, to death; the 

Rocanvilles, the Esterhazys? That’s going to be the test. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2659 

 

 

(2130) 

 

And so we’re going to be watching very carefully, Madam 

Minister. We’re going to be watching the Premier. And we’re 

going to be watching the government and this minister and the 

Deputy Premier and all the back-benchers as to whether or not 

those forecasts are met or not. 

 

We wish you well. We hope that you get those four tests met. If 

you an handle the situation, you’ll have our support, as you 

have in second reading. You tell us you an do it. We’re going to 

vote for you because you tell us you can do it. We’re going to 

try to improve your Bill. 

 

But I tell you, Madam Minister, based on your answers today, 

and based on what I think is the unseemly response of the 

Premier a few days ago on this legislation, we are worried. And 

every potash worker and family and potash town ought to be 

worried because you don’t know what you’re doing; you’re 

muddled; you’re incompetent; you’re confused; and the very 

future of this industry is at stake. 

 

So I urge you, Madam Minister, and the Deputy Premier, and 

the Premier, those who control this government, to consider 

carefully some of the suggestions that we’re going to make to 

improve the Bill, and let’s get on with the job of protecting 

Saskatchewan potash and stop the job of politicking, which is 

what you and your Premier have done and, unfortunately, are 

doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale — and I hesitate in saying 

honourable — raises the issue of the purpose of the Bill. I’ve 

been into the purpose of the Bill several times, Mr. Chairman, 

from day one it has been stated in a non-partisan way. 

 

The member wants the media to ask questions why this Bill was 

put into the House. He would have a hard time really believing 

that the media probably understand the industry and its 

problems better than the honourable lawyer from Saskatoon. 

And on one hand that’s good; on the other hand that’s 

unfortunate, particularly when you look at this self-anointed, 

next leader of the New Democratic Party. 

 

You know, he can ask the intent, the purpose of the Bill, and 

after listening to what the hon. member has just ranted and 

raved and carried on about, I have to ask what the purpose of 

the line of questioning was, Mr. Chairman. And if the member 

from Quill Lakes and Regina Lakeview would be so gracious as 

to allow the floor unless they have something to say, then I will 

give to the floor . . . obviously the member from Quill Lakes 

doesn’t. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what is the purpose of the line of questioning? I 

hear no, no statements about workers until the very end. I heard 

a lot of legal questions. That’s fair, because we are into some 

legalities in terms of the United States and the anti-dumping. 

But I do not believe for a minute that the hon. member from 

Saskatoon  

Riversdale gives one rip about the industry and the total impact 

on this province. And his first time, Mr. Chairman, first time 

speaking on this Bill came tonight, came tonight from the 

supposed to be self-appointed next leader of the New 

Democratic Party. That’s unfortunate, Mr. Chairman, very 

unfortunate. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the issue of government intervention, I think it’s 

a fair observation, and I would like the member to know that I 

am not totally comfortable with government intervention. 

However, Mr. Chairman, I have stated from day one that there 

were not a lot of options, and the intervention was taken 

because of other interventions that were happening around the 

world. 

 

I am amazed that the member from Riversdale sees this as 

government intervention when that is the same gentleman who 

was deputy premier, I believe he was deputy premier, had a 

hand in expropriation of potash mines. Now you want to talk 

about government intervention, then you talk about 

expropriation of potash mines — that’s government 

intervention, Mr. Chairman. Muddled, confused; the member’s 

memory is going, Mr. Chairman, and he has a lot to remember 

when he gets into it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, he’s quite right. All is for naught if it doesn’t 

come down to the workers and the jobs, and we’ve stated that 

from day one. We’ve also stated that this was put in in order to 

protect the jobs that we could. And we believe, Mr. Chairman, 

that the Bill will be successful in doing that. 

 

He’s quite right. The test is whether there’s going to be an 

industry there, and that means jobs, Mr. Speaker. Today that’s 

about 3,600 direct jobs; indirectly you could probably double, 

four times that. We know what it means to communities like 

Esterhazy and various others; in fact, perhaps more so on this 

side of the House than the two over there that represent potash 

communities. It means small businesses; it means taxes for the 

schools, for the R.M.’s. Mr. Chairman, it’s small town, Main 

Street, Saskatchewan, and all the businesses and the workers 

and the jobs that that entails. 

 

We know what the impact is, but we also know, Mr. Chairman, 

what’s going to happen if this Bill is not done and not carried 

out, and that is you’re going to see a major loss of jobs within 

the potash industry and a major impact on those communities, 

Mr. Chairman. That is all I have to say in regards to this Bill 

tonight unless there are other questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 

want to make a few observations dealing with the history of the 

potash industry, and they’ll be brief observations. 

 

I want to deal first with the origin of section 92(a) of the 

constitution. Some people evidently believe it had something to 

do with Alberta, and it did, but only peripherally, only 

peripherally. The history of that . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d ask the member from Wilkie and 

other members to allow the Leader of the Opposition to make 

his comments. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2660 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — There were a couple of Supreme Court 

cases, Central Canada Potash and Cigol, whose decisions 

restricted the rights of provincial governments to deal with 

resources. The restrictions didn’t apply effectively to minerals 

owned by the Crown. Where the mineral was owned by the 

Crown, the Crown could regulate its rate of production and 

even set its price. And that is the situation with respect to the 

great bulk of the mineral rights in Alberta. 

 

It was provinces like Saskatchewan where there are significant 

amounts of freehold minerals where this interpretation of the 

constitution restricted the rights of the provinces. And it was to 

deal with that situation which section 92(a) was drafted and 

passed. 

 

I can assure you that it was of great interest to our province and 

of peripheral interest to Alberta. Under those circumstances, it 

will not surprise you we took a lead in the matter. I mention 

that, not because I want to be difficult or abrasive, but just to 

recall that bit of history. 

 

I recall one other bit of history. I’m not aware of any potash 

mine which has even been expropriated by any government of 

Saskatchewan. Not yet. 

 

But I want now to deal with another little bit of history, and to 

ask the minister whether she is aware of when some of the 

potash mines came into production in this province, and are you 

aware that IMC sunk its shaft and reached its deposit in 1962? 

And I’ll stop with that question. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I appreciate the Leader of the 

Opposition’s history lesson. I’m not sure how your member 

from Saskatoon South is going to grade you, but I suspect, 

given his track record, not very well. 

 

Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’m aware. I think I went over the history 

of potash in Saskatchewan when I introduced the Bill, and that 

included IMC in 1962, and I went back even a littler further to 

the first finding of a core, which I believe was in the ’40s, in 

fact, the year that I was born and which was a good year for 

Saskatchewan. Not everyone would think so, but some would. 

 

I also, with respect to the Leader of the Opposition, have 

recognized that, in fact, the government of the day in 1982, 

yourself namely, was very instrumental in the changes that 

came to the constitution, but I also recognized and gave credit 

where I thought it was due, and that was to your counterpart at 

the time, Premier Lougheed, from the province of Alberta. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, I want to underline the comments 

the member for Swift Current in that regard . . . We worked 

very closely with Premier Lougheed, and I have no wish to 

derogate in any way from the work which he did with respect to 

amending the constitution, and particularly with respect to 

92(a). 

 

I want simply to underline what the minister has said about the 

fact that IMC came into production in 1962, and that, as she 

knows, IM came into production because of some technology 

which came to this country  

brought here by a German firm, the metal lining of shafts called 

tubbing, which was brought here by a firm called Heinel Leug 

as a matter of fact, who incorporated a Canadian company and 

retained lawyers in Regina to do that. And the lawyers were . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is this a history lesson? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, a history lesson. And the lawyers 

were Davidson Davidson and Blakeney. And it was in the years 

1959 - ’58 and ’59 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. 

 

And all I want to say, Madam Minister, is that anybody, 

particularly any minister of the Crown who alleges that these 

events of the coming of German technology and the sinking of 

the IMC shaft happened when Premier Ross Thatcher was the 

Premier, displays a woeful ignorance of the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now you wouldn’t, you’d hardly think that a minister of the 

Crown wouldn’t know when Premier Thatcher became Premier. 

But evidently we have a minister of the Crown who believes 

that Mr. Thatcher was Premier in 1962. I’m not surprised with 

respect to that, Minister, but I simply want to underline the fact 

that some of the comments made in Hansard on page 2477 

would disgrace a grade 10 student. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the member for Kindersley is desperately trying 

to introduce every subject into this debate other than potash. I 

want to talk about the Bill and some of the comments that have 

been made with respect to the potash industry, and I will tell the 

minister that any suggestion that Premier Thatcher was the 

Premier of this province in 1962 displays a level of ignorance 

on the part of the member for Melville which is even more than 

his ordinary level of ignorance, and I say that is a very high 

standard to me. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Allow the member to make 

his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Madam Minister, I want to attempt to 

summarize what you have said, and I want to attempt to do it in 

as fair a way as possible, about the background of this Bill. 

 

(2145) 

 

Madam Minister, would it be fair to say — and I’m attempting 

to do it as fairly as I can — that because of too much production 

or too little consumption, a surplus of supply arose; that this 

oversupply put pressure on the U.S. industry, and this pressure 

almost certainly led to the petition which was placed before the 

U.S. Department of Commerce; and that that is what this Bill is 

dealing with, the oversupply and possibly the effect of the 

oversupply causing pressure on the U.S. industry and the 

application of the U.S. Department of Commerce; and that is all 

the Bill deals with. Is that a fair estimate, a fair summary of 

what you said, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you for the history lesson. In 

looking at my second reading speech . . . Because I know very 

well who was Premier in 1962, who was Premier in  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2661 

 

 

1964, ’68, ’71, and on we go. In my speech, at least a copy of 

the second reading speech that I have, I don’t find that, but I 

will review Hansard, and I assure you that I would not want to 

confuse your party with the Liberal Party at that time of the day. 

However, there are times when I admit I sometimes cannot tell 

much difference. But in that particular case I did know. 

 

Yes, in response to your main question as to the interpretation 

of what I said, I have stated that the larger issue and the main 

issue is one of oversupply. I have also stated, yes, that that did 

indeed put pressure on the producers in the United States. I 

think that oversupply, you could safely say, has put pressure on 

all producers, world-wide, for the most part. And we believe 

that this Bill will in fact enable our own producers to be able to 

deal in a better manner with the anti-dumping charges. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 

Chairman, and Madam Minister, I obviously owe you an 

apology. If you thought any of those remarks were directed to 

you, I most assuredly do owe you an apology. I well understand 

that you know something about when governments changed in 

this province, and I regret that I confused the . . . may have 

given the impression that you didn’t. It was not you who were 

lacking that knowledge . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

That’s right. It is the member for Melville, and I referred to the 

page in Hansard, and for those who want to check it up . . . no, 

well . . . If Madam — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, the 

member for Meadow Lake is suggesting that the member for 

Melville was a member of the NDP at that time or the CCF, 

whatever. 

 

All I can say is that we’ve heard that story from the member for 

Melville many times. It gives a good deal of indication of the 

credibility of that story when this alleged member of the CCF 

doesn’t even know that Mr. Lloyd was the premier of the 

province in 1962. And if he is alleging, if he is alleging that he 

didn’t know that but he is a good solid CCF-er, we, I don’t 

think, we know that we put no credence in this story that he 

trots out during every speech about how he used to be a 

member of the party. I think we now know, we now know that 

he has no knowledge of the history of this province and 

couldn’t remember what party he belonged to at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I want to direct my 

attention to the member for Swift Current, because we are 

discussing some serious business. 

 

Madam Minister, my question is a serious question, and I put it 

to you this way: if, in fact, our problems arose because of 

oversupply; and if, in fact, that oversupply put pressure on the 

U.S. industry; and if, in fact, in due course that caused the 

members of the U.S. industry to petition the Department of 

Commerce, would there not have been merit in acting, in the 

way you now are, some months ago after the pressure was 

evident, but before the U.S. industry had made applications to 

the Department of Commerce? Wouldn’t it have been a good 

idea to move then to bring about the changes which you say 

will bring some markets to build in, which we all hope you’re 

right. 

 

Wouldn’t it have been a good idea to move then, rather than 

waiting for the adjudication by the Department of Commerce? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a fair question, and 

it’s been asked several times over by various people over the 

last month. And I can only tell you what I’ve told other people 

when it comes to that question, and that was that in looking at 

the industry, in talking to the industry before those preliminary 

figures came down, it was felt by the industry, and in turn by 

myself, that at that time, given their self-discipline, they had the 

capabilities of addressing this issue themselves without 

government intervention. 

 

Now you know, we had estimated and . . . on the 43 per cent 

figure as being a high that would come down on the 

preliminaries, obviously we were very far off when the high 

turned to be 85 per cent, and there was 77, and 52, and onward 

down. 

 

And given that, it became very evident very quickly that some 

of them would not be able to manage on their own. And when 

we took a look at that issue, and along with the issue of the 

productive capacity, or the oversupply, it became one of having 

to ask ourselves; do we do the intervention? Should we do it? 

 

And when you look at the industry and what it means for 

Saskatchewan, we could only conclude that, yes, we had to do 

this in order to try and maintain that industry there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, yes. Yes, Mr. Chairman, and 

Madam Minister, I know that the members will not want to 

prolong this because I don’t think we’re going to finish it 

tonight. Madam Minister, I appreciated that answer. And in 

effect you are saying that you did not want to intervene in the 

way you’re doing any sooner than the situation might require it. 

And that’s fully understandable because it is, in some sense of 

the word, Draconian legislation, and I don’t use that as a — it is 

legislation which is certainly very powerful in the powers given 

— and I’m not suggesting that it wouldn’t need to be to do the 

job; I’m not suggesting that. 

 

Is it fair, then, to say that both the size, the numbers revealed by 

the Department of Commerce adjudication and the logic came 

as something of a surprise both to the Saskatchewan industry 

and to the Government of Saskatchewan? Is that a fair 

summation of what you have said? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say that 

the industry was as surprised, or perhaps even the word “shock” 

would more ably describe everyone’s reaction to it and, in fact, 

I think it was almost incomprehensible lack of logic, not logic, 

and certainly the degree of the duties. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 p.m. 

 


