













































August 10, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 10, 1987 

 

1645 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Policy Regarding Prescription Drug Plan 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, last Thursday 

in this legislature the Premier indicated that you had finally 

gotten the message that thousands of families are being hurt, 

both emotionally and financially, by your destructive changes to 

the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. He, the Premier that 

is, at that time promised that a plan to help people deal with 

these catastrophic drug bills would be announced in a few days. 

 

My question to you today is: what form will the catastrophic 

prescription drug plan take, and will it cover 100 per cent of the 

cost of the drug, and how many people will be eligible for the 

program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of things . . . and 

first, by way of background, Mr. Speaker, just very briefly. The 

drug plan which we adopted and put into place on July 1 of this 

year was a plan modelled specifically after the plan which is in 

place, and successfully in place, in the province to our east, 

Manitoba. That plan is in place, and our plan is modelled after it 

with some improvements, with lower deductibles for seniors 

and some other people. That’s number one. 

 

Number two: in the Manitoba plan there is a program of special 

needs. I’m not sure what the term is . . . program of special 

needs which is in effect, the same special needs which are in 

effect in the plan which we put in place, in July, which deals 

with cystic fibrosis patients, renal disease, and some others. In 

our case that includes about 2,000 people who are covered; in 

their case it’s about 1,500 people who are under that special 

needs category. 

 

Beyond that, what we have been looking at, and what we have 

been watching very carefully, and the kind of - what has been 

termed “unique”, and which I will continue to call unique 

circumstances, which may come up which we may not have 

been able to foresee - what we’ll call unique circumstances. 

And we have been monitoring that from the day that it was put 

in place from July 1. Now that was the month of July and into 

about one-half for the month of August. 

 

And members will also know, and this is the reason for it, that 

we had two months. We allowed people to buy two month’s 

supply of drugs at the end of the former plan. At the end of the 

former plan we allowed them to buy two month’s supply of 

drugs for the very reason that we would have some time to look 

at this, to deal with these, what I will call, unique 

circumstances. 

 

What I will say to you, Mr. Speaker, in very specific answer to 

the question is that we are still looking and will  

be for a few days. And the Premier has said that, I know, a few 

days. And . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s fine, the 

members will deal with it in their political sense and try to find 

this example and that example and so on. 

 

What I will do, Mr. Speaker, what I will do, and what the public 

will expect us to do, is to look at this very, very carefully and 

know exactly the numbers of people and exactly the people who 

will be dealt with. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, regardless of the . . . Despite, 

notwithstanding the argument coming from the seats over there, 

people will not die as a result of this waiting - people will not 

die. This is the kind of thing that the member from Regina 

Rosemont is saying from his seat, that he’s been saying in the 

public which is . . . That’s not a legitimate comment for a 

member of the Legislative Assembly to make. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, in supplementary to the 

lengthy speech which we have just heard from the Minister of 

Health, Mr. Minister, you may have announced these cuts to the 

prescription drug plan in June, but you have had them under 

consideration since the first part of this year. Did no one 

understand the kind of life-threatening situations that these cuts 

would create? And if so, Mr. Minister, I say to you that, that’s 

appalling - absolutely appalling. 

 

But even more upsetting, my question, Mr. Speaker, even more 

upsetting would be if the minister did not understand these 

problems at that time as he is indicating in the House here 

today. I ask you, Mr. Minister, were you ignorant of the 

problems that you were creating, or were you determined to try 

to push through these changes regardless of the kind of hurt that 

they would create the people in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it’s true that we looked at 

this plan for some time prior to the implementation of the plan. 

That’s true. And that’s as it should be - to look at just what will 

be the case and how will it affect the public in this province. 

That’s the case. 

 

We chose the Manitoba model and looked at it carefully. What 

are the problems in Manitoba? was the question we asked in the 

broadest sense. What are the problems there? Because the 

member uses terms like “life-threatening circumstance” and so 

on. I hear him using that kind of terms. I heard a couple of his 

colleagues use, specific examples, life-threatening 

circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the communities of Winnipeg and Brandon and 

Minnedosa, and whatever communities you want, will have the 

same kinds of circumstance and the same kind of demographics 

as what we have in the province of Saskatchewan. And the 

papers in Manitoba are not filled . . . In fact, the papers in 

Manitoba have no examples of cases where people say the 

Manitoba drug plan is causing life-threatening circumstances. 

That’s the case, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1646 

 

What I’m saying here, Mr. Speaker, if there are - if there are, in 

fact, difficult circumstances, what the member calls life 

threatening . . . Some of the ones that they have trotted out into 

this legislature, and had some of their people trot out into the 

media and so on, have been about as much as $16 a month 

increase in cost, that kind of number. That is not life 

threatening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will say that we will continue to look at it, and are 

continuing to look at it. No one will have a life-threatening 

circumstance as a result of this drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker. We are 

concerned about the life-threatening situations here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. It seems that you are not 

concerned, because in your recent publication in a Conservative 

newspaper called ViewPoint, you say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, in regard to the drug plan: “In revising the plan 

we are protecting the most in need.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He said new question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Was that a new question? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, it was. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m sorry, I missed that. That’s fine. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — You said in your publication to 

Conservative members, and whoever else gets this, Mr. 

Speaker, that in revising the plan we are protecting the most in 

need. 

 

I want to give you an example of some of those people you are 

protecting who are the most in need. Weeks ago a family from 

Esterhazy, and this is weeks ago, wrote to the Premier and 

yourself about a need to spend $6,000 a year to buy medication 

for their young son under your new plan. In late June, a Regina 

woman wrote to you to show that her monthly medication will 

now cost more than her entire monthly income. And quite some 

time ago . . . Finally, in my third example, you were made 

aware of the case of a Saskatoon man, Ross Reaney, who has 

decided to stop taking medication for a number of serious 

health problems, because to spend up to $600 a month for his 

medication will leave his family without food or shelter. 

 

When are you going to give these people and thousands more 

like them some answers, Mr. Minister? It’s not good enough to 

say, sometime in the future. They don’t want phone calls from 

your aides or letters saying, we’re working on a policy. They 

need those answers now because they are being had pressed, 

and they indeed are in threatening situations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the quotation the member 

uses where I have said, “And in development of this plan that 

we’ve talked about, those most in need would be covered,” - 

that’s the case. Those in special  

care homes, they’re covered under the plan as it existed before 

July 1. People on welfare, those most in need in this province, 

are covered as they were prior to July 1 implementation of this 

new plan. 

 

As I outlined a few moments ago, those in need, as it relates to 

very specific and horrendous costs - cystic fibrosis drugs and 

some of those, diabetes, renal disease and some of those - those 

are covered as they were prior to the implementation of this 

drug plan. That’s the case. 

 

The member talks about specific examples. Those specific 

examples will come forward. And those are the kinds of 

examples that we wanted to come forward because if there are 

those kinds of examples . . . I do not agree that in every case 

that has been brought forward by the opposition opposite, for 

whatever their purposes, are in fact unique cases. Some may be. 

That’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what I’m saying is that we will develop this thing. You 

must admit, Mr. Speaker, and all members in honesty must 

admit, this program’s been in place for one and one-half 

months. It’s a program which is based on a program which has 

been successful and continues to be successful in a very similar 

province, next door to us to the east, and that’s the program we 

have. And then they lay out numbers, Mr. Speaker, like 

whatever number it may be - $2,000 a year, whatever number it 

is - that are onerous. That, Mr. Speaker, is an unfair number to 

bring forward because the amount of numbers . . . the amount of 

an annual cost that they bring forward, they lay it out, but they 

do not . . . they neglect to suggest that there is a rebate coming 

back. A rebate of 80 per cent of the cost to the individual is 

going back to them, and it’s rotating on a monthly basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, most people in Saskatchewan do not live on cabinet 

ministers’ salaries, and cannot afford $600 a month up front. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — That may be okay for you; but it is not 

okay for the senior citizen living on a pension in this province. 

 

Most Saskatchewan people have said to you, Mr. Minister, that 

they disagree vehemently with the priorities which you have 

set. And the last thing I say that any government should do is 

cut, to pay for its deficit, health programs that are essential to 

the health and well-being of any citizen in this province. 

 

You knew that, Mr. Minister, when you put together your 

budget and your programs. You knew that there would be 

catastrophic problems created. You tried to get away with it, 

hoping that it would pass by without having to do something 

about it. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, why have you subjected thousands of 

Saskatchewan people to these long weeks of fear and hurt, and 

continue to do so without clarifying  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1647 

 

what your new policy is going to be? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, we just heard an example. 

The member says, thousands of Saskatchewan people in, to use 

his terms, catastrophic problems. Several days ago his House 

leader used “tens of people” in the province, tens of people in 

the province are in the circumstances that he would call unique 

and difficult circumstances. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, and I will say this, if there are those kinds of 

circumstances, let’s know exactly what they are so that as we 

set this down . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s true. let’s 

set them down. That makes eminent sense. It makes eminent 

sense to any thinking person and to the public at large in this 

province. There’s no question that that’s true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the examples and the rhetoric that comes forward 

from members opposite and, in this case, the member from 

Regina North East, talking about “catastrophic,” and of 

“thousands of people” in this kind of circumstance, is not 

legitimate rhetoric for a member of the Legislative Assembly, 

unless he’s try to scare the population at large. And I submit 

that’s what he’s trying to do, is scare the population at large. 

And that’s not a legitimate activity for him to engage in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister has indicated that he has patterned this program after 

Manitoba. He well knows that Manitoba has two separate plans 

to supplement the regular drug plan - Pharmacare and one other. 

He did not announce either of those when he announced his 

program, effective July 1. 

 

Will he at least announce that, effective today, the programs 

that exist in Manitoba will exist in Saskatchewan? That would 

be a far cry from what we had before. But will he go at least 

that far and announce that, effective today, the rules will be the 

same? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The special circumstances, or the 

special plans, as the Leader of the Opposition lays out or 

suggests, that exist in Manitoba, one, is for welfare people. 

That’s in place in Saskatchewan. One. Okay. 

 

The second one is the one that I outlined earlier, and that is the 

special circumstance plan which deals with cystic fibrosis and 

some of those diseases. Now as far as my information goes, that 

is the case. That is the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one other circumstance which exists in 

Manitoba. There is one other circumstance which exists in 

Manitoba, and that is a plan whereby they say to people, 

nothing will change in terms of what you are required to pay up 

front, or in terms of your deductible, but what will change is 

that you can apply to us for a special envelope of a different 

colour that you can send out, and then we’ll send in the 

different coloured envelope to ensure a faster turn-around. 

Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba the turn-around time is about eight 

weeks. Okay? And they ensure to these people who have the 

special coloured envelope that it’s about four weeks. And our 

turn-around time has been about 20 days. Now that’s not to say 

that it will be maintained there for ever, but we gave the 

commitment and continue to strive to make sure that that 

turn-around follows under the 30 days so that people can deal 

with the revolving nature of the rebate for next month’s drugs 

and so on and so on. 

 

Medical Deterrent Fees 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s to the Minister of 

Health, and Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are concerned 

when Tories start talking about improving medicare. And what 

I’m wondering is whether the minister has in his mind the kind 

of changes proposed by the PC Premier of Alberta. 

 

As you know, Premier Getty plans to lobby Ottawa to change 

the Canada Health Act in order to make sure that doctors can 

charge deterrent fees on office visits. And the Alberta Hospital 

Minister says, and I quote: 

 

One of the concepts we’ve been looking at for some time 

now is the ability to charge the patient a flat fee . . . A 

$5-fee or something like that would be a great deterrent. 

 

That’s the Alberta hospitals minister, Mr. Speaker. He goes on 

to say that: 

 

. . . an alternative to deterrent fees is the deinsurance of 

some medical services. 

 

And which of these options, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of 

Health looking at - deterrent fees or deinsurance of medical 

services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, when this administration 

in Saskatchewan, when this administration decides to look at 

what is being done in another province, any of our sister 

provinces, and chooses to adopt something that is in place in 

another province, we will be very forthright and will say so, as 

is the case in the drug plan, for example, that we’ve just been 

talking about. We chose to go with a system that was in place in 

Manitoba and have been very forthright in saying so. 

 

As it relates to the comments that the member is attributing to 

the Premier of Alberta, and then I believe some subsequent 

comments to the Minister of Hospitals in Alberta, I have not . . . 

I don’t adhere to those kinds of plans, if those in fact are the 

plans that they have. She says . . . the Premier in Alberta has 

suggested the abolishment of the Canada Health Act. I will say 

to the hon. member it was this government, this Conservative 

government in Saskatchewan, which banned extra billing in 

Saskatchewan, not those guys who now sit over there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1648 

 

Ms. Simard: — A new question to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have trouble 

believing this minister’s statements when in a government 

statement, when it comes to medicare. They’ve been misled too 

many times before. And I’m asking the minister if we recalls 

ads in the Meadow Lake Progress, his own constituency. And 

these campaign ads and promises, and I quote, say that, “There 

will be no fees in the medicare system in any way, shape or 

form.” It goes on to say, “The present fees on the drug plan will 

be removed.” 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, they have undermined the best 

prescription drug plan in North America and created hardships 

for many people in Saskatchewan. And I’m asking the minister, 

is it any wonder Saskatchewan families can’t believe him now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, in the plans which we 

have brought forward, and in the drug plan which we 

implement. And I have said this on many occasions, in the drug 

plan which we have implemented, which we picked up from the 

province of Manitoba, it was to address a very specific and very 

. . . and a circumstance which should be concerning to all 

members of the legislature and to all citizens of the province. 

 

The fact that the cost of the drug plan - the protection drug plan 

that needs to be in place in this province - was reaching the 

$100 million mark in an annual basis - $100 million, Mr. 

Speaker. In this jurisdiction, in this jurisdiction, we . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, this jurisdiction, this 

government, that government, whoever it would be on this side 

of the House, over a long period of time with a trend-line going 

like that, could not afford the kind of drug plan that was in 

place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the drug plan that we have put in place is one 

there to protect the people, and it is the most generous drug plan 

that exists in this country today. It’s the most generous drug 

plan that exists in Canada today, and no one, even those people 

with the rhetoric that they choose to bring forward here, can 

dispute that fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Possible Changes to Saskatchewan Assistance Plan 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is for the Minister of Social Services. We already 

know, Mr. Speaker, that cabinet recommended, and the minister 

approves of the imposition of deterrent fees on the legal aid 

system in Saskatchewan, and that move is typical of how this 

government is fighting its deficit on the backs of the least 

fortunate members of our Saskatchewan society. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, to that assault upon Saskatchewan 

poor people, will the minister now confirm that he is also about 

to impose or increase user fees in other areas within his 

jurisdiction; that he is about to slash the Saskatchewan 

assistance plan by some $30 million over two years; and at the 

same time, that his budget is actually being increased for 

administrative costs  

related to the property management corporation, the early 

retirement scheme, and severance pay for those his department 

has fired. Will the minister confirm that all of that is now in the 

works? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite and I were classmates, and when we were classmates 

he was more accurate in the things that he said and the 

information that he gave in law school. And certainly I wish to 

point out, Mr. Speaker, to the independent member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, that cabinet did not recommend fees in 

legal aid, that legal aid proposed these as a possibility. Cabinet 

has not rejected them. I’m not sure we could reject them or 

impose them, but we have not rejected them. And we will see 

how it works and whether they are reasonable. 

 

I do admit that there have been some management resignations 

in my department, and we are trying to improve the department 

with new people who have a new outlook. And we expect that 

we will continue with welfare reform. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, specifically to the same 

minister. I am not now referring to the legal aid issue, but other 

issues within the minister’s jurisdiction for Social Services. 

 

Will the minister weigh his words very carefully and confirm 

now to this legislature: that he is about to impose user fees in 

other areas within his jurisdiction other than in the case of legal 

aid; that he is about to slash the Saskatchewan assistance plan 

by something in the order of $30 million over two years; and 

that his budget is increasing on the administrative side for the 

property management corporation, the early retirement scheme, 

and the severance pay for fired employees in his department. 

Will the minister candidly admit that those things are now in the 

works in his department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, most of those 

matters will be covered in the estimates of my department. I did 

indicate that we are considering further welfare reform, and 

we’ll make announcements as we proceed. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister at least confirm 

that instructions to his department, to the effect that I have just 

described in this House, were in fact delivered by means of a 

memorandum dated June 29, from the secretary of the treasury 

board, addressed to the minister’s deputy minister? Will the 

minister confirm the existence of that instruction? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I really don’t know which instruction he 

is referring to with respect to a private government document. Is 

he going to table it? I would consider the matter. 

 

Excess Space in Government Offices 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible to the property management corporation. On 

August 5, Mr. Minister, you offered, as an excuse for your 

incompetence in leasing space at $12,000 a month for three 

employees, you offered the  



 

August 10, 1987 

1649 

 

following excuse: 

 

. . . it seems logical to me that when we were down-sizing 

government . . . there would be some excess space. 

 

Here is the important words: 

 

There is excess space in places other than the credit union 

building. 

 

The question, Mr. Minister, is how much excess space? How 

much is your incompetence costing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina North 

asked a question a few days ago about the lease to the Credit 

Union Central. I’d be more than pleased to provide that 

information to the Assembly today in regard to the answer of 

the question of the member from Regina Centre. 

 

We do have a lease with Credit Union Central, one that has 

been in place, as the Leader of the Opposition would know, 

since 1976, renewed again in 1981 and 1984. It’s for 880 square 

metres of office space, and it runs to November 30, 1990. 

 

We’re presently in negotiation with Credit Union Central, who 

feel they could use the space - it’s good space - and seeing if we 

can end that contract. If not, we will probably bring some 

organs of government into the area. 

 

The reason that we have not vacated the space in entirety . . . 

The member mentioned something about three employees, and 

that is correct. Those are people who work in what was in the 

Co-op computers, and of course we have not been able at this 

time to relocate the computers into the new space. 

 

We will have vacant space, as do all governments across this 

country. basically the Government of Saskatchewan in the last 

few years has been running at about a rate of 4 per cent 

vacancy. And if you consider the amount of space that is leased 

and owned by this government, I think that’s a very admirable 

situation. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Report on Review of Social Assistance Files 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I rise today to report to the House on the review of 508 social 

assistance files following the June postal strike. 

 

And as the members are aware, that in the month of June 

Canada Post held rotating strikes throughout the province. And 

rather than jeopardize the necessary delivery of cheques to 

recipients of social services, we arranged clients to pick up 

cheques in major centres. All those clients capable of picking 

up their cheque were asked to pick up their cheque. People who 

were handicapped had home delivery, but could make other 

arrangements to have friends pick up their cheques for  

them. 

 

With respect to the cheque pick-up process, because we had 

never done this before, there was a bit of a line-up and, should 

this happen in the future, we will try to organize it so that there 

will be shorter line-ups. But in any event, this first process 

turned out some interesting statistics: 590 clients (that’s not 

individual people, but client cases) did not appear to pick up 

their cheque. Of those 590, 88 were located and did not 

understand the procedure and we found that their cheques were 

in order and they picked them up later. That left 508 cheques 

totalling $203,721.75 not picked up for unknown reasons. 

Thereafter my department immediately began a review of those 

files and tried to contact the people involved. They were able to 

contact 286 out of the 508 people, and the following is a list of 

the circumstances in the 508 cases. 

 

First category is that 36 people were not aware of the pick-up 

procedure. They were entitled to their cheques and they 

received their cheques. Thirty-seven people had a change in 

circumstances, and their benefits were recalculated. Eighty-two 

people had their assistance cancelled due to employment or 

other types of income that we were not aware of. Sixty-seven 

people had their assistance cancelled due to ineligibility for 

other reasons. Of those 67, 31 had moved back home or out of 

the province or back to the Indian reserve; 15 had a change in 

marital status; seven were found to be in jail; eight had other 

non-incomes or non-employment incomes such as, they had 

now qualified for a pension or old age security or something of 

that nature; three were now receiving child support; and three 

were in an alcohol or a drug treatment centre. 

 

The next category, there were 81 clients who were not at their 

addresses. Their whereabouts are unknown, and we cancelled 

their cheques because we couldn’t find them. And then there 

were 205 clients who couldn’t be found at all; we don’t know if 

they exist or not. But we cancelled those cheques for the 205 

people because we could not find them in any way whatsoever. 

 

In total then, my department has cancelled 435 cheques out of 

the 508. We will try to continue to locate the 286 people for 

whom we can find no address or no knowledge of them, and if 

we do locate any of them, we will try to ascertain as to their 

circumstances. But so far we have been unsuccessful. If 

evidence of fraud is discovered in these investigations, we will 

turn the matter over to the RCMP or city police for further 

action. 

 

It should be remembered, Mr. Speaker, that of the people 

surveyed, only 2 per cent were unaccounted for or were 

cancelled on welfare. So the great majority of people are in 

need and are giving us accurate information. I wouldn’t want 

this to reflect on all people who collect welfare cheques, but I 

wanted to report to the House on those that could not be found. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I find your last statement to be the 

most intriguing of what you said today. It would seem to me 

that as you’ve dealt with this particular set of circumstances and 

many others, Mr. Minister, that you have done as many things 

as you possibly could to cast  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1650 

 

aspersions on the honesty of Saskatchewan people in need. 

 

Now you and I both know that on any given point in time it is 

really quite an amazing set of circumstances that there was less 

than 1 per cent of those cheques that were picked up. You 

know, Mr. Minister, that simply as a matter of course at any 

point in time, as people are moving out of the province, either 

because they’re not able to find employment here, or they’re 

moving in order to gain employment, that there will always be a 

roll-over of social assistance case-loads, Mr. Speaker. And so 

it’s not surprising at all that there will be some cheques that are 

not picked up. 

 

I suppose it’s really, if anything, a mark in favour of the 

honesty of Saskatchewan people and the integrity of 

Saskatchewan people in need, that the number would be as 

small as it is, because you readily admit, Mr. Minister, that 

there is less than 1 per cent of the case-load that did not pick up 

their cheques. 

 

And I find it interesting as well, when you attempt to imply in 

this House, to cast aspersions on Saskatchewan people in need, 

Mr. Minister, when you drag out the figures that there are 67 

people you discovered who were ineligible. That represents less 

than one-quarter of 1 per cent of the entire case-load. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Minister, compared to a lot of other 

programs that are put forth by this government, financial 

assistance in programs, not the least of which is the home 

improvement program, that you would be hard pressed to find 

anywhere a set of circumstances in which there was less than 

one-quarter of 1 per cent potential abuse of those income 

subsidy kinds of programs, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I would . . . And I point out as well that as you even draw 

on that minuscule amount, that by your own words some of 

those people were ineligible because they’re now participating 

in drug treatment or other kinds of similar programs. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think the Saskatchewan people have come to 

know you, not as a person in that cabinet opposite who defends 

the needs of Saskatchewan people in need. And I think it is 

appalling it’s in Saskatchewan today that the person who should 

most be defending the needs of Saskatchewan people, people 

who are suffering, is the one who is leading the attack, either 

directly or indirectly. And I personally, quite frankly, Mr. 

Minister, find your statement today appalling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 29 - An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I move first reading of a Bill to amend 

The Legal Profession Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

wish to raise a point of order with respect to the answer given in 

this Assembly by the minister in charge of the property 

improvement corporation. And I would invite Mr. Speaker to 

check the record in today and on August 5. 

 

On August 5 the minister got burnt by a question from the 

member from Regina North and has presumably been smarting 

about it ever since. Today when I asked a question, he did not 

direct himself to my question but he stood up and said: I was 

asked a question by the member from Regina North a few days 

ago; I want to respond to that question. And he did. He made no 

pretence at answering my question. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, there is some necessity for them to make 

some pretence to answer the questions. And I ask you to invite 

. . . to check the record and give us a ruling on this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thank the hon. member from Regina. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the hon. member 

is smarting from an inability to ask intelligence questions. And I 

just wonder, Mr. Speaker, if you would undertake to take a look 

at the rules of this Assembly to determine which would be a 

proper forum for the question asked by the hon. member, 

whether it be question period, which I thought was originally 

established to deal with pressing and urgent matters of pressing 

public importance, as opposed to estimates questions which are 

of a very technical, detailed nature, Mr. Speaker. The hon. 

member has abused that in the past and I would like, Mr. 

Speaker, to perhaps bring to the House his attention in the 

future, of the rules with regard to that type of question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thank the hon. member for Regina Centre 

for bringing that point of order to my attention. I will certainly 

review the record, and if the member in question has not in his 

answer dealt with the question as asked, we will certainly rule 

on it. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENT 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, and in 

response to a request made by the Minister of Social Services, I 

would like to take this opportunity to table the document that I 

referred to during the question period. It is dated June 29, 1987. 

It is from the secretary of the treasury board. It is addressed to 

the deputy minister of the Department of Social Services, and it 

is regarding treasury board minute number 1229, 1987-88 

budget. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1651 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

today to rise and move second reading of a Bill to amend The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Superannuation Act. When 

the 1986 annual report of SaskTel was tabled in this House on 

June 26, it proved once again that this Crown corporation 

continues to operate profitably in an environment of constant 

change, with new technology, increased consumer demands, 

and now the threat of increased competition on the horizon. 

 

This corporation needs to be able to respond to all of these 

elements affecting its operation, and its track record is 

exceptional. In the immediate future, the pressure from all of 

these elements will increase dramatically. Last year, SaskTel 

implemented a corporate effectiveness program. It is a bold 

program designed to place customer service and satisfaction at 

the top of SaskTel’s priorities. It put the onus on improvement 

and maintenance of customer satisfaction directly on the 

shoulders of the managers. 

 

Shifting of personnel to positions more suitable to their 

experience and capabilities has taken place, and more 

reassignments will occur in coming months. The aim of 

SaskTel is to become more responsive to customer demands 

and to adapt more readily to a changing economic and technical 

environment. 

 

Under section 10 of The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Superannuation Act, retirement eligible is restricted to persons 

older than 55 years. This means that employees below the age 

of 55 years cannot be considered for retirement, even though 

they may have had rather lengthy careers with the corporation. 

 

The proposal is quite similar to the present section 10 of The 

SaskTel Superannuation Act which has been in force since 

1972. The only major difference is that there will be no age 

restriction, and the required period of service will be extended 

to 15 years from the present 10 years. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, we seek an amendment to The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Superannuation Act which 

will allow SaskTel to offer early retirement to an employee with 

a minimum of 15 years continuous service. This action would 

give due recognition to the services rendered to the company. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Unless members on this side of the Assembly receive some 

assurances that I don’t think were present in the minister’s 

speech, it may be some time before this Bill gets second 

reading. 

 

I want, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind members of the 

Assembly the wording of this Bill. It borders on the bizarre. It 

says, the new section 10 says: 

 

Where the corporation is of the opinion that an employee 

is not able to meet the requirements of his employment 

and the employee has served for at least 15 years 

continuously . . . the employee may be retired at the option 

of the corporation . . . 

 

And then the rest does not add or subtract to that. 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing in this Bill which 

says anything about voluntary retirement. The clear wording of 

this Bill makes it . . . While the Minister of Justice is shaking 

his head, the former minister of Justice is shaking his head . . . I 

would have thought that if this government had meant that you 

only wanted to offer people retirement who voluntarily accepted 

it, you could have drafted a Bill to that effect. But you haven’t. 

 

The Bill which you have drafted, Mr. Minister, gives the 

corporation the option to retire anyone where they are of the 

opinion that they’re not able to meet the requirements of the 

job. And there’s nothing in this legislation which even spells 

out requirements. 

 

It’s worth while . . . It’s worth while, Mr. Speaker, to refer 

members to the former section. The former section stated, 

SaskTel may retire an employee “not physically or otherwise 

qualified for his employment” if the employee is 55 years of 

age or older. 

 

The section does not give the . . . the former section did not give 

the corporation an unlimited discretion to retire employees, 

which is what this Bill does. And if the minister who is 

objecting so loudly from his seat means what he says, then 

presumably we’ll see some amendments. 

 

But as this Bill is drafted now, this Bill gives the corporation 

the right to retire any employee where they are of the opinion 

that the employee doesn’t meet the requirements of the 

corporation. And given the history of labour-management 

relations with this government, the sorry history of labour-

management relations, employees are justly concerned about 

how the corporation is going to use this section. 

 

It doesn’t strain the language of this section at all, it doesn’t 

strain it at all, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that this government 

could decide that, because an employee is particularly active in 

union activities, that he or she does not meet the requirements 

of the corporation and is therefore going to be retired. I say to 

the minister that this section gives you an unbridled discretion 

to retire employees for virtually any reason at all if you’re of the 

opinion they don’t meet the requirements of the corporation. 

 

(1445) 

 

And I point out, Mr. Speaker, that it is the government and not 

the courts that determine what the requirements of the 

corporation are. Because the language says: “Where the 

corporation is of the opinion . . .” The former section had no 

such discretion in it. The former section said they may retire 

employees not physically or otherwise qualified for their 

employment. It gave the courts, who might rule on such a 

dismissal, some kind of an objective standing. There’s no such 

objective standing in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It says, where the 

corporation is of the opinion that an employee is not able to 

meet the requirements of the corporation, and the employee has 

served 15 years, the employee may be retired at the option of 

the corporation - a broad discretion written into that, Mr. 

Minister. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1652 

 

I thought when I first read it that it was drafting error. I didn’t 

think, Mr. Speaker, that any government would take upon itself 

the right, as they do, to negate employees’ rights otherwise 

given to them by law. And I didn’t think the government would 

take upon itself the right to negate contractual rights that they 

may have bargained in a collective agreement. However, when I 

read the explanatory notes, it was clear that the government did 

intend to give itself a very broad discretion. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, that unless there are some assurances 

given to members of this Assembly with respect to the intent of 

the legislation, and unless the wording is cleaned up, it’s going 

to be a while before second reading is given on this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, and other members of the opposition, have 

received a large number of calls from employees of the 

corporation who are concerned when they ask us, as is a fair 

question given the history of labour-management relations over 

the last year, what is the worst interpretation which could 

reasonably be put on the language - it’s horrendous. It means 

the employees who have served for more than 15 years have no 

rights at all. That’s the effect of what you’re doing. 

 

If you want employees to ask themselves what’s the best 

interpretation that could be put on the language, you better start 

treating those employees a little differently than you have over 

the last year. They have been asking, as I think they have every 

right to ask, what is the worst interpretation which the language 

of that section will reasonably bear. And I tell them it’s 

horrendous. When you’ve served there for 15 years, you’ve not 

rights at all in the corporation. That’s the practical effect of the 

wording that you’ve brought forward. 

 

Now the minister mumbled in, I think, a few ill-drafted 

sentences, what he thought the legislation was going to say. I 

want to, Mr. Speaker, have an opportunity consider those 

remarks, however brief - and they were very brief. I want to 

have an opportunity to consider those remarks before finalizing 

my comments on this Bill. And I therefore beg leave to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, when we adjourned debate 

on these estimates last week we were just pursuing the items 

related to the teachers’ superannuation fund, and I have some 

questions to follow up on the questions that were asked 

regarding the teachers’ superannuation fund. 

 

I’ve been making an assumption, Mr. Minister, regarding the 

funding of the teachers’ superannuation fund, and I’ve been 

using the figure 7 per cent on an assumption. And I  

wanted to ask for clarification on the authority, what is the 

authority on which you are basing that the minimum 

requirement of putting moneys interested . . . interest, what is 

the authority on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, section 14(1) of the 

Teachers’ Superannuation Act, provides for the establishment 

of a . . . that interest shall be paid. And as I understand it, the 

historical context there was a mutual agreement at the time. 

And the further section of the Act speaks to interest rate 

provisions, and that’s under section 55(1) where it talks about 

refunds. And the number there used on Page 6097, III, says 7 

per cent per annum, compounded annually, on and after July 1, 

1980. 

 

And so what I’m saying here, there’s really a couple of sections 

that speak to it, and part of what was put in place here was 

based on a mutual agreement: (a) that their 14(1) talks about the 

establishment of an interest - that interest shall be paid. There 

was mutual agreement at the time, and just as the fund - if this 

money was being taken out of the fund what rate would a 

teacher expect on it? It was established at 7 per cent, and that’s 

the basis on which we’ve arrived at the 7 per cent. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I’d like to ask the minister if this mutual 

agreement that he refers to - has he got any record of it either in 

the minutes of a meeting or anything in writing on that mutual 

agreement, and also as to the date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s part of the bargaining and, as a 

result, part of the collective bargaining agreement. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, if you’re saying that it’s 

written into the collective bargaining agreement, I’m wondering 

if we could - just to save time or go on to some other question - 

but I’d like to have a copy of that portion of the agreement to 

peruse during the questions. 

 

Clearly, what the minister has said here is that then it’s section 

14(1) that provides the authority, along with section 55, for the 

interpretation. I’ll look at this a little further in a couple of 

minutes, but I would like to ask a couple of questions - 

additional questions for clarification. 

 

When we were dealing with the amounts of money that were 

contributed to this fund from the interest bearing account. There 

is some confusion from rereading the Hansard as to what 

exactly the amount was. The minister indicated, and I believe 

this is recorded in Hansard, as the amount being, the 7 per cent 

being equivalent to $25 million. Now then there is some 

statement in there as well, and I would like this clarified, but 

then he said, “That’s a 1985 figure.” 

 

The year that we’re dealing with is the ‘85-86 year, the total 

amount of the fund there is actually 472 million, now, which is 

44 . . . which is, if you take 7 per cent of that, you certainly 

don’t get 25 million. 

 

And so I want to ask the question again, for clarification 

purposes, just where did he get the 25 million that he put in, 

when actually we should be looking at something closer to 30 

million? 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1653 

 

There is reference here also in the annual report under . . . on 

page 44, which talks about the minimum fund balance being 

determined as 428 million. Now if you take 7 per cent of that 

figure, you get 30 million. But the teachers’ superannuation 

fund balance at the beginning of the year is $472 million. It’s 

quite confusing, so we would . . . my understanding would be, 

Mr. Minister, that the figure that we should be using is the 

figure - the fund balance at the beginning of the year - right 

here, $472,877,750. Why are we using instead the figure $428 

million, which is the minimum fund balance, and secondly, 

would you be prepared to correct the figure of 25 million 

because that certainly can’t be accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, 

it’s the previous year’s fund balance that is used. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Why is that minimum fund balance that is 

used? What is the authority for using that particular minimum 

fund balance when that is not the minimum fund balance? Why 

come up with that kind of formula? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well that has been the practice for 

many years, and I suspect that it’s because at the end of June 30 

of any given year we know that that’s what is in the bank, so to 

speak. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — See here is the problem, Mr. minister. When 

we look at section 14(1), which is a statute under which this 

particular superannuation fund is set, and section 14(1), and I 

will have to read it so that we can interpret very carefully, and 

for the record. It says: 

 

The Teachers’ Superannuation Fund shall at all times at 

least equal the sum of: 

 

(a) contributions made to the fund by or on behalf of 

teachers who have not retired, together with interest 

thereon; 

 

(b) contributions made to the fund by the Minister of 

Finance; and 

 

(c) the teachers’ voluntary contributions, together with 

interest thereon. 

 

Now, we’re taking interest from one amount of money and 

adding it to a different total. And we’re taking figures out of 

one fund . . . you’ve been giving me figures from one fund to 

make up a $25 million fund, or a 7 per cent, but then the Act 

clearly indicates something totally different. I question, Mr. 

Minister, whether this Act is actually - whether section 14(1) is 

actually being followed. 

 

My question is, Mr. Minister, as I want assurances that this . . . 

I’m asking why is not this particular section 14(1) actually 

being followed? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We’re acting in accordance with the 

Act, Mr. Chairman. As I mentioned, there are the two sections 

here that are relevant: 14(1) and then, section 55(1)(b), part 3 

particularly. I don’t know what more I can say about it. I think 

if the hon. member is looking for  

something that isn’t there, some bogy man that isn’t there, we’d 

probably be a long time looking for it because we are not, for 

the most part, charting a different practice than has been the 

practice in the past here. We’ve been meeting - and then some - 

our minimum expectations under statute and under regulation. I 

don’t know particularly what the hon. member is looking for. 

Maybe he could come to the point of the questioning, and I can 

try and satisfy him. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, the difficulty here that we 

are trying to establish is the legal authority, and the basis under 

which the present method of calculating the teachers’ 

superannuation fund, and the method that the Minister of 

Finance is using to make contributions to the teachers’ 

superannuation fund, and I’m trying to establish a legal 

authority for it. Now, the minister referred to section 55(1) as 

being part of the authority. Quite clearly, and if you read section 

55(1) and interpret it, that deals specifically with refunds of 

contributions to teachers. It does not deal with establishing the 

fund or how the fund is to be made up; it deals with nothing but 

refunds of contributions. I don’t know how you can begin to 

take a 7 per cent out of that particular clause - out of section 

55(1) - and try to base your rationale for make up of the fund on 

it, when section 14(1), along with, I believe, section 18, are the 

ones that talk and refer to how the fund is supposed to be 

established. 

 

Now when the minister refers to precedents, I think the other 

thing that has to happen here is we have to look at the 

precedents in detail. It was in 1980 - and I want to correct my 

figure of the previous day that I used, 1978 - that the new 

superannuation fund was also put into place. 

 

The problem, Mr. Minister, is that when this government last 

year, under last year’s ministry, made a new decision and all of 

a sudden we start hearing about, well we only have to put in 7 

per cent. I’m wondering where this all originated and how the 

policy all of a sudden seemed to have changed. I wanted to 

know the authority, and that’s why I asked for the copy of the 

teacher . . . collective agreement, to see if it’s actually written 

into that, or did you just snap the 7 per cent from section 55, 

which to me just does not make sense. And I can’t see how you 

can possibly interpret section 55 as the authority for a method 

of building up the fund. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just to walk the hon. member, Mr. 

Chairman, through the history here again. As I said, section 14 

established that we would match the contributions and there 

would be provision for interest, although the exact interest rate 

was not defined as the hon. member has correctly pointed out. I 

said then that there was . . . It was mutually agreed to, and the 

basis for that mutual agreement, so far as what interest rate 

should be, had its basis in section 55 where it talks about 7 per 

cent. But to turn it around another way for you and try and walk 

you through all of this: section 14 establishes that there shall be 

an interest payment and that contributions shall be matched, 

interest rate not defined. 

 

So then the issue becomes one of what I think the hon. member 

is asking, is what should the level be, and he’s  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1654 

 

questioning the basis for 7 per cent. Well the fact of the matter 

was is if a teacher was taking some money out of the fund, what 

rate, that is to say a refund if a refund was due, what was the 

rate, the interest rate? I mean, if you had a refund being made at 

7 per cent, then it seemed to make sense that would . . . bears 

some relationship to the interest that would accrue if the money 

was left in the fund. And that was spoken to in section 55. So 

they went to the bargaining table with that, and that 7 per cent 

was mutually agreed to. 

 

The essential . . . The basis here that you must accept is this, 

that if the legislation spoke to a refund and said, if we have to 

pay you out, Madam or Mr. Teacher, after a certain date in 1980 

the rate shall be 7 per cent, then the quid pro quo, it seems to 

me, is that if you had left the money in, you would make 7 per 

cent. I don’t think they’d want to be penalized for drawing it out 

or for leaving it in. 

 

But further than that, further than that the administrators of the 

day went to the bargaining table and said, this is the basis . . . 

section 14(1) didn’t speak to it, but indirectly it speaks to it in 

section 55. And what would you think about, for example, 7 per 

cent from 1980 on? And it was bargained in good faith and 

mutually agreed to. 

 

Now it seems to me a reasonable enough and straightforward 

enough process, and that’s the historical context if you like. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well if it was mutually agreed to, then there 

should be no problem in providing substantiation of that 

particular report in question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, in 

so far as the documentation or further documentation of what 

you’re asking for, I’ll endeavour to provide it just as soon as we 

can. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Now when it comes to the calculation of the 

fund . . . of pay-outs of the refund, there is no problem with that 

and I don’t think any teacher, or neither any member of the 

superannuation commission, or anybody that I’ve heard of has 

any difficulty with that, with section 55, according to the 

pay-outs. 

 

The difficulty here is the interpretation of 14(1). And you’ve 

talked about some way of establishing the interest rate. When I 

read this section 14(1)(a) it says: 

 

. . . contribution made to the fund by or on behalf of 

teacher who have not retired, together with interest 

thereon. 

 

It doesn’t say, together with a portion of the interest thereon - 

“together with the interest thereon.” Now if that was yielding in 

the vicinity of 18 per cent last year, then my interpretation 

would be, and the year previous something very similar to that, 

that that is the interest that should be put into the fund. And I 

ask you: how can you interpret that any other way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I think 

if you’re having any difficulty with the legislation that the 

former NDP administration put in place in so far as your 

interpretation of it or not, the reality is, when it  

comes to the setting of this interest rate, the basis is for it as I 

described earlier, that it’s been based on now a well established 

precedent and a practice that was accepted and mutually agreed 

to. And if you want to try and rewrite history and somehow 

suggest that what’s been mutually agreed to along the way and 

a practice that’s been used, and in fact if you want to criticize 

legislation that was put in place here by your own party, feel 

free to do so. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the problem is not 

with the legislation at all. It’s what’s happening to the 

legislation over the last couple of years. But I will await the 

arrival of the package, of the bargaining package, and then will 

come back to this. 

 

I want to ask another couple of questions regarding the fund, for 

clarification purposes. The minister mentioned that you took 7 

per cent of the minimum balance of the fund. And he said that 

that was 25 million. When I calculate 7 per cent of 428,358,000, 

I get something far closer to 30 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The correct number that you should 

be basing your calculations on, which is why you are having the 

inaccuracy, because you are quite simply doing it wrong - the 

correct number is $371,012,000. And that practice has been one 

that’s been in place for years and years and years. And I think 

for anybody here dealing with pension funds and or, indeed, my 

own modest finances and bank accounts that I deal with on a 

yearly basis, it seems to be that if you start with an opening 

balance based on what the closing balance is of the last day in 

the final year . . . And that’s the practice that we’ve undertaken 

here as well. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I’ll come back to that later on. 

 

Then the other question was, we were asking you about where 

do you get the . . . how did you arrive at the $83 million? And 

you said it was 16.8 per cent of some fund. Now when I 

calculate it, I get to be 16.8 per cent of something very close to 

500 million - of 494 million, actually. 

 

Now where does that . . . on what do you base that 16.8 per cent 

to get the 83 million of interest? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In the annual report ‘85-86, which I 

think is the most recent one we have available - teachers’ 

superannuation, Saskatchewan Teachers’ Superannuation 

Commission, on page 41, if I could refer the hon. member to 

that page, investments fund stood at 534,698,913, and the 

earnings were 83 millions of dollars-plus. I don’t have the exact 

number, but it’s $83 million roughly. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

I noted with some interest your comments earlier about this 

mutual agreement between the government and the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation to withdraw funds of 

earnings from the pension earnings and put them into the 

provincial treasury. I challenge, Mr. Minister, I challenge you to 

show to this Assembly where this mutual agreement arises. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1655 

 

And the reason I do that, Mr. Minister, is because I have here in 

my hand a report on May 13, 1986, at which time we first asked 

these questions, from the general secretary of the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation to the presidents of local associations of 

teachers in Saskatchewan, in which it was clearly stated that the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation was not mutually agreeing 

to this at all, that your government arbitrarily made a change in 

decision on policy. 

 

And your Minister of Finance, feeling that this was one way to 

have access to some tens of millions of dollars to put into 

paying for the deficit, decided to take it out of the earnings of 

the teachers’ superannuation fund, while that fund, Mr. 

Minister, I remind you, and Mr. Chairman, has an unfunded 

liability of in excess of $1 billion. 

 

I read to you, Mr. Chairman, what this memorandum from the 

president, or the general secretary to the presidents of the locals 

says, and then I will ask you to once again explain what you 

mean by mutual agreement. It says that: 

 

Following Council a meeting was requested with the 

Provincial Government to discuss STF concerns about the 

government’s changed practice of assigning excess 

interest earnings of the Teachers’ Superannuation Fund. A 

meeting was finally held on Friday, May 2, 1986 at which 

time President, Bert Gordon, Vice-President Gerry Cooke, 

Superannuation Commission members (and others, and I 

won’t go on) met with the Minister of Finance (who is still 

the Minister of Finance). 

 

They met with representatives, including the Minister of the 

Department of Finance and the minister. And it goes on to say, 

and I quote: 

 

We outlined our general goals and concerns about the 

teacher pension plans and specifically emphasized our 

serious concerns about the government’s recent decision to 

use all excess interest earnings beyond the 7 per cent to 

pay current pensions. 

 

I quote the next paragraph: 

 

The response of the Minister to our immediate concerns 

was not particularly encouraging. (I don’t think they were 

surprised by that.) While he indicated that he recognized 

the need to address the problem of the unfunded liability 

and that his government was exploring ways to deal with 

the unfunded liability, he indicated that the general fiscal 

situation of the province made it difficult to provide 

special additional funding for pension plans. 

 

In other words, Mr. Minister, the Minister of Finance admitted 

at this meeting that he was going to use money that was earned 

by the teachers’ superannuation fund to help him with his 

deficit. That is not any indication to me of a mutual agreement 

to approve what you are doing, which I might add, doing quite 

wrongly. 

There was further to that, Mr. Minister, a letter sent to one Mr. 

Lane, who is the Minister of Finance. And it’s a long letter, so I 

won’t read it all. But I’ll read you the pertinent sections dealing 

with this question in which it deals with the superannuation 

earnings, and the opposition by the teachers of Saskatchewan to 

the removal of those earnings from this fund. 

 

And it was asked of the minister, that he should: 

 

. . . commit your government to the goal of a fully funded 

superannuation plan and declare its intention to allocate all 

interest earnings in excess of the statutory seven per cent 

to the Teachers’ Superannuation Fund as an initial step in 

moving to the goal of one fully funded formula plan for all 

Saskatchewan teachers. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you have, throughout these estimates, stood 

in this House and either did not quite accurately state the facts 

or information, tried to confuse and on even more occasions, 

tried not to answer the question at all. You have already . . . you 

have again done it today by trying to allege, hoping that 

somehow the issue would go away, that there was a mutual 

agreement between you and the former minister of Education, 

who is from Swift Current, that this was okay. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, that it was not okay, that the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, formally, as well as 

informally, indicated to you and your government its objections 

to what you are doing. 

 

Now in light of that, Mr. Minister, can you explain where you 

got this mutual agreement between yourself and the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation that it was okay in 1985-86 

to siphon off almost $40 million from the earnings of the 

superannuation fund into the treasury of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I think 

now that the former Finance minister, who probably had some 

say in how these plans were to run when he was Finance 

minister, a little more history might be useful. 

 

For the teachers, there are the two plans, Mr. Chairman. One, 

for all intents and purposes, most often referred to by teachers 

and others as the old plan, probably had it’s origins around 

about 1930, was a defined benefits plan, I think, is some of the 

kind of technical words that are used to describe it. But the 

reality was, it was not actuarially sound. 

 

And through the ‘70’s when the NDP were in government, Mr. 

Chairman, and that member opposite was the minister of 

Finance, what did they do with this plan where the unfunded 

liability grew by leaps and bounds. What did the hon. member 

do about that, Mr. Chairman? 

 

You know, he’s very sanctimonious and does a lot of 

sermonizing today . . . and I’m prepared to listen to that, to let 

him score his political points if there are any to be scored. 

That’s his job. But ought he get too wrapped up in 

sanctimoniousness, Mr. Chairman? He ought to remind himself, 

or be reminded, that he was the minister of  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1656 

 

Finance in a decade when unfunded liabilities went out of sight 

in this province in that old plan that the teachers had. That is a 

historical fact, Mr. Chairman, and he cannot dispute that, and I 

would like him to stand in this House and dispute that fact. 

Because that is the record, that is the legacy of his party, Mr. 

Chairman. Absolutely and unequivocally, that is the legacy of 

the NDP when it comes to pensions. 

 

Well given that this unfunded liability situation, Mr. Chairman, 

and that kind of situation in pension plans was a serious 

concern, along came what’s probably more commonly known 

in layman’s language as money purchase plan. And the reality 

there is, is what’s happening today is what’s happened in the 

past few years since that was established, is that the government 

will match the teachers’ contributions equally. And as well, we 

will guarantee that the funds shall earn 7 per cent. And as well, 

the government guarantees that the pension payroll will be met, 

that the pension payments will be met. Now that is what is 

expected of government, Mr. Chairman, and that is what is 

being delivered. 

 

Now the hon. member tries to make the case that somehow the 

7 per cent is a number that somebody pulled out of the sky. 

Well who was the author of the legislation when it was put in 

place, Mr. Chairman? Who was the author? And if 7 per cent 

doesn’t have some relevance in so far as how it was arrived at 

in terms of negotiating, and the earlier basis I described for it in 

that that was the . . . the Act spoke to it under the refund 

section. Then why is it that that continues to be some issue at 

the bargaining table today? If it wasn’t felt as part of the 

bargaining process before, then why would it continue to be felt 

to be part of the bargaining process? 

 

The central question comes down to this, Mr. Chairman. There 

are two issues. Number one is, who has the track record on 

unfunded liability in this . . . (inaudible) . . . Who wrote the 

book on pension plans with unfunded liability? Who wrote the 

book? The hon. member asking the question is who wrote the 

book on that, Mr. Chairman. And the historical record in this 

province is clear on that point; and he cannot get around that 

point. 

 

And the second point is, Mr. Chairman, is: is this Government 

of Saskatchewan living up to its obligations relative to the 

teachers’ pension fund? And the answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the minister tries so hard. 

Let me first of all bring to his attention that the formula plan, as 

it was, has had indeed a substantial unfunded liability as almost 

every pension plan in Canada that was originally started way 

back 25, 30 years ago. 

 

But I want to add further, Mr. Minister, that since July 1, 1980, 

when indeed another government was in power in 

Saskatchewan, there were legislative provisions provided which 

required for the first time that teacher contributions be matched 

by the government contributions, a very substantial step in 

dealing with the unfunded liabilities, Mr. Chairman. It was 

assumed at that time that the earnings of the fund would then 

stay in the fund, and it was only by the decision of this 

government by policy in  

1985 that then began the raising of the teachers’ superannuation 

fund by the government to take money out of the earnings and 

put it in the treasury. That’s where it began, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now here is the minister wailing about the terrible unfunded 

liability which his colleagues have done since 1982, but instead 

of following a practice which was started to deal with that 

problem, he is going backwards and in fact taking money that 

should be left as earnings in the fund. 

 

Now he has members of his caucus who are members of the 

teaching profession, and they know that to be a problem, and 

I’m surprised that they have not stood up in their caucus and 

their cabinet and have said to the minister that it’s a problem. 

 

I add to the minister when it deals with section 14(1). He tries 

to once again confuse the issue because he didn’t say that 

section 14(1) deals with the old plan; that one deals with the old 

plan. And I won’t read it because my colleague has already read 

it and mentioned it. The minister neither deals with the matter 

in section 55(1), in which it is clearly stated that it has nothing 

to do with the earnings of the fund and what’s retained in it; it 

deals, Mr. Chairman, with the refund of contributions to a 

teacher who has superannuated or chooses to leave the 

profession. 

 

Now that is distinctly different, Mr. Chairman, from earnings of 

the fund which the Minister of Finance is - I use the word 

guardedly - but stealing from the fund and putting in the 

treasury. Now I ask again, Mr. Chairman, because he didn’t 

answer my question. He went into the speech as he always does 

when he is feeling uncomfortable. I ask him again since he has 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, do I have the 

floor? Thank you. 

 

I ask the minister: where is this mutual agreement between 

himself and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the 

treasury, that the Minister of Finance could take money out of 

the teachers’ superannuation fund earnings and put it in the 

treasury, since he has said it’s there. I want to know where it is, 

because everything that has come from the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation is contrary to what the minister is saying. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member. Just 

for their information, I do have the reference that I said we 

would get from the collective agreement, and I’m just having a 

couple of copies xeroxed we can send over to you. 

 

But the hon. member tried to make the case that we’re 

somehow raiding? Well let’s read into the record what the facts 

are, and I read these facts into the legislation knowing that 

we’re in quite different fiscal times than we were in the heady 

days of the ‘70s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the hon. 

member from Regina Rosemont says read them from ‘82 on, 

and I will do that certainly for you because you will not like 

what you hear. 

 

(1530) 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1657 

 

But the story from June 1, ‘82, to June 30, ‘87, has been that 

under the PC government, I might add, Mr. Chairman, Deputy 

Chairman, that over and above over minimum requirement, 

over and above our minimum requirement . . . you know these 

raiders as the NDP member would suggest, we have put in 69 

. . . nearly 70 million, 69,812,000. Now that’s the raiders, okay. 

 

Now what did the good guys, the NDP do during their time? 

Okay, we’ve done that in five years. Okay, under this guise of 

raiding, so-called raiding according to the NDP opposite, and 

what did the good guys, the so-called good guys of the NDP 

years, you know, what did they do for the teachers’ fund in their 

11 years? Over and above their minimum requirements, they 

put in 61 million, Mr. Chairman - 61,481,000. Now how does 

the hon. member opposite square this so-called raiding of the 

fund when we put in nearly 70 million, and their party put in 

something like 60 million, a little over 60 million. We put in 

nearly 70 million. 

 

Yes, I thought that the hon. member from Rosemont and North 

East and Prince Albert might like those facts and some 

additional facts, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Under the NDP the 

growth in the unfunded liability was 845,608,000; under our 

government, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 241,000 or something close 

to what . . . 15, 20, 25 per cent of the size that it was under the 

NDP years. And the hon. member opposite, who was once the 

finance minister in this province, who authored this legislation 

that he now says today is uncertain and vague and etc., etc., etc. 

I mean he’s got to remember, I mean who was the author of this 

stuff, Mr. Deputy Chairman? These are the facts, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, for all to see. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, when this individual who 

was minister of finance was on those treasury benches, 100 per 

cent of the earnings stayed in the teachers’ superannuation fund 

earnings. Under this minister and this government, only 7 per 

cent of the earnings are staying in the fund, and the rest they’re 

removing and putting into the provincial treasury. That is the 

issue here, Mr. Chairman, that’s the issue. 

 

There could have been in the teachers’ superannuation fund, in 

the fiscal year 1985-1986, an additional $40 million as part of 

that fund if this government hadn’t taken it out and spent it. 

And if you look at the kind of spending that they have been 

making, as my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake says, 

they blew it. And I say, Mr. Minister, that there is nowhere in 

the legislation where it says the government should do that. 

 

Now you could probably find a lawyer who could argue that the 

government can legally get around it. But once again, that’s not 

the issue because there is a moral and a financial fiscal 

management question here, neither of which this government 

seems to have a great deal of. 

 

It is fiscally irresponsible. It is irresponsible to take money out 

of the earnings of a superannuation plan, which is already 

underfunded by over $1 billion, and give it to the Minister of 

Finance so he can give it to Peter Pocklington. Well that is the 

height of irresponsibility, especially . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . As soon as the chirping stops, Mr. Chairman, I’ll continue. 

Especially, Mr. Chairman, that is irresponsible especially when 

those people over there have spent years making a big rhetoric 

issue - because all it is is rhetoric - about unfunded liability of 

pension plans. There’s a question - there’s a matter here of 

doublespeak once again. Say that’s it’s a problem, and then 

when it comes to doing the action, make the problem worse by 

taking money out. 

 

Mr. Minister, I now have, and my colleague has - and he may 

have some questions on it as well - this copy of the agreement 

which you sent us, collective agreement with regard to teachers’ 

salaries, etc. It says nothing different in this agreement than 

what it says in the Act. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Section 55. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — It says nothing on section 55. That 

doesn’t surprise me, because the Act is written on the basis of 

the agreement. And I bring to your attention something which 

you failed to say again, that this deals with the refund on 

contributions - the refund on contributions. 

 

Your agreement which you have sent to us says: a teacher to 

whom clause 5(4)(1) applies and who discontinues teaching 

shall continue to have the right to apply for and obtain a refund 

of contributions, provided that on and after July 1, 1980, the 

interest on the contributions of such teachers shall be credited at 

the rate of 7 per cent per annum. That’s got nothing to do with 

the earnings of the fund and the fact that you’re taking money 

out of those earnings and not leaving them in the fund where 

they should be staying. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, this does not seem to me like any kind of a 

mutual agreement between you and the representative of the 

teachers of the province to say that you can do it. 

 

Now can you tell me, Mr. Minister: does the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation agree? Does the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation, who represents all the teachers, some 11 to 12,000 

in Saskatchewan, agree with your policy that earnings in excess 

of 7 per cent should be removed from the earnings of the fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The first point I would like to make in 

response, Mr. Chairman, is the hon. member has talked about 

this issue. If his legislation, or at least his interpretation of his 

legislation, is unclear or uncertain, then if that’s a given, then 

somehow we have a moral issue or a management issue here. 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, if there’s a moral 

issue, the moral issue is: who left the legacy of an $845 million 

unfunded liability in the teachers’ pension fund? Who has the 

moral obligation? 

 

I can see why this bothers his conscience, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman. I’m quite prepared to deal with this in a reasonable 

and up front manner, but he’s murking the water, if you like, 

with a lot of this political rhetoric. It’s a legacy of his party’s 

ineptness when it comes to dealing with pension funds, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman. That’s quite  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1658 

 

simply the fact. 

 

The second point that I would make is that the teachers’ 

federation, if we go back to the time in question, agreed that 7 

per cent was the appropriate number. And it has been 

negotiated, and it may well be that it’s up for negotiation now, 

but I’m not going to talk about what might be being bargained 

at the collective bargaining table. 

 

And the final thing that I would like to ask of the hon. member, 

given that I sent him over the information he asked for, is, I 

wonder if he could table all those documents that he referred to 

earlier in the House in his line of questioning, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman. I wonder if he might table all of those for us - the 

correspondence, etc., etc. 

 

We’d be interested in perhaps reading some of those letters 

more fully into the House record, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I’m 

wondering if he would extend to me the courtesy of tabling 

those documents for us, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I am surprised that any 

Minister of Education who will have been asked questions on 

Friday on this issue would have not stopped and got himself 

briefed with the files that are existing in his department, where 

he would have all this information. 

 

I ask the minister if he does not agree with what the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation is saying, as what I have 

said, Mr. Chairman. I would welcome him to write to the 

president of the teachers’ federation of Saskatchewan and ask 

for a response on this question. And I know what it’ll be. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you another question related to this. If you 

are so concerned about the unfunded liability of the teachers’ 

superannuation fund, do you not think it would be useful to 

leave all of the earnings in the fund as a step towards dealing 

with that unfunded liability? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think we maybe, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, have found some agreement that the hon. member 

and I can agree on, is that we agree that unfunded liabilities and 

pension funds is a major issue, not only today here in 

Saskatchewan but, I think one could argue, in the number of 

funds across Canada, and maybe even in some of the western 

world. 

 

But I can’t let go, Mr. Chairman, without . . . I can’t finish up 

this particular item without making reference to the fact that if I 

pick up through ‘75-76, through ‘80-81, and I look at the 

statements where it talked about revenue and it talks about 

interest earnings, and then the contribution to surplus, it doesn’t 

square with the hon. member’s commitments that he says were 

undertaken on behalf of the NDP government. 

 

I look in ‘75-76. Interest earnings were 5,545, and contribution 

to surplus was 3,282. And these . . . should add three zeros to all 

these numbers, Mr. Deputy Chairman, to put them into proper 

perspective, because I’m talking in the millions. In ‘76-77 under 

the NDP, the  

fund had interest earnings of 7.139 million. Contribution to 

surplus - was it 7 million? No, less than 3 million. And ‘77-78 

was 9.3 million-plus. Was 9.3 million returned? No, it was 8. 

Or even in ‘80-81, the numbers there were 19 million and 17 

million. So there’s some inconsistency with what happened 

versus what the hon. member is telling us what happened under 

an NDP government. 

 

The only thing we know for sure is that’s the period of the ‘70s 

under the NDP, unfunded liability just mushroomed. It was like 

an atomic explosion out there in the teachers fund, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I think, Mr. Chairman, if the minister 

checked the accuracy of what he just said, that the agreement in 

section 14(1) didn’t come into place until 1980 when the two 

funds actually came into place. So any figures quoted previous 

to that would be under a completely different situation. 

 

But I want to turn to a new topic, Mr. Chairman. And this topic 

relates to request for funding by College Mathieu, which is the 

only French private high school in Saskatchewan. And they’re 

into a building program, and they’ve been requesting your 

department, Mr. Minister, for funds for their building program. 

I wonder if you could indicate to this House when it is that you 

are going to let them know whether or not your department will 

be giving them some funds so they could proceed with this very 

important project. 

 

I might add that although it’s a French private school, we know 

that they accept all students, any student who would apply. It is 

actually open to public. You don’t necessarily just have to be 

French to go to that school. But I think there is a prerequisite of 

being able to use the French language. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member raises the question 

of College Mathieu, and I have, oh, in the last I suppose month 

or month and a half, I was in fact down there and visited the 

school and met with some of the..in fact it was very near the 

end of the school year. I met with some of the children there, 

and as well, some of the board members and directors, etc. 

Hence, I have some understanding of the project and the 

funding as they would like to see it. 

 

(1545) 

 

For the record, the policy as it stands today would be that we 

have a formula in place that would see us anteing up. Our share 

would be 10 per cent, although I understand the federal 

government is prepared to put 50 per cent into this project, 

which makes it somewhat unique. And they would like to see 

the provincial government ante up more than 10 per cent. 

 

Well I said to them at that time and what I say to you today is 

that I’m prepared to take a look at that formula. I give no 

guarantees. I make no guarantees and I don’t want to heighten 

anybody’s expectations unnecessarily, because you and I both 

know the challenges the province faces in terms of our fiscal 

policy. But I did say I was prepared to look at it. I give you no 

guarantees. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1659 

 

And the reason that I don’t want to make any sweeping 

statements is that there are other schools that follow the same 

formula, and what we do for one we must be bale to do for 

others, albeit that I recognize that this project does have some 

uniqueness in it. But that was my commitment to them then, 

and I repeat that to you today. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, the people from College 

Mathieu advise me that the federal money that has been 

committed with the 50 per cent of the project is conditional 

money, conditional, and only for a certain amount of . . . 

conditional. That is, it has a time condition to it - that unless 

funding comes from the province by . . . and I’m not sure just 

how long it is; it sounded like it could only possibly be till the 

end of the year. 

 

And their concern of course is that that federal money may 

disappear before your department has made up its mind. Now 

what I would like is a commitment from you that at least you 

will be able to give them a definite answer so that that money 

from the federal treasury does not escape before you come to 

them with a definitive, positive answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well certainly if there’s some time 

constraint on the federal money, and I’m not aware of it, but 

even if there is and I’m not aware of it, certainly it would be 

only sensible practice administratively to give them an answer 

one way or another before the money runs out, and we would 

do that. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Assistant Deputy 

Chairperson. Nice to be recognized and to enter in these debates 

in regards to the Education estimates for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairperson, we have seen since the last two and a 

half to three weeks since these Education estimates began, a 

political position being put forward by the Minister of 

Education, the member from Weyburn, and that political 

position roughly translates to this: that it’s a tough time in the 

province of Saskatchewan, that things are hard, but that we 

have been able to hold the line in education and for spending of 

education, in order to pursue a policy of excellence, I believe 

the term, the buzz word is. And that they have followed a logic 

track, which is another one of the minister’s favourite buzz 

words, which would lead to a continuing and growing 

excellence in the field of education at all levels in the province. 

 

And I want to, today, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, deal with an 

area of education that I have particular concerns in and of which 

I have particular questions to deal with. Before I do it, before I 

ask the minister the questions in this area, I want to say and put 

on the record, first of all, that the people of Saskatchewan, I 

believe that the people of Saskatchewan owe the teachers of 

Saskatchewan a debt of gratitude and a debt of thanks for the 

kind of jobs that they’ve been doing now, they have done in the 

past, and under undoubtedly hard, hard circumstances, they will 

continue to do in the future. 

 

Earlier on in these estimates the member for Regina Centre 

made a statement that he has received letters on the future of 

education. And the number of letters and the  

number of calls and the number of contacts that have been made 

to him and his office have been exceeded by no other 

department. That the future of education, the future of education 

remains the number one serious concern of people in 

Saskatchewan, and their concern over the future of education. 

 

The minister has for the last two and a half weeks tried to dispel 

those concerns by saying that nothing has changed in education. 

On the one hand, because it’s a contradictory position he’s 

taking, on the one hand he’s saying that nothing has changed, 

that they’re following the course, and that education is one of 

the four pillars and is sacred. On the other hand, on the other 

hand he has admitted that no, they have in fact deviated from 

that course. They’ve deviated from . . . structurally have 

deviated from it in terms of what they have done to the 

community colleges and to the regional colleges and to the 

amalgamation and the loss of local autonomy, and that they’ve 

changed that; and that they have changed some directions when 

it comes to libraries; and that they have changed this and they 

have changed that. But that basically they’re staying the course 

and that education is an inviolate area that the government will 

not touch, and in fact it remains, as the minister was fond of 

quoting, one of the four pillars and a centre of excellence. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, the facts are to the 

contrary. When we look at the actual numbers, the actual 

number of dollars that have been spent in education in this 

province compared to what will be spent, we will see that the 

minister’s rhetoric just doesn’t hold up; that, in fact, despite all 

the fine and fancy theories and buzz words and buzz phrases 

that the minister likes to put forward, despite the fact that he has 

obviously picked up a number of catchy and flashy jargon 

words from some level of the bureaucracy or another, that 

despite that fact, what we’ve seen here, here in black and white 

and blue, black and white and blue - we have seen the kind of 

destruction to the moneys that are donated to education, that the 

people of this province, and particularly the teachers of this 

province, are objecting to and are concerned about. In fact, I 

may even say are afraid. 

 

There is fear and loathing in the education profession among 

teachers. There is fear and loathing, and it’s reflected in the 

number of letters that I know I have received and other 

members have received from members of the teaching 

profession, and not just individual members of the teaching 

profession, but whole school staffs. 

 

In the constituency of Regina Rosemont alone, I have received 

letters expressing grave concern over the future of education 

from the staff of Martin Collegiate, from the staff of McLurg 

School, from the staff of Ruth M. Buck School. And I could go 

on and on and on, but I’m not going to take the time of the 

Assembly to do that, because the minister himself has received 

those same letters. 

 

The teachers represent the front-line people involved in 

education in this province. They’re the ones who are delivering 

the services. They’re the ones who are entrusted with the 

education and the passing along of values and attitudes to 

young people in this province.  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1660 

 

And they are afraid. They are afraid for the future of education 

in this province. 

 

The minister knows they’re afraid because he has letter after 

letter after letter from members of the teaching profession in 

this province. And the teachers in this province have a good 

right to be afraid. They have a good deal to be afraid of when it 

comes to the kind of treatment from education that they are 

receiving from the minister himself. 

 

Now the member from Prince Albert has pointed out the kind of 

destruction wreaked upon the educational development fund, 

where we have seen the actual amount of dollars available for 

education cut in half - cut in half - stretched from five years to 

10 years. We’ve seen the EDF fund chopped so that new 

initiatives in education cannot be put forward. 

 

We have seen other, as we go through the estimates, time after 

time, other portions and programs of the Education budget 

which have fallen under the axe of this government. 

 

But you know, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, when I was running 

through the estimates and realizing that there was a chop in this 

program and a hack in that program and a slash in the other 

program, and that there was that fear and loathing out there by 

members of the education profession, and I looked at the total 

budget for Education, and somehow things weren’t jiving. 

Somehow things weren’t jiving, because I knew there were cuts 

in the programs, and I knew there were cuts in the areas that 

were vital to the continuing development and growth of 

education in this province. 

 

And yet, what I’ve seen, when you look at the bottom line, on 

page 33 of the Education estimates, you will see that, in fact, 

according to the figures put down in black and white here, 

there’s a $3 million, roughly a $3 million increase in Education 

spending. 

 

And I looked at that and I said, but that’s not right. There can’t 

possibly be a $3 million in Education spending, not when the 

minister has chopped the educational development fund in half, 

not when he’s cut this program, and not when he’s cut that 

program. How could it be that there’s this $3 million increase? 

 

So I scratched my head a while and perused the books - perused 

the books, went back through the estimates - and there on page 

29, tucked away under item number 22, payments to the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation of 

$23,850,000. And I look and see what was paid out last year, 

and there was nothing. There was nothing. So what we have is a 

totally new item in education of $23.8 million added to the 

Education budget to give the appearance - solely to give the 

appearance - that the government was concerned with 

education, and was maintaining education levels at past 

practices. 

 

And so there we are, a 3 per cent cut. Once we remove 

payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, what we have is a 3 per cent chop to the  

Education budget as a total Education budget that’s laid out. 

And when you put inflation on top of that, of 4 per cent - and 

we’ll be generous and be conservative, if you like, and put it 

down to a little amount which we’ll say 4 per cent. Three per 

cent and 4 per cent, and even the Minister of Education is able 

to add those two numbers together. Three per cent cut in the 

actual budget; 4 per cent in education; and it comes up to 7 per 

cent. A 7 per cent chop in the education budget in real terms - in 

terms of the real dollars going out to the schools and the school 

systems in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, let me say, no wonder the teachers 

of this province are filled with fear and filled with loathing at 

the kind of treatment they’re receiving at the hands of this 

government when it comes to education. I concur with the 

member from Regina Centre when he says, not . . . there is no 

other issue which has generated more contact. Because not only 

his office has received contact on this issue, my office has, as 

well, and no other issue - not even despite the kind of hacking 

and slashing and tearing at medicare that the government is 

doing - has received the kind of popular response and popular 

disgust that the cuts in Education are generating. 

 

And now I want to turn to, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, an area 

which is close to my heart, and that’s the whole question of 

special education and what this government has in store for 

special education in this province. Now the government and the 

minister opposite, the Minister of Education, has day after day 

stood in the House and talked about building centres of 

excellence in education, and has day after day said that they’re 

going to be bringing forward new initiatives in education and 

are going to be developing a whole, brace new world to fit into 

the area of technology for knowledge-based industry, for 

knowledge-based economy, given that the - in the minister’s 

own words - the agrarian economy is dead. 

 

And that’ll be of some interest to the farmers of this province to 

know that the number one industry in Saskatchewan is dead, 

and that knowledge is now the number one industry and not 

agriculture. And that’s a fine, exceedingly strange statement to 

be made by someone who represents a rural riding, as the 

Minister of Education does. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, I’d like the minister now to 

briefly outline to us, and I believe I’ve taken eight minutes in 

my statement, so if the minister would respond in kind, the 

minister could outline to us in general what the government’s 

plans are for enhancing special education - building new 

programs. What new initiatives, sir, are you planning to take in 

the area of special education in this province? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, the 

question related to special education . . . I think if one reviews 

the history and the funding record of out government relative to 

special education, those children with special needs, if you like, 

you would find that it is up dramatically. This year the level is 

the same as it was last year. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1661 

 

And so I can say to you and to all members of the House and to 

the public of Saskatchewan, that we’re committed to it . . . as 

committed to it, if not more committed to it, than we even have 

been in the past. I can also, for the hon. member’s information, 

to perhaps expedite the examination of these estimates, tell him 

that we also are, at this point in time, giving consideration, 

serious consideration to changing how we fund it; changing it 

from a per pupil basis to a block funding arrangement. The 

reason for that would be so that we can give more attention to 

the programs themselves, and have less time and energy and 

money, quite frankly, tied up in administration, if you like. 

 

As well, it would be worth noting that the excellence fund or 

the special initiatives fund - the education development fund - 

which the hon. member referred to - which, by the way, is not 

cut in half, Mr. Chairman - that that fund, as well over the past 

couple of years and, I suspect, over the next several years as 

well has funded many . . . many school boards have used that to 

fund many special education initiatives. 

 

So I think it’s safe to say that our government’s commitment to 

those who have special needs is even greater than it was some 

several years ago. And I think certainly if one looks at the 

funding track record, there would be ample evidence to make 

that point, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the minister is right that 

the EDF fund has not been cut in half. In 1986-87, it was $35 

million; in 1987-88, it’s 14.5 million. I guess it’s been chopped 

somewhere closer to 62 or 64 per cent. So the minister is right; 

it hasn’t been cut in half. It’s been chopped by over 60 per cent, 

if my figures are right. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Can I answer that, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman? 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister will have his 

chance to answer. The minister will have his chance to answer 

after I finish asking the question. You will have ample 

opportunity; as you have demonstrated, Mr. Minister, you’ve 

taken ample opportunity to answer or attempt to answer 

questions, and you will have ample opportunity after this. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, as I said before, the minister - total for 

education development fund to be voted was 14,500,000 this 

year versus 35 million last year. It’s there in black and white. 

So as I said before, it was more than a 50 per cent cut. 

 

However, the minister has raised a question in regards to 

changes in formula funding for special education in the 

province. Now the minister said that there’s going to be some 

block funding coming down for special education as opposed to 

a per pupil funding. Can the minister tell me whether in fact this 

means there is going to be a change, first of all, in the - and I’ll 

ask this question specifically - in the high-cost funding formula 

for special education needs students? Secondly, will this block 

funding be going directly to the school boards, or is there some 

other mechanism that the minister has in terms of the 

contemplation of changing the funding levels  

to special education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just to pick up your last questions 

first. There’s no change in the high cost or those with the most 

serious disabilities, because we recognize that they are a very 

particular category. And the block grants will go to the school 

boards respecting their autonomy for their administration. 

 

But as it relates to the excellence fund or the education 

development fund in general, what the hon. member does not 

know, and what the blue book does not show, and where he is 

inaccurate, is although there may well have been $35 million 

budgeted last year, the actual expenditures were $28 million. 

 

The second point is, and why I disagree with them, and I think 

if school boards were here, and as I indicated to the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association when I met with 

them last week, I mean it’s very important to be clear here on 

the education development fund and what it was. It was a fund 

set up by the Progressive Conservative government under our 

Premier to provide for some additional funding in education, to 

provide for excellence and quality education. It’s been very 

successful to facilitate with the new course and the Directions 

that the K to 12 system was taking. It’s been very popular. I’ve 

read into this record before a number of initiatives, whether it 

be in updating library facilities or resources, library resources, 

or special education initiatives into the record. 

 

The fund was set up as a $150 million fund. It was originally set 

up over five. That became six years, based on the fact that 

school boards themselves were telling us in some instances that 

they couldn’t gear up properly to handle that sum of money and 

do it in everyone’s best interest. And I thought that was very 

honest and forthright of them. We have taken the additional step 

of stretching it, not from now six years, but to 10 years. 

 

But the important point here is - and you can talk about the blue 

book numbers. But here is what is happening, because I want to 

be very clear on this for the hon. member’s information, is that 

the fund was $150 million when it was set up, and $150 million 

will be spent. And that is the fact. The fund has not been 

chopped into half or into 62 per cent or anything else. It’s very 

alive and well. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m glad you agreed with 

my initial statement that you’ve cut the EDF fund for spending 

this year by 50 per cent. You submitted in here that the $28 

million was spent last year, and you’ve only budgeted $14.5 

million this year. That’s 50 per cent in anybody’s books. That 

was the original statement I made. 

 

And if you want to use the numbers of the 35 million as being 

an estimate, I suppose the 14.5 million is an estimate. So that’s 

more than a 50 per cent cut this year from the educational 

development fund - some of which went to very worthwhile 

projects in the field of special education; some of which went to 

very worthwhile projects in the field of education. And I repeat 

that because the concept behind the idea of an education 

development fund - provided there’s adequate funding  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1662 

 

and provided that there is access by school boards and by 

individual school units in this province - is a good idea. And I 

won’t deny that. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, I’m interested in the whole question of 

special education funding, and the formula, and the changes in 

the formula, and what that means in actual dollars and cents to 

the school units in the province. 

 

You say that you’re going to change from a per pupil basis, 

from a per pupil basis to a block funding. Now leaving aside, 

leaving aside for a moment the legal implications under The 

Education Act or your ability to change it from a per pupil basis 

to block funding, now leave that aside because I believe there 

are . . . I think that you’re going to run into a little legal problem 

in this area, but leave that aside, tell us on what basis your 

department intends to block fund school units and school boards 

in this province in special education. If you’re not going to deal 

with it on a per pupil basis, how are you going to make a 

determination as to the amount of dollars each school board in 

the province receives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The first point I would want to make 

here, and as I made earlier, is that this is under consideration, 

and we’re in the midst of designing it, which is why I raised it 

with it with you so we could speed up this estimates process 

because I thought we would sort of lay a track into how we’re 

going to fund our special education. That the basis for doing it, 

for making the changes, albeit that it only affects one-half of the 

funding if you like, because as I said earlier, those that are most 

severely disabled, that that does not change. 

 

Why we’re doing this is we want to make best use of the 

dollars. And rather than sort of tie up dollars in manpower in 

the administrative side of it, which we don’t think necessarily 

helps the student . . . Or to put it another way, we think we can 

capture some of those dollars and put them into programming, 

which is what the student needs. That is the basis for why we’re 

doing it. 

 

So the question then becomes one of, and quite rightly so, how 

do we determine how much money school boards will get? 

Well I suspect, as they design the program, they may well yet 

draw on some demographics. It talks about X number of pupils 

times X numbers of dollars to arrive at a number, but once that 

number’s arrived at, it becomes a block grant, and in terms of 

how they administer it, essentially unconditional. 

 

Now to make a further point, and one that I’ve made a number 

of times in these estimates, is that I, as the minister, do not 

somehow think we have a monopoly on good ideas, sitting in 

this legislature or sitting in my office. And the fact of the matter 

is, when it comes to this area, relative to the funding of those in 

our province who have some special needs, we did not design 

this in isolation. 

 

And quite frankly, I don’t know as we can take credit for some 

of this new program design, because the fact of the matter is a 

number of school boards have made suggestions like this to us. 

I suppose one could argue to some degree this is in response to 

what some school boards have recognized out there as a 

cumbersome  

process to some degree, a time-consuming process sometimes 

to some degree, a program that’s administratively top heavy, 

and by making some changes it can be to everyone’s benefit, 

particularly the students’ benefit. I think that’s what we’re all 

interested in. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to get your 

answer straight. I understand that you’re guaranteeing before 

this House, that the high-cost funding for special education 

students and that formula will not change, that that will be in 

place. Do I understand . . . Is that what you’re saying? Is that 

what you’re telling us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — In regards to the block . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — In blood. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — In regard . . . Okay, in your blood. The minister 

says that he’ll put it on as blood. So when the school boards 

come looking for some blood, we’ll know exactly where the 

donor can be found. 

 

The second part of this issue is again it goes back to the block 

funding. Now you say you haven’t determined a method of 

determining how that block funding will be apportioned. Could 

you please tell us and guarantee to the special education 

teachers and administrators of this province that there will not 

be any cuts to special education programs - programs, because 

you mentioned the word programs; I didn’t say administration - 

to programs to any of the school boards or any of the school 

units that deliver special education services to people in this 

province. 

 

(1615) 

 

Can you guarantee that each and every pupil who now receives 

special education and who may be determined in the future to 

need special education services, will you guarantee that those 

programs will remain in place and that there will not be any 

cuts to special education programs in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is 

asking me to give him something, a guarantee I cannot give 

him, for reasons that he well knows. Because for me to all of a 

sudden change the policy 180 degrees from what we’ve had in 

the past to what he’s suggesting would surely meet with the 

objection of every school board across this province. Because 

what he’s saying is, you take it over and you run it. And in so 

doing, I can somehow make sure that it runs absolutely the 

same as it did last year, although there may be some savings, if 

you like, that we can funnel into the programming side by 

making some changes. Now school boards don’t want that. We 

have long respected their autonomy. 

 

If you’re asking me if there’s a commitment to special 

education in this province, I can say yes, and I can say yes 

unequivocally. If you’re asking me if we’re going to assign 

some, and money based on a per pupil number to get a figure to 

make available to school boards, the answer is yes. And if 

you’re going to ask me . . . (inaudible) . . . number to turn over 

to school boards to run and to  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1663 

 

administer that money as they’ve always done, the answer is 

yes. So you’re looking to me for a guarantee. Now if you think 

we’re going to sit idly by and not watch what school boards do, 

that too would not be true. 

 

Well I guess I’m saying, and I have some faith in their 

expertise, perhaps more faith than you do in them. I think 

they’ve served us well in the past; I think they will serve us well 

in the future. 

 

Many of them have suggested that we look at a change in how 

we administer this, or how we make this determinations in 

terms of the dollars, and this is what we’ve done. And I think 

they’ll be quite happy, because it essentially becomes an 

unconditional grant for them. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, let me say that your answer, your 

answer reinforces in me, and reinforces in the teachers of 

special education in this province, the kind of fear that people 

out there are fearing - that people out there are fearing. 

 

If you’re talking about local autonomy and the ability of boards 

to deliver programs and design programs, that’s one thing. 

That’s one thing. If you’re talking - and I’m not talking about 

that, because that’s a concept I support - but if you’re talking 

about a degradation of standards and the ability, the actual 

ability for parents to have their children, their children with 

special needs dealt with at a level that they’re now being dealt 

with, and hopefully at a level which is a better level some time 

in the future, that’s not the impression I get from your answer. 

 

The impression I get from your answer is that you’re trying to 

off-load, you’re trying to off-load some of the costs of special 

education, and you’re trying to off-load your responsibility 

under The Education Act, for the maintenance of certain 

standards, onto the backs of school boards. And that’s a whole 

different matter, a whole different matter from local autonomy. 

 

We’re in favour of local autonomy because we believe that in 

fact that’s the best way that programs can be delivered. But we 

demand that, along with local autonomy, you, as Minister of 

Education, ensure that the dollars are there to not just hold the 

line, not just cut back, but in fact go forward in education, and 

particularly in special education in this province. 

 

That’s the question I’m asking you. And your answer, sir, your 

answer, the answer immediately before this question, does not 

assuage the fears in my mind one little bit, because you have 

confused - and deliberately so - confused the question of local 

autonomy. You confused the question of local autonomy versus 

the question of adequate funding. 

 

Will you ensure and guarantee to this House that there will be 

no cuts in the quality of special education services delivered by 

local school boards into this province? Yes or no, will you 

guarantee that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The voice of the central planners in 

the NDP party has spoken. 

 

My answer is this, and I use the hon. member’s own  

words “degradation of standards as relates to special education” 

has no part nor no place in my department. As it relates to 

special education, our commitment remains clear, as does our 

commitment to the school boards across this province in terms 

of the autonomy that they enjoy. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 

estimates have been going on for some time, and I think that the 

people of Saskatchewan and my colleagues have clearly 

indicated - clearly indicated the direction of this government, 

evidenced by its waste and mismanagement, its manipulation 

during election times for the benefit of the Tory party. And now 

the people of Saskatchewan have to bear the problems as a 

result of your mismanagement, your waste, and your political 

decisions made, and manipulations for electoral advantage. 

 

And we find that education is indeed suffering throughout this 

province. And I want to lead you through some of the areas 

where it is evidenced in Saskatchewan where there has been 

very serious cut-backs in the educational funding. And I want to 

ask you first of all, Mr. Minister, if you can provide us with the 

information as to how many regional offices you have in the 

province, and whether or not you can indicate whether any of 

the regional offices that had been previously established have 

been cut during the course of the year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The change in configuration of 

regional offices last year compared to this year is the Yorkton 

offices have been closed, Mr. Chairman. And in anticipation of 

the next question, why? 

 

When examining our education budget, the view was that as 

much as possible we would concentrate on maintaining the 

funding that’s dearest, if you like, to the hearts of the teachers 

and the trustees and the students in our schools. And that 

funding was: (a) seemed to be the operating budget; and 

secondly, the education or the education development for the 

excellence fund. That has been our approach. If there were 

some savings to be made at the administrative level in so far as 

regional officers and the administrative people in those offices, 

it seemed like a good place to tighten the belt, if you like, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

At the same time, this initiative of our regional office 

configuration, because the functions that those offices perform 

and that those regional directors perform are very important 

ones, they being one of a team in that office, we did not 

unilaterally just make up this configuration sitting once gain at 

our desks in Regina. We had a number of consultations with the 

teachers’ federation, the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association, and particularly the League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors, or the organization more commonly 

known as LEADS. 

 

And in fact, by the end of the day it was a LEADS proposal, for 

the most part, that led to the configuration that we have today 

with our regional office structure. And I am of the view that it 

will serve the people well. They were very . . . those who, if you 

like, have to run the system from that standpoint were very 

tucked into making the decisions.  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1664 

 

Not necessarily an easy decision, but I have no doubt the 

province will be well served, and I’ve had a number of letters 

from the Yorkton and area. And I’m not happy that that means a 

loss of an office for the Yorkton area, but that doesn’t mean to 

say that they won’t be served, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I want to deal more specifically with the 

closure of the regional office over in Yorkton, and you have 

received correspondence from the trustees of that region. And in 

their letter to you, Mr. Minister, you talk about consultation. 

And I want to read through some of the questions that they 

asked in this here, and I’d like you to provide an answer for 

these. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Send a copy over. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I’ll do it the way I want, Mr. Minister, and you 

answer the questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — There are a number of questions and concerns 

of the school division represented at this meeting, were 

expressed, and this is the east central branch of the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. And in fact they 

held a special meeting, and they say there are a number of 

questions and concerns. And I’m going to run through these. 

And I’d like you, for the benefit of the people in Yorkton and 

the trustees who you didn’t consult with, whether or not you’d 

provide answers to the special questions that they have asked. 

Their first question is: why was region three office the only 

office closed when other offices were kept open? Can you give 

them an answer to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I, in the earlier 

answer . . . in anticipation of the question relative to the 

configuration of regional offices, I think I indicated to the hon. 

member the thinking that went into the new configuration. I can 

assure the hon. member, as I think I have in some of the 

correspondence I have with some of the people from that area, 

one doesn’t expect Yorkton, whether it be the municipal 

officials or those in the education field there, to be excited 

about the closure of their office. At the same time there have 

been many places in this province who haven’t had the luxury 

of having the regional offices located right in their town 

anyways. 

 

Having said all of that . . . Because I am not the best one to 

make a judgement as to where the offices should be located or 

not located, I drew on the wisdom of those groups I talked 

about earlier, the LEADS people, the SSTA, and the STF. And, 

in fact, we had the regional directors themselves put forward 

their recommendations as to what would be the best 

configuration. And what was at the heart of that was: (a) 

servicing the people; (b) not having everything located 

centrally, if you like, in Regina and Saskatoon, which have their 

share of offices and government offices . . . and it’s the rural 

areas that so often don’t have that same accessibility. 

 

And it wasn’t a case of picking on Yorkton or anything like 

that, Mr. Chairman. In fact, when the configuration . . . I left it 

for the most part up to the officials and to those  

involved in the system to take a look and see how can we best 

deliver this service, albeit with less offices. Because it was our 

view that we had to tighten the belt . . . Let’s tighten it in that 

administrative area, maintain the functions so that we do have 

more money for the school boards to run programs for their 

children and to make sure that we have teachers on the front 

line. And that’s the basis. 

 

Now I know that flies in the fact of the NDP dogma. The NDP 

consistently in this House argue the point of: (a) central 

planners, as the hon. member from Regina Rosemont has just 

done; and (b) argue that more government, more layers of 

bureaucracy is the only way to go. 

 

Well when I talked with the SSTA, in particular, about the 

strategy for the budget, the basis that they saw us undertaking 

here was make sure you maintain the operating grant and the 

EDF. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Second question . . . Try to be a little briefer 

and to the point. The second question that they ask is: what is 

the economic impact of the additional expenditures of the 

school divisions to communicate with a more remote regional 

office? Did you do an impact on it, and can you provide them 

with that answer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think if you would see in the 

blue book, you would see that we have a saving of about 

$268,000 nearly $269,000 and four or five, six person-years, 

something like that. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I ask you, Mr. Minister, you knocked 

down a saving for yourself. But the question is, do you pass on 

extra expenses to the trustees of that division if they have to use 

another source of regional office - that’s what they’re asking. 

What is the substitution for the regional office that you closed? 

And is there a financial . . . sit down until I finish will you, 

because I haven’t finished. And I don’t need you standing up; 

wait till the question is asked. 

 

I asked you a specific question: is there a transfer of costs over 

to the regional school divisions? Because that’s what they’re 

asking you here. What is the financial impact if, in fact, they 

have to use a different regional offices? And in fact, what is the 

regional office source for the school divisions of the Yorkton 

area - what do they use? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, some of the thinking that went 

into the closure of the Yorkton office was for the very reason 

that hon. member raises, is that that was an office that could be 

closed with a minimal financial impact anybody in terms of 

travel and accessibility, etc., etc. 

 

And the further point that I would make in so far as the savings 

that were generated, whether it be the amalgamation of the 

department or otherwise, for the most part went back into this 

budget. Rather than pay administration, we wanted to pay for 

programs. And I talked about earlier about a 500,000 or a half a 

million dollar new budget item for the libraries. I could suggest 

to you, I think I probably could say if I wanted to, that that half 

a million dollars resulted as a result of the efficiencies in 

amalgamating the department. And that’s some of the  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1665 

 

kinds of games that you can have by running things efficiently. 

 

(1630) 

 

At the end of the day here, the regional directors and the service 

that they provide to the boards will be maintained - be clear on 

that. If there is over a half million dollar savings to be made, it 

could put into programming, if you like, at the school level. 

That was our preferred course. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well can you answer the question and listen 

carefully? What do the school . . . what regional office is now 

designed for the use of Yorkton? Their regional office has been 

done away with. Who do they go to get the services from? I 

mean, that’s what they want to know. And did you do a 

financial impact study in respect to those boards that will have 

to use another regional office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I am advised that they will likely be 

serviced by one of, or all of, the following regional offices: 

Saskatoon, Melfort, Regina and Weyburn. But because of 

locating boundaries, etc., etc., it might make some sense to 

touch base with those most directly involved to see whether 

Saskatoon versus Melfort might make more sense, or Regina 

versus the Weyburn office might make more sense. 

 

The actual boundaries, if you like, are being determined in 

consultation with those affected, and are not yet clearly drawn. 

But it could well involve all of these, as you might well 

imagine. And because we want to have the best configuration, 

we would like to continue to use the same recipe, and that’s 

consult with the people who are affected. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well then that’s the very point that they raise 

here. It says that: 

 

The decision to close region office three was not made for 

economic reasons (this is the board). The government took 

advantage of the situation in our area. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

Our area should have equal . . . should at least deserve 

equal status to the La Ronge area. 

 

And it goes on and it asks this question of you, Mr. Minister: 

 

Why were the boards not informed of a possible closing of 

the regional office? 

 

I ask you, on behalf of the boards that wrote to you, that 

question: why were they not consulted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The consultations that I talked about 

that were held, were held with the teachers’ federation, the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association, their umbrella 

organization which those boards are members of, and 

particularly, in this case, the L.E.A.D.S. (League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors, and Superintendants) organization. 

Now if the hon. member is saying, well why didn’t you walk 

out to this particular school board and say, well, we’re looking 

at closing down your office and laying off half a dozen people, 

well, that’s the reason. Because you don’t do it on an ad hoc 

basis, number one, and (b) it wouldn’t make sense to walk out 

there and say, well, we’re thinking of firing or laying you 

people off. I mean that would be simply silly, and that’s not the 

way we operate. 

 

I had no particular hidden agenda as to how this configuration 

should look, and that’s why we went into some fairly 

exhaustive discussions. A number of options were looked at. I 

mean, I think I recall joking at one time about this is “option 

32(a),” because there had been that many options discussed as 

to what the regional office configuration should look like. I 

mentioned that if you live in Yorkton, obviously you’re 

unhappy; I suppose if you live in Melfort, you’re obviously 

happy. 

 

The reality is that they will be served. They will be served well. 

And if there was a quarter of a million dollars there to be saved 

that could be put into excellence in our educational system right 

up to the grass roots level, we wanted to capture it and do that, 

and that’s exactly what we’ve done. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well, it certainly would have seemed logical if 

there’s any consultation by you, Mr. Minister, that the east 

central board school division trustees surely would have been 

consulted with. And they have written to you, as I’ve indicated 

in this letter, and they go on to say, and I want it for the record 

just to demonstrate that they haven’t been consulted. And it 

says: 

 

If we are forced to transfer to another regional office, what 

is our choice? 

 

They haven’t even been consulted to the extent of knowing 

where they go. 

 

All school divisions indicated that we should be kept as a 

block, and attached to the Regina region. 

 

This is the group of them meeting. Point 11. 

 

If we have to go to Regina we may as well bypass the 

regional office and go directly to the department. 

 

They go on to say: 

 

There will be a lot of waste time and money, running 

down the road to a regional office distant from us. 

 

And so what you’re doing is, in fact, if there’s no regional 

office close by, and you maybe have consolidated some of the 

region which you still don’t know what the configuration is, 

which surprises me. But none the less, is their contention not 

correct that if they have to bypass - they have no regional office 

now in Wynyard - that if they have to go to another regional 

office, doesn’t this in fact . . . are they not right in stating that 

there’s a cost transferred on to them in carrying out their affairs 

if they  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1666 

 

have to go, as you said, to Melfort, or to Saskatoon, or to 

Regina, or wherever. And this is a concern of theirs, and I 

wonder whether you’ve taken it into consideration, or have you 

dismissed their concern in respect to that transfer of costs to the 

school division boards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said right at the outset before the 

member even got into this point, as you will recall, I said at the 

time that if I lived in or near Yorkton, or was a trustee in or near 

that area, certainly if I once had an office there and I now don’t, 

I’m going to be upset by it; that’s a natural reaction. But I could 

argue that the Kindersleys, the Meadow Lakes, the Nipawins, 

the Estevans of the world, and I could go on and on and on; 

there are many, many, many large centres in this province who 

have never had or enjoyed the benefits of having a regional 

office of education right in their centres either. So if you’re 

going to make an argument for Yorkton, then you ought to 

make an argument for a number of other cities and/or large 

towns in this province, because otherwise your logic falls apart, 

quite simply. It is not the issue whether they are going to be 

served and served adequately, and the answer, there, is yes. 

 

And if you gave, if you walk out on the street and do 

man-on-the-street interviews today - this is the acid test, this is 

the acid test - and you ask the average parent out there: where 

do you think you should spend the money in education - in 

more administration, or in more at the school for the children, 

or for the teachers, and libraries and those kinds of things? the 

answer comes down 99 times out of 100: do it at the school 

level. 

 

That is to say, you don’t have that regional network out there 

and that extension network that is so useful when it comes to 

things like special education, and our facilities planning, and 

getting the program initiatives fed from . . . and 

well-distributed. But if you ask the people across the province 

whether they want . . . where they would priorize their money, 

they are clear every time, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to read the closing paragraph of this 

letter from a group of trustees in the east central part of 

Saskatchewan who I say don’t . . . and throughout this letter 

indicate, they indicate two things: one, you didn’t consult them; 

and two, that they didn’t get much support from the local MLAs 

in the area. 

 

The following comment in closing: 

 

The above comments represent some of the concerns of 

the school division boards and administrators. Action by 

the provincial government is unwarranted. School boards 

request that you reconsider your decision and keep our 

regional office of Saskatchewan education open. 

 

And this has been sent by a group of East Central Branch No. 4, 

the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) from 

Yorkton, Saskatchewan. And so I make that point, and I 

indicate to you that clearly they weren’t consulted, clearly 

you’re transferring some costs on over to the school board 

division. And thirdly, you are taking from Yorkton a service 

that was provided in the past. And  

this is the school board divisions that have written to you and 

asked you to reconsider it. I’ll be very pleased to send out your 

answers to them, which I intend to do, because I feel obligated 

to represent these people because they’re losing a service. And I 

regret that you won’t reconsider it, Mr. Minister. 

 

I want to go on . . . and I’ve heard you during the estimates 

talking on how well education is doing under this 

administration. And I think that out in rural Saskatchewan 

certainly they’re saying that some of the services are being cut, 

and cut drastically. And they’re also saying that there’s a 

transfer back on to the local school division because there is a 

cut in the operating funding this year. You admit it yourself. 

 

And I’ll tell you, I’ll give you an example, and you’ll say, well, 

that’s the school board’s decision. But what I’m illustrating 

here - if you take one school board division - and I’m going to 

indicate to you the number of cuts that took place in the 

Humboldt School Division as a result of the lack of operating 

funding and cut-backs by your government. And here is from a 

concerned parent in the Humboldt School Division. 

 

The following are some cuts the Humboldt rural school division 

have already made for next year. And let me read them to you, 

Mr. Minister. (1) The band program has been established for 16 

years. A very high standard with many students pursuing a 

music career. Completely cut. (2) Speech therapist with a 

work-load she could barely handle, completely cut; guidance 

counsellor, completely cut; computer consultant, completely 

cut; access to educational psychologist, completely cut with the 

closing of the Melfort regional office; choral program, 

completely cut. And it goes on to say that other services are not 

being offered within the division. 

 

And I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, those programs were 

not cut because the board, the local division school board, 

wanted to cut them I can tell you that, because they’re very 

responsible people, and they do try to provide a high quality of 

education. 

 

But what you have done is transferred more cost over to the 

local school boards. And that’s what you’re doing. And here are 

a whole series of cuts that have taken place just in one school 

division, and I can tell you, Mr. Minister, it’s not a school 

division that is particularly poor. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well how can you stop people from 

singing? 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well the sports broadcaster says, how do you 

stop people from singing? 

 

I’m going to say that we had in Humboldt rural school division 

just an outstanding band program, and the division has had to 

make cuts because of the cuts of education funding by your 

government. You have wasted the money. You have 

mismanaged this economy, and now the children of 

Saskatchewan are starting to bear the brunt of your 

mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1667 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And those are the cuts just in the Humboldt 

school division. Imagine: band program, cut; speech therapist, 

completely cut; guidance counsellor, completely cut; computer 

consultant, completely cut; access to educational psychologist, 

completely cut; the choral program, completely cut. 

 

Now you might want to laugh over on the other side and don’t 

think it’s very serious. But I’ll tell you that people and the 

parents who have children and were getting these services, 

think it pretty serious. And you’re going to say, well, the school 

board has the choice. I’ll tell you, they don’t have a choice 

because there’s been drastic cut-backs in the operating funding 

by this government. And you know it, and the people of 

Saskatchewan know it. And this is part of the result of what is 

happening in the educational system. And that’s in the 

Humboldt School Division. And I can come forward with more 

evidence of where programs had been required to be cut. 

 

And as I say to you, Mr. Minister, these were very worthwhile 

programs which local boards wanted to maintain. In fact, in the 

school division there was a petition of over 1,500 names, asking 

the board and in fact making representations to the minister 

himself, asking that funding be provided for these very useful 

programs. The people of the Humboldt Rural School Division, 

I’ll tell you, are not very pleased with the massiveness of the 

cuts that are going on in that division. 

 

(1645) 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, how can you stand in this House 

with a smirk on your face, pretending that education is moving 

forward, when in fact you see worthwhile programs just in one 

division of Humboldt Rural School Division being drastically 

cut? All of those programs which provided a basis for a good 

education. And you stand here and pretend that you’re funding 

education. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, have you been receiving 

correspondence from parents and taxpayers and school board 

divisions, requesting further funding because of the necessity of 

having to cut back on very worthwhile programs? 

 

And certainly, I know in the Humboldt School Division they 

have made representations to you to help to keep some of these 

very worthwhile programs. And I was wondering whether you 

could elucidate, Mr. Minister, in a half a dozen words or so, not 

a five-hour speech, whether or not this is evidence of the 

education system being seriously damaged by the lack of 

funding, by the mismanagement and the waste that has been 

perpetuated on the people of this province by the government 

opposite. 

 

I ask you, do you . . . Take the smile off your face and start 

considering the major, the major cuts that are taking place in 

one school division. And I’ll tell you, it’s serious. And I ask 

you, Mr. Minister, can you in fact address those major cuts that 

the people and the parents of the Humboldt Rural School 

Division are very concerned with? 

There’s only one alternative that they can use, and that is to 

massively increase their own local taxation base. And if that’s 

what you’re recommending - of course, that’s what you’re 

doing. But I’m asking you whether you’re prepared to take a 

look at the seriousness of what is taking place just in this 

particular example. 

 

So I ask you, have you received representations in respect to 

this, and are you concerned with the massiveness of the cuts 

that are taking place, and will you indeed provide extra funding 

so that the education system out there will not in fact be 

deteriorating to the extend that it has under your 

mismanagement, your waste, and your incompetence? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member raised a number of 

points relative to education funding in general across this 

province and as well, specifically, as it relates to the Humboldt 

Rural School Division, Mr. Chairman. I am not going to hide 

under the cloak of autonomy that those trustees enjoy, in terms 

of second guessing their decisions. 

 

But here are the records as it relates . . . here are the facts as it 

relates to Humboldt rural school district, Mr. Chairman. The 

hon. member used words like, destroying. I mean, that typical 

NDP overstated rhetoric. Now he has tried to suggest that at 

Humboldt school district, Humboldt rural school district, where 

out of an 8 or $9 million budget, out of an 8 or $9 million total 

budget that they have to spend, Mr. Chairman, is that this 

$35,000 decrease that they have will somehow destroy 

education. Now have you ever heard anything so ludicrous in 

your life? 

 

The NDP would try and get the people of this province to buy 

the notion that because, out of 8 or $9 million budget they have 

$35,000 less, that somehow education is going to fall apart out 

there. Well I’ll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, I have a lot more 

faith in those people in Humboldt, those trustees, than that hon. 

member does, and if I was them I’d elect themselves a new 

MLA because the one they’ve got isn’t adequately representing 

them. 

 

I’ve never seen such gross distortion, fear mongering, and doom 

mongering as has come from that hon. member from Quill 

Lakes. Because I ask you, Mr. Chairman, what other category - 

what other category can you put that in, Mr. Chairman? What 

other category can you put that in except fear mongering when 

he says, you’ve taken away, you’ve cut $35,000 out of this 8 or 

$9 million budget, and you’re going to destroy education. 

 

But the story goes on further, Mr. Chairman. Why is the 

Humboldt Rural School Division budget that they receive from 

the provincial government this year, why is the operating grant 

decreased, Mr. Chairman? Well the reason it’s decreased, Mr. 

Chairman, is that they have fewer students enrolled - fewer 

students enrolled, Mr. Chairman. And that adjusts the amount 

of money that they have available. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, the other part of the story that the hon.  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1668 

 

member refused to tell the public is that if Humboldt trustees 

had thought that somehow education was going to be 

jeopardized so much, would they not have raised their mill rate, 

Mr. Chairman? If they would have thought that the government 

was being so stingy with the money, and that somehow they 

would have to back-fill, as the hon. member suggested, that 

they’re going to have to make it up, well, they didn’t increase 

their mill rate as far as I know, Mr. Chairman. 

 

So when he says that we’re off-loading our problems onto the 

school districts locally, it’s simply not true because they didn’t 

increase the mill rate. But you want to know what else, Mr. 

Chairman? That school board has an additional $2 million-plus 

in property this year that will be assessed as school tax they 

didn’t have access to last year. 

 

So you know what, Mr. Chairman? I bet if we could have the 

final numbers here - I’ll bet if we could have the final numbers 

here we would be able to show the hon. member form Quill 

Lakes that that school board, in fact, this year probably has as 

much or more money than they had last year to spend on 

schooling. And, Mr. Chairman, that doesn’t take into account 

the fact that the Humboldt Rural School Division has had 

something in the order of 151, $152,000 available through 

education development fund for special initiatives in excellence 

for their students. An additional $152,000 for that school board 

over and above base grants, Mr. Chairman, for special 

initiatives in excellence. 

 

So on every measure, the hon. member is wrong. Point number 

one, they have more property that’s assessable this year. Point 

number two, the drop is not some horrendous number from the 

base grant, not figuring in the net gain likely from the increased 

assessment, and that there’s fewer students. Now he stands here 

and criticizes the local board for hot doing this, and not doing 

that, and not doing this, when in fact he doesn’t even have the 

whole story, Mr. Chairman. He doesn’t have the whole story at 

all. 

 

And if we look at the entire province - and I’ve read these into 

the record before, but perhaps he wasn’t here. What is the 

record, Mr. Chairman? In the North, as the hon. member from 

Athabasca will full well know, in the North the initiatives have 

been many, and we will continue to do them. 

 

And across the province under the NDP years, if one buys the 

logic, Mr. Chairman, that somehow the provincial government 

during the Tory years have been stingy with their education 

fundings and mill rates have had to rise out there in rural 

Saskatchewan to compensate, then how does he figure, if that 

logic is true, how does he explain this? 

 

Under the NDP years, there was a 63 per cent . . . I better get 

these numbers right, Mr. Chairman. Oh, it’s even worse than 

that. Under the NDP administration, there was a 69.7 per cent 

growth in mill rates in rural Saskatchewan. And under the 

Progressive Conservatives for a similar time frame, there’s been 

a 15.7 per cent growth. 

An Hon. Member: — Was there a reassessment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Now how does the hon. member 

square that? And they shout reassessment from their seat. And 

reassessment hasn’t got one thing to do with it. What has got 

everything to do with it is the fact that there has been building 

and growth and diversification across this province since our 

Premier took over the reigns of premiership in this province. 

 

So here’s what happened under the NDP years, Mr. Chairman. 

The provincial NDP government was very stingy with the 

money, and rural school divisions had to increase their mill rate 

by 69 per cent to keep the schools going. Under our 

government, there’s been the excellence fund and the money in 

that education development fund. And there’s been special 

initiatives across the province because of it. 

 

And the operating grants, Mr. chairman, went up not 5 per cent 

or 35 per cent merely to account for inflation, they went up 60 

per cent across this province. And that was at a time when the 

number of school children in our K to 12 system dropped below 

200,000. It went down 4,000. Funding went up 60 per cent, and 

the enrolment went down 4,000, from 201,000, or 203, 204,000 

to 199,000 roughly. 

 

And similarly, Mr. Chairman, as I explained earlier, if somehow 

we are being stingy with the amount of money we give school 

boards, how does the hon. member from Quill Lakes explain 

the fact that school boards today enjoy a surplus of nearly twice 

the size it was when the NDP were in government in 1981-82. 

How does he explain that one? I mean what we’ve seen here, 

Mr. Chairman, is the worst case of overstating facts of political 

rhetoric, of doom mongering, and of fear mongering that I’ve 

ever seen. 

 

Because I’ll tell you what, as I stand here today, the Humboldt 

Rural School Division with 8 or $9 million to expend on behalf 

of the students in that area, will deliver a first rate education 

despite what that member form Quill Lake says. I absolutely 

believe that with that 8 or $9 million they will deliver as fine an 

education as you’ll find, not only in Saskatchewan, but in North 

America, Mr. Chairman. I absolutely believe that. 

 

He wants to criticize the local school board. He wants to 

criticize the local school board; I want to applaud the local 

school board for what they’ve done with the dollars that they 

had in the educational development fund, and the library 

updating, and the special initiatives they’ve been able to put in 

place, Mr. Chairman. I want to absolutely congratulate them for 

what they’ve done. 

 

And they suggest in the letter that somehow they won’t have 

access to a regional office and regional services. Mr. Chairman, 

that is absolutely hog-wash. He knows it, and they know it. 

There’s going to be a different office but they will served, as 

they have always been served, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I suspect that if we could have the number that the school 

board probably has some sense of this very day, in so far as 

what the assessment increase means, in terms of  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1669 

 

the property . . . there’s more property there. There’s been 

growth and development in that area. Property valuation has 

gone up some $2 million, and their mill rate remains 

unchanged, but you multiply that mill rate by that new-found 

assessment, and that means money for the school board. And 

I’ll bet you when you add it all up, and despite the fact that their 

enrolment has gone down, I’ll bet you, Mr. Chairman, that they 

have as much or more money for this year than they did last to 

spend on education on the K to 12 system. 

 

I’ll bet you, as sure as I’m standing here, and I know this too, 

that they will do a good job on behalf of the students in that 

area, as they have done in the past. 

 

And so I’ll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, I get tired of this kind 

of rhetoric because it does not serve the people of this province 

well. It does not serve the people of this province well. They’re 

trying to scare the people in Humboldt and area. They’re trying 

to scare them, because what they’re saying, Mr. Chairman . . . 

let’s examine the thrust of that argument. Let’s examine what 

this member said. He said, you’re taking $35,000 in funding 

away from that school board - $35,000 out of that 8 or 9 million 

we have to spend - and somehow education is going to fall just 

like the Roman Empire fell. Now who buys that logic? 

 

Would anybody in their right mind, listening to these debates 

this very day, whether they’re in Humboldt, or in Regina, or in 

Weyburn, or in Meadow Lake, or in Nipawin, would believe 

that, Mr. Chairman? Would anybody in this province today 

believe that because we’re only going to spend three-quarters of 

a billion dollars in education - and that’s from the provincial 

coffers, not counting what they raise in property tax - would 

anybody in this province believe what the NDP are saying 

about education being destroyed because we spend 

three-quarters of a billion dollars in this province, more than has 

ever been spent. 

 

Well that’s why I say it’s time for the NDP to examine their 

policy, whether it be education or otherwise. They are totally 

irrelevant and unhooked from what the people in rural 

Saskatchewan are thinking, Mr. Chairman. That is the reality. 

 

When they were in government, they never brought in a special 

excellence fund. When they were in government, we saw what 

their blueprint was in education when it came to post-secondary 

education - they wanted to cut back on funding to universities. 

They were of the view that enrolment should be slashed and 

that somehow we should target all our opportunities in the 

resource-based economy when, in fact, everything today tells us 

the opposite was happening. 

 

What it comes down to, Mr. Chairman, is this: when it comes to 

educational policy, whether it be K to 12, or adult education, or 

agriculture policy, or potash policy, or uranium policy, or 

understanding and doing something about the implications of 

the knowledge-based economy, the NDP are bankrupt of ideas. 

 

Worse than that, Mr. Chairman, not only are they  

bankrupt of ideas - and I look at the hon. member from Regina 

North East sitting in the back row there - and this is something 

that should worry that member because, as I understand, he is a 

prospective candidate for the NDP leadership race. But, Mr. 

Chairman, why that becomes so serious when you’ve got your 

future leaders of an opposition party, and not paying any 

attention to the public policy issues of the day, is simply doom 

mongering dumb, and setting them into an either/or perspective. 

Her Majesty’s loyal opposition is doing a disservice to her loyal 

majesty and to the people of this province. Because, Mr. 

Chairman, the reality is this in Saskatchewan today. they do not 

want to see us arguing back and forth about this versus that, 

you’re wrong and we’re right kind of perspective. 

 

What the people across this province want to see today is debate 

around some constructive proposals. And if they would come 

up with something constructive, whether it be in education, or 

in agriculture, or in the potash industry, or in the uranium 

industry, or in the forestry industry, or as it relates to the North, 

Mr. Chairman, or as it relates to the implications of the 

information-based economy, I’ll tell you, for one, I would stand 

in this House and I would debate that and I would debate it at 

great length. 

 

Because one of the biggest issues that’s facing Saskatchewan 

young people today, Mr. Chairman, is this. They walk down the 

street, whether it be in Humboldt or elsewhere, and they see the 

world around them changing. They see the tractors on their 

dad’s farm changing. they see the technology and the 

understanding that their dad must have relative to fertilizers and 

sprays, and chemicals, and the new hybrid seed varieties, and 

these scanners in the sky. They see all of that changing. They 

would be mightily disappointed, Mr. Chairman, in a 

government that did not change, too, when it came to adult 

education, to keep them current with the times. And the changes 

we are making, Mr. Speaker, are not merely for change’s sake, 

but because the world is changing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Being 5 o’clock this committee is 

recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 

 


