













































September 24, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 24, 1987 

 

 

2807 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 

Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Free Trade Negotiations 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Premier, and it has to do with the recent 

developments on free trade and the negotiations. Obviously the 

Premier was in discussions with the Prime Minister of Canada 

yesterday, and I wonder if the Premier would give the House 

and the people of Saskatchewan a brief summary of what the 

situation is and, specifically, would he answer whether or not 

this is a suspension of the free trade negotiations or is a 

termination of the free trade negotiations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can say to the 

hon. member, to answer the last question first, that it is a 

suspension, but it’s serious in terms of the gap between the 

negotiators. Mr. Reisman has been a negotiator for 25 years or 

more, as you know. He negotiated the auto pact years ago, has 

negotiated internationally on tariffs for Canada, and so he’s an 

experienced man. He says it’s extremely difficult, and there 

really wasn’t much point in going on any further, unless United 

States brought to the table something reasonable. 

 

With respect to the Prime Minister’s view is that we have to 

have a substantial package when it comes to subsidies and 

tariffs and dumping and the trade remedy actions that the 

United States use on us. And the best example today, and I’m 

sure you’re very familiar with it, is the potash case where you 

can hardly find an American who thinks it’s a good idea, the 

anti-dumping. I mean, the farmers don’t like it, the consumers 

don’t like it, the taxpayers think it’s ridiculous. They’re 

spending billions of dollars on the U.S. farm bill. And it’s 

typical, because their mines, Mr. Speaker, couldn’t live under 

the anti-dumping rules that have been applied to us. 

 

So I can only say, as briefly as I can, the Prime Minister’s view 

is that this is a difficult situation. Obviously he’s tried hard to 

negotiate, and believe that it’s a fair challenge to do that, but we 

have to see some movement on the United States, or in fact it 

will be terminated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the 

Premier. In light of the fact that their Premier rather pointedly, 

and obviously purposefully, chose the word “suspension” as 

opposed to “termination” for the talks, there seems to be an 

indication or an implication that there is a possibility that these 

negotiations will resume. 

 

Will the Premier advise whether or not the Prime Minister has 

told him, if that is in fact the case, whether the discussions are 

going to be resumed before the October 5 deadline, and if so, on 

whose initiative and on what  

ground rules? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well that’s a very good question that I’m 

sure not anybody knows the answer to it with respect to what 

kind of response the United States will come back with. 

 

We suspended the discussions; we suspended the negotiations 

because United States hasn’t moved. Obviously the United 

States will have to move and get serious with respect to the 

whole trade remedy world that we deal with, or else the 

suspensions will lead to the termination. 

 

I mean, you’ve watched television I’m sure, and others, this 

morning. The United States is still trying to kind of figure out 

what they’re going to do, and they are very confused, frankly, 

in Washington, both in terms of their own political priorities 

and in terms of their trading relationships. So we’ll see what 

they do. If they’re prepared to respond on the substantive issues 

. . . I could read five of them, but I won’t at this time But if 

you’d like me to, I can read the five that have been laid out and 

given to the President of the United States by the Prime 

Minister, and say, these are the things we’ve got to see at the 

table, or else it’s over. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 

I would take him up on his suggestion if he would follow up on 

it and give us those five conditions subsequent to question 

period. 

 

But my new question to you, sir, is this: in light of the fact that 

the Canadian government, through the course of these 

negotiations — in fact before the negotiations — has already 

surrendered, at least by my judgement and the judgement of a 

lot of Canadians, some very valuable bargaining chips, such as 

doing away with the foreign investment review agency and the 

drug patent Bill which is currently before parliament, and others 

which I think the Americans wanted removed. 

 

In the light of the fact that we have gone a long way toward 

agreeing to the Americans’ demands and yet no progress has 

been made judging by yesterday’s developments, will the 

Premier be able to tell the House whether or not the Prime 

Minister has articulated an alternative trading strategy to him in 

the eventuality that the bilateral negotiations with the United 

States collapse — an alternative trading strategy which in fact 

involves a world-wide trading situation with not only the United 

States, but with a lot of the nations of the world? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Two observations, Mr. Speaker. I can 

say, without hesitation, that the actions such as FIRA (foreign 

investment review agency) and the actions such as the national 

energy program — and I don’t mean to embroil us in a new 

debate — but actions that were taken by the NDP in terms of 

nationalizing firms have not helped the Americans feel positive 

about the Canadian-American trading relationship. It’s  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2808 

 

antagonized them. 

 

And whether we were in bilateral negotiations or not, Mr. 

Speaker, we wanted to see FIRA changed, and we wanted to see 

the national energy program changed, and that had nothing to 

do with the bilateral discussions; in fact, it was the wise thing to 

do, and Canadians support that. 

 

Secondly, with respect the multilateral trade negotiations — 

sure, I mean, we’re into those, and the Prime Minister has been 

raising agriculture world-wide in terms of us dealing with them. 

But I would point out to the hon. member that if the United 

States shows the world that it’s unable to move towards freer 

trade with its largest and the best trading partner in history of 

the two countries, then others, like Japan and Europeans, are 

going to look at the United States and say, you can’t be serious 

when you’re talking about tariff reductions and freer trade 

world-wide when you can’t even get it together with your best 

friend and your best trading partner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

American Anti-dumping Action 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. Mr. 

Premier, my question deals with the American anti-dumping 

action they took against the Saskatchewan potash industry. 

 

The Americans have now agreed to delay the final ruling until 

January 8, and we hear out of the United States that U.S. trade 

lawyers and even officials of the Department of Commerce 

have said that this is now an opportunity to negotiate a political 

settlement on this industry between Ottawa and Washington. 

This is the kind of lobbying and action we’ve urged you to take 

for many months. 

 

I’m asking you, Mr. Premier: in your discussions with the 

Prime Minister yesterday, did you urge him to seek an early 

meeting with President Reagan to negotiate a political 

settlement on this anti-dumping action? And furthermore, now 

that the comprehensive trade agreement or talks have stalled, 

did you also urge him to focus in on a specific industry where a 

political settlement could be had within a few months? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first I would say to 

the hon. member that I am not convinced, and I don’t think 

many people in Saskatchewan are convinced, that the 

anti-dumping case against Saskatchewan potash mines is valid. 

We think it’s wrong, that it’s wrong-headed, that it’s fraudulent, 

that it is very much unfair — very much unfair. In fact, mines in 

the United States will clearly admit that they couldn’t live under 

the rules that they’re applying to us here in Canada. 

 

So I am not prepared to admit, as a Canadian and as a 

Saskatchewan resident where we have the majority of the 

potash and supply 80 per cent of the potash to the United States, 

that in fact we have to have a political negotiated settlement 

when I’m yet unconvinced that we are at guilt or at fault at all. 

 

We have been taking our legal action and our economic analysis 

and our accounting analysis to the Commerce department in 

some detail, and it’s good research and it’s well documented, to 

help them make the case and help them review it to make sure 

. . . perhaps they can realize, as many Americans are realizing 

now, that in fact the case is wrong, and that it is an over-supply 

situation. It is world wide. We have closed down operations. 

We’re running . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order. Order, please. I know that it’s an issue that could, you 

know, draw a very long and good response, but there should be 

a limit. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, I don’t need to remind you that 

when we were in discussions on the Bill, your Minister of 

Energy and Mines indicated that it was a quasi-legal argument. 

But the United States people are now saying that this can be 

settled on a political basis. 

 

I’m asking you now: why didn’t you take the opportunity 

yesterday to speak for Saskatchewan potash workers and their 

families with the Prime Minister, to seek an early solution to 

this anti-dumping problem which you claim is a world-wide 

problem? Why aren’t you protecting the workers and families in 

Saskatchewan now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely don’t have 

much time for the hon. member’s supposed regard for 

Saskatchewan potash mines and Saskatchewan families in the 

potash industry, when he borrowed money from Americans and 

brought them here, and is the reason for the whole problem to 

start with. 

 

And the Senator from New Mexico quotes the NDP time and 

time and time and time again, and they don’t like to hear that, 

but they quote them in the Congress, and they quote them right 

through the halls of Congress in Washington. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I mean, I can read it here again. So to 

stand up there now and say . . . Let me point this out. If you 

want to resort to only political negotiations, we will be into 

many, many, many political negotiations with the United States 

unless we can have negotiations with the United States, unless 

we can have a new bilateral trading arrangement between the 

two countries. And if you want to negotiate on softwood lumber 

and pork next month, and uranium and steel and potash and 

several things for months, then of course we can have that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would say: the key is to have a bilateral 

trade mechanism that would . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Deficiency Payment to Farmers 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2809 

 

also to the Premier. It deals with his meeting with the Prime 

Minister yesterday. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Premier, in your discussion with the Prime 

Minister, did you get a commitment from him of a date by 

which the grain price deficiency payment will be in the hands of 

the farmers; and did you get from him a commitment on a 

specific amount to be paid? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it seems like the only 

opportunity that the hon. member uses to ask a question about 

agriculture is when I happen to meet with the Prime Minister. 

Well I am happy that he’s concerned about agriculture. 

 

I will say to the hon. member that through the work of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and in good part by my 

colleagues here in my office, every Minister of Agriculture in 

Canada and every Premier in Canada has said the same thing 

with respect to deficiency payments, that they should be at least 

$1 billion; that they should be more than that this year, as a 

result of the export subsidies to the United States. 

 

The Prime Minister understands that, and the Prime Minister 

has made a commitment to farmers across Canada, and indeed 

to Saskatchewan, that he will be there to defend Saskatchewan 

farmers against unfair subsidies by Americans or anybody else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 

you were face to face with the Prime Minister of this country 

yesterday, and didn’t ask him how much and a date when the 

farmer who need money in Saskatchewan are going to get it? 

What kind of Agriculture minister is that? Were you more 

concerned about saving your political hide again, rather than 

looking after farmers? Why did you not demand a grain price 

deficiency payment now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the agricultural 

community we can probably compare our political hides. And I 

would say, even in your jurisdiction, I would say that the 

substantial payment that the Prime Minister has given to 

Saskatchewan farmers, and the combination of the deficiency 

payment and the western grain stabilization, about $10,000 a 

farmer in the last few months, it is significant. It’s more than 

any administration has ever done. 

 

And the Prime Minister on top of that has said to me and to the 

premiers and others: yes, I will support Canadian agriculture; 

and yes, I will support Saskatchewan agriculture producers in 

the face of export subsidies that we see in the United States. 

 

So that commitment was there last year, Mr. Speaker. And as 

far as I’m concerned, it’s there this year, and it will be there in 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Position on Misleading the House 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 

Mr. Premier, is it your position that ministers of the Crown 

should tell the truth to this legislature and to the people of this 

province? And if one of your ministers was found to have 

misled this legislature, would you feel compelled to discipline 

that member? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I often find the members 

opposite exaggerating, misleading the public, stretching the 

facts to a very large extent, Mr. Speaker. And I would think the 

general public in the province of Saskatchewan expects all 

members to be accurate, and to be on the mark, and not to 

exaggerate, and to be as fair with the facts as possible, Mr. 

Speaker. And that would include, obviously, the members of 

the NDP who, in question period, I think you could see, often 

stretch it considerably, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Waiting for Cancer-Related Surgery 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — A new question to the Premier. On Tuesday, 

I asked your Minister of Health about the case of a 53-year-old 

Saskatoon woman, Joyce Kosokowsky, who was diagnosed as 

having a cancerous growth on her kidney. Her doctor says she 

needs surgery to confirm that the growth is malignant, and 

remove it. On Tuesday your Minister of Health told this 

legislature, and I quote: The person in question today has 

surgery booked for October 5.” 

 

Mr. Premier, I want you to know that St. Paul’s Hospital has not 

booked her surgery. Mrs. Kosokowsky has not been advised of 

a date for her surgery, and she requires urgent cancer surgery. Is 

it fair to say, Mr. Premier, that your Minister of Health 

deliberately misled this legislature? Do you condone that kind 

of behaviour on the part of your minister, and is this minister 

playing politics with Mrs. Kosokowsky and her family? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the hon. 

member and to the House a couple of days ago, I believe, the 

case in question, and I stand by that as my best information, is 

that the surgery is booked for October 5. The member here 

raises the question and says — in fact I heard her say it very 

clearly — that the person has diagnosed as having a cancerous 

growth. That’s not the fact, Mr. Speaker. The best information 

we have is that the person has been diagnosed as having a 

growth which could potentially be cancerous. It could 

potentially be cancerous. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, let’s just 

go back over the case in the situation at St. Paul’s  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2810 

 

Hospital. The fact is that at St. Paul’s Hospital over a period of 

a number of years, quite a number of years . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please! I’d like to 

remind the minister that your going back over the case is going 

to take a considerable length of time, and I don’t think we can 

allow that. So if you can do it in a few remarks, you may 

continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In order to explain this case we must lay 

out the circumstance. If you would bear with me for just a few 

seconds, I will deal with it. The case is the following. Urology, 

the waiting lists for urology at St. Paul’s Hospital, Saskatoon, 

have been in the order of three to four weeks for a number of 

years. They are now at five weeks. That, over years, 

periodically has changed — up to five weeks, down as low as 

three weeks. There is not a significant change in terms of the 

length of time people will wait for . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 

the minister’s office contacted St. Paul’s Hospital and was 

advised that Mrs. Kosokowsky could be in the hospital the 

week of October 5 or the week of October 12. So the minister 

misled this House, and I want to know whether or not you 

condone that kind of behaviour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I stand by what I said then, and what I 

say again today. The information that we have in the 

Department of Health is that the booking for this lady was for 

October 5 at the latest. Hopefully she’ll be in before October 5. 

I would hope that would be the case, as will the person in 

question — that the member has chosen to bring before the 

House — as will all of her family and everyone concerned 

about the particular case. Obviously we would hope that the 

case could be dealt with at St. Paul’s Hospital as soon as 

possible. I would hope that as well. I will stand by what I said 

earlier. But the best information that we have in the department 

is that that will take place October 5 or earlier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, are you aware that your 

government — supplementary — cut funding to St. Paul’s 

Hospital by $1.5 million? Are you aware that they had to close 

69 beds this summer for a two-month period because of those 

cuts, and will you now admit, Mr. Premier, that the reason why 

Mrs. Kosokowsky and thousands of others like her are waiting 

on lists, and have extended waiting times, is because of your 

underfunding of hospitals in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates — the waiting 

list that the member talks about, extended waiting lists and so 

on in urology at St. Paul’s Hospital — I have outlined the 

circumstance surrounding that. And I say again that it has not 

increased substantially over a period of a good number of years. 

 

Secondly, is the hon. member aware, Mr. Speaker, are members 

over there aware at all of the legacy that they left as it relates to 

. . . as it relates to . . . as it relates to St. Paul’s Hospital? Mr. 

Speaker, which government . . . which government is 

responsible for the regeneration and the new construction going 

on at St. Paul’s Hospital; much needed, and should have been 

there a good deal before. Which government is responsible for 

that, Mr. Speaker? This . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 

 

Request for Information by Provincial Auditor 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question to the Premier, and it has to do with some very 

shocking revelations that were disclosed this morning in the 

meeting of the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Mr. Premier, this morning the president of the Crown 

Management Board confirmed — and he did this during 

testimony before the legislature’s Public Accounts Committee 

— he confirmed that he has been instructed by the board of 

directors of the Crown Management Board not to provide the 

Provincial Auditor with information he has requested about the 

operation of Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Premier: since you are the vice-chairman of 

the Crown Management Board, and since you are the Premier, 

can you explain how you justify denying information to the 

Provincial Auditor this way? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, over the last 

couple of days, we’ve had the sad public spectacle of a token 

NDP leadership candidate unravelling before the public in 

terms, Mr. Speaker, of falsely and deliberately misleading this 

House, and I accuse the member from Regina North East of 

that, Mr. Speaker. That is not the information that the Provincial 

Auditor asked. 

 

Let me indicate what the Provincial Auditor asked for. He asked 

for the proposals submitted by the private sector audit 

companies to be able to do the audits of the Crown 

corporations. Mr. Speaker, that is the information he asked, and 

that is in the year 1987, not the year under review before the 

Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Secondly, what we are prepared to give in committee when 

we’re in debate, if the question arises, is the list of the 

proposals, or the successful proposals — I don’t think that the 

unsuccessful proposals are relevant — the proposals for the 

companies to be able to do the audits of the Crown 

corporations, we will give the information. We will also give 

the information, because it is not under the year under review 

for the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, of the value 

of the proposals or the fees for the proposals which will indicate 

that the private sector  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2811 

 

audit proposals are less than the fees charged by the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. Supplementary. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, since you refuse to answer 

the question on behalf of your government, on an important 

matter such as this of government policy, I ask you: will you 

confirm in this House today that the board of directors of the 

Crown Management Board has directed the president of that 

corporation not to provide information that the Provincial 

Auditor has requested? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I again, will repeat: what information? And 

I again am somewhat shocked at the spectacle that we see of the 

candidate whose party has turned on him, and I think he is now 

getting somewhat extreme in his questions, Mr. Speaker. I 

suggest to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, the information we 

are prepared to give . . . and one should, and I would think that 

the hon. member should know, that we are entitled, before the 

Public Accounts Committee, to deal with the year under review. 

 

The legislation is before this Assembly to deal with the ability 

of the province of Saskatchewan to use private sector auditors 

to deal with the audits of the Crown corporations. We find it 

somewhat surprising that it seems to be all right for the New 

Democratic Party to use private sector auditors for the Potash 

Corporation and SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation), but to use it beyond that seems somewhat wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to repeal The Public Utilities Review 

Commission Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 

to repeal The Public Utilities Review Commission Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Public Utilities Review Commission Repeal Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 

respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 

resulting from the enactment of The Public Utilities Review 

Commission Repeal Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as the opposition has  

supported repeal of this, I suggest later this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

POINTS OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 

the day, I wish to raise a point of order having to do with the 

conduct of today’s question period. Mr. Speaker, yesterday you 

were very strict with the member for Quill Lakes with respect to 

his background statement on the basis that it tended to provoke 

debate — a lengthy background statement. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we had the spectacle of ministers opposite 

saying whatever they wanted to say, whether or not it had 

anything to do with the question. We had the spectacle of the 

member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden making provocative 

statements which were again unrelated to the question asked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has to be rules for both sides of the House. If 

our conduct must be such that it does not provoke debate, then 

the conduct of the ministers opposite, and particularly the 

Premier, who felt perfectly free to say anything he liked 

whether or not it had anything to do with the question, must 

also be to the point, on the subject, and relatively brief. 

 

Those are the rules which apply to us, Mr. Speaker, they must 

be the rules which apply to the members opposite. And the 

worst two, I suggest, are from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, and the 

Premier himself. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, to review the record 

and give us a ruling as to whether or not you think the Premier 

and the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden fell within the very 

strict juncture that you set for the member from Qu’Appelle 

Lake yesterday . . . the member from Quill Lakes yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would likewise invite Mr. Speaker to 

review the record and to catalogue all those provocative 

statements that have been made in the House, and rule as to 

whether provocative statements should be, should be in fact 

banned from the House. I think that there would be very little 

said in here if that were the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Speaking further to the point of order, Mr. 

Speaker, the hon. member indicated that he had some concerns, 

I believe, as ministers answering in a way that he found less 

than acceptable. Mr. Speaker, I would hope that your ruling 

would extend to respond to the general tenor of the hon. 

member’s point of order, and whether or not the deliberate, 

false interpretation of documents by members of the opposition 

. . . 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2812 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please! I 

would ask the Minister of Finance to please sit down. I don’t 

think he’s speaking to the point of order. 

 

The Minister of Finance knows that he must not accuse 

anybody in this House of deliberately misleading this 

Assembly. I’m afraid that the Minister of Finance seems to be 

doing that, and I would ask him to respond to that, and 

withdraw. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize if that was the 

way my remarks were taken. They were not meant, Mr. Speaker 

. . . I did raise very much . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. I 

would ask the Minister of Finance to simply withdraw the 

statement and apologize without any qualifications. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Certainly I withdraw and apologize, Mr. 

Speaker, and then I have another point of order I’d like to raise. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Referring to the hon. member’s point of order, 

from Regina Centre, if I may I would like to deal with it now. 

 

The hon. member’s point of order is well taken, and let me give 

a few remarks on that. However, I would just like to point out 

one thing, that in dealing with the hon. member from Quill 

Lakes yesterday the ruling was not on whether or not he was on 

topic but that his preamble was too lengthy. I think I should like 

to bring that to your attention. 

 

However, having said that, it is true that some members are 

taking too long in their responses. As a matter of fact, I think 

question period was going quite well for a while. In the last few 

days it seems to have taken another turn for the worse, and I 

would like to remind that there are some ministers who are 

taking too long with their answers. There also are some 

members on the opposite side, perhaps, taking a little too long 

with their preambles. I would hope that hon. members, in the 

spirit of the good conduct of this House, will try to keep that in 

mind and try to rectify their ways in future question periods. 

 

But, yes, the point of order is well taken. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. As I 

heard during question period today, the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana accused the Minister of Health of 

deliberately misleading the House. 

 

I would ask that you review the record on that, and if you find 

that to be unparliamentary, I would ask and hope that she would 

be asked to withdraw those comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I make note of the point of order, and I will 

definitely review the record to see if the minister — rather, the 

member from Nutana — did in fact make those remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I raise a similar point of 

order, and I now deal with the remarks of the member  

for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, not during his intervention on the 

first point of order, but rather his intervention, his answer in the 

question period. I wrote down the words “falsely and 

deliberately misleading the House,” applying that to the 

member for Regina North East. 

 

I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to review that and to advise the 

House whether or not in your judgement those words are 

parliamentary. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order of the Leader of the 

Opposition is well taken, and I will certainly review the record 

to see if the Minister of Finance in fact did make those remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — A further point of order, Mr. Speaker. I 

would ask Mr. Speaker to consider the rather recent practice in 

this session of the opposition in question period, and 

deliberately not quoting either correctly, or a wide interpretation 

so far from the accuracy of the document as being a factual 

assessment of the documentation used, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My particular example is the two questions the last two days by 

the minister from North East. I have documents wherein . . . 

which refute not only his question but the interpretation and 

impression that he was attempting to lead. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the further example of the member from Regina . . . I apologize, 

from not Centre, but Regina Victoria — I apologize to the hon. 

member — when he yesterday, and I suggest . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

It’s a long bow to draw for a point of order. If you have a point 

of order, please put it, and I ask the hon. member not to make a 

speech; just put your point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe that the 

activity of a deliberate misinterpretation of documents as being 

part of a factual statement should also be reviewed by Mr. 

Speaker. And I raise that point of order as to that . . . as whether 

it being a good parliamentary practice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I asked you to consider the point of 

order raised by the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, to 

consider whether or not it’s the role of the Chair to pass upon 

interpretation of material, impressions left, as the member for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden apparently thinks it is. And I ask you, 

Mr. Speaker, to rule on whether or not you should be called 

upon to decide whether an interpretation amounts to a deliberate 

misrepresentation, which is the job that the member for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden wishes to foist upon you. And I ask you 

to review whether or not that’s the appropriate role of the Chair, 

or whether that is just another misconception of how this House 

operates, among the many which are held by the member for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, 

should it be your intention, following the point of order raised 

by the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, to in fact ascertain 

whether there has been misinterpretation,  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2813 

 

and if it’s your intention to look into that, I wonder if, in the 

same vein, you might check the government’s budget 

projections for the last five years or so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. If you don’t 

mind, I would like to deal with the hon. member’s point of 

order, the Minister of Finance. Order, please. Order, please. It is 

not the role of the Chair to rule on a dispute of facts between 

members, and therefore the point of order is not well taken. 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On a 

point of privilege, during question period the Premier promised 

that he would table and forward to me the five conditions that 

the Prime Minister has set out on free trade, and he hasn’t done 

that. I wonder if the Deputy Premier would undertake to tell me 

when I can get it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that’s hardly a 

point of privilege, but the Premier did undertake to provide 

those five items, as it were, and I will undertake to see that the 

hon. member gets them. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Hon. members can carry on their debate outside 

the Chambers. I’d like to ask hon. members to please refrain 

from interrupting and making noise when the Chair is on his 

feet. And I’ve reminded hon. members before, and it seems that 

some just don’t want to do that. So I’m reminding you again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today, Mr. 

Speaker, I talked with the Opposition Whip about dealing with 

the private Bills on page 6 of the blues. I wonder if we might 

have leave to go to Committee of the Whole, private Bills, to 

deal with those three private Bills in committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1445) 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

Bill No. 01 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities 

 

Clauses 1 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 

Briercrest Bible College 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Bill No. 03 — An Act respecting Our Lady of the Prairies 

Foundation 
 

Mr. Chairman: — There is an amendment to clause 1: 

 

Amend the printed Bill by adding the following before 

section 1: 

 

Whereas Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation was 

incorporated by chapter 106 of the Statutes of 

Saskatchewan, 1957, as amended by chapter 86 of the 

Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1963; and 

 

Whereas Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation has by 

petition prayed for amendments to its incorporating 

legislation to reflect changes in its trustees and 

amendments to the Income Tax Act (Canada); and 

 

Whereas it is expedient to grant the prayer of the said 

petition: 

 

Now therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 

consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

enacts as follows: 

 

Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

THIRD READINGS 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 01, An Act 

respecting the municipal (Saskatchewan) Association of Rural 

Municipalities be now read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 

Briercrest Bible College 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 02, An Act 

to amend An Act to incorporate the Briercrest Bible College be 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 03 — An Act respecting Our Lady of the Prairies 

Foundation 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be 

now read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2814 

 

move that Bill No. 03, An Act respecting Our Lady of the 

Prairies Foundation be now read a third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I should perhaps, first of all, give the 

minister an opportunity to introduce her officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me 

today is the associate deputy minister of Energy and Mines, Mr. 

Ray Clayton; immediately behind Mr. Clayton is the lawyer 

from the Department of Justice, Mr. Ray Petrich; and 

immediately behind me from the Department of Energy and 

Mines, Mr. Steve Zurawski. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I was wondering if the minister 

would take this opportunity to address just a couple of the 

problems that we had with the Bill in second reading, both the 

Leader of the Opposition drew your attention to that, and 

myself. We can expedite matters rather quickly if you can 

address yourself to those two problems, and then we can go on 

with Committee of the Whole on clause by clause. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I believe the problems, Mr. Chairman, 

was about the increase and burden for individuals? Is that 

correct as being one of the problems . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . And the issue of evasion of taxes by multiple 

incorporations. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the amendment gives farmers, regardless of 

whether they are incorporated or not, the exemption of 3,200 

acres, and no resident individual owns more than that 3,200 

acres in the mineral rights. So the impact is not on the 

individual farmer. 

 

To address your second question, which was the issue of 

abusing it, we had intended to follow the definition as it is laid 

down in The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, and it will be 

monitored on that basis. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, there were a couple a 

questions. One was incorporating the definition of an 

incorporated farm into the Bill, rather than leaving it into 

regulations. Could you just indicate to me as to why would you 

not want to incorporate the definition into the Bill, rather than 

putting it into regulations? That’s the first question. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I understand the concern of the 

opposition, Mr. Member, but I also think that it’s unfounded. 

We simply did not consider it necessary to once again put it into 

the Act, with it already being  

identified. And I might add that several programs and other 

pieces of legislation use that definition without incorporating it 

in full into the Act. 

 

We can also address the issue of regulations, which allows 

some flexibility and perhaps more room for fine tuning than one 

might find in legislation. But we simply did not consider it to be 

necessary. And if it wasn’t necessary, why would you do it? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, well we have two problems: 

first of all we didn’t know what definition you were going to 

use. Secondly, I know from experience, as well as you do, that 

it’s much easier to change a definition by regulation that it is to 

change it if it’s in a Bill. If you have it in a Bill and if you want 

to change it, then you must come back to this House and state 

your reasons as to why you want to change the definition. So 

there is, I think, more stability and more assurance for the 

people out there that the definition will not be unduly changed 

without coming before the legislature and making your 

explanations there as to why you want to change it. So I think 

there are some merits in having the definition written into the 

Bill. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The legislation defines the . . . uses the 

term “the agricultural corporation.” The definition of that will 

be laid out in regulations, as I understand it, and I believe I 

mentioned it in my second reading speech; I may be wrong. But 

we would be using the definition that appears to be common 

throughout Saskatchewan under The Saskatchewan Farm 

Ownership Act, as it defines a farmer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, 

as I understand the legislation, it provides for an exemption for 

the first 3,200 acres; and as I understand the legislation, it 

provides that this extension will now be extended to agricultural 

corporations as defined as you now say in The Farm Ownership 

Act. 

 

Would you agree, Madam Minister, that if any one owned 

32,000 acres, but not 3,200 acres, they could enjoy the same 

exemption by the device of incorporating 10 agricultural 

corporations, all of which will qualify because they’ll all be 

owned by a farmer who is devoting his energies to farming and 

therefore avoid the total impact of the tax even though they own 

32,000 acres? 

 

Will you agree that that would be possible under the Act as you 

have drawn it, and of the definition of farm corporation which 

you say you will use in the regulations drawn from the previous 

Act to which you referred? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, we have 

checked our records, and there is no individual that owns over 

that 3,200 acres. I don’t know if that addresses your question or 

not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Madam Minister, are you telling me 

that no individual owns more than 3,200 acres of mineral rights 

in the province, notwithstanding the fact that many, many 

people own more than 3,200 acres of surface rights — and we 

all know of many, many who own more than 3,200 acres? You 

are saying that in so far as mineral rights are concerned, nobody 

owns more than  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2815 

 

3,200 acres? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No individual farmer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — That’s what I mean, no individual 

farmer. I’m surprised at that answer, but I’m in no position to 

dispute it, and I’ll accept your comment. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well I should think so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well I’m sure it would have surprised 

the member for Weyburn to hear that no individual in the 

province owns more than 3,200 acres of mineral rights . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh sure, the member for Weyburn, 

he has added, as he says, the intent of this Bill to the short list of 

things which he understands. 

 

If I understand the minister’s answers, he is saying that nobody 

can gain any advantage by splitting their ownership, at least by 

the use of a corporate device. Whether they can do it by 

transferring for their wife is another matter, and that possibility 

has always been there — or their spouse, I should say, not 

necessarily . . . or child. 

 

But with respect to the use of the corporate device, nobody is in 

the position to split their holdings and therefore reduce or 

eliminate their tax liability because nobody owns more than 

3,200 acres of mineral rights in the name of one individual in 

this province. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I would like to just ask very 

specifically: give me a reason . . . I mean, you told me you were 

going to put the definition into regulations, but could you tell 

me very specifically why it is not better to have the definition in 

the Bill rather than in regulations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the term agriculture 

corporation is reasonably descriptive in itself. And as I stated 

earlier, it was to allow the flexibility in dealing with it in the 

legislation, and that’s where we intend to deal, or I’m sorry, in 

the regulations. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — You’re missing my point. I know where you’re 

going to deal with it, but why? I want the why of it. Why would 

you deal with it in regulations rather than having it in the Bill? 

I’d like to know the reason as to why it’s better to have it in the 

regulation, rather than having it in the Bill. I would think there’s 

more security to having it in the Bill because you can’t change 

it as easily, and you’d have to come before this legislature to 

explain to the people why you want to change the definition. 

All I’m asking is: why couldn’t you incorporate it in the Bill? 

There may be some legitimate reason. All I want to know is the 

why. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again the 

reason is flexibility, and allow me to give the member some 

examples as to why one might use that flexibility. If there are 

some loopholes that we did not foresee, it would give you the 

flexibility to deal with it rather quickly. If we have overlooked 

something else, or if there is a possibility of some abuse, then it 

allows that flexibility immediately within the regulations. 

Like I said, you know, I think the term agricultural corporation 

is relatively descriptive on its own, and most people understand 

that. But in terms of the total definition in legislation, we would 

prefer it in regulations in order to deal with some possible 

misses or loopholes. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I don’t agree with your 

answer, but we’ve had enough experience, I think, with the 

definition. It’s been there before. I would think if it was going 

to give us any problems we would have had problems up to 

now. I think it would be better to have it in the Bill, but I’m not 

going to delay proceedings any longer, and just leave it at that. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1515) 

 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 

Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, members of the 

committee, I have beside me, Mike Benson, executive director 

of finance and administration, Department of Education; 

immediately behind him, Deb Achen, director of grant 

programs; and Ted Jowniak, assistant director of student aid, 

who’s moving into the seat immediately behind me. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, in committee I now have the opportunity to ask 

you a number of questions in detail with respect to this Bill. My 

first one, Mr. Chairman, to the minister is: Mr. Minister, will 

you inform the Assembly whether section 10 of this Act is 

required in order to allow your government to bring in changes 

in the student loan and student bursary program, which first of 

all eliminate the student bursary program as we’ve known it; 

secondly, change it to a forgivable loan program; and thirdly, 

significantly change the rules over last year under which 

forgivable assistance will be offered to students? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to section 10, I think if the 

member were to examine legislation in this House that has 

come long before us, for example, An Act respecting the 

Stabilization of returns to Beef Producers in Saskatchewan, 

otherwise known as The Beef Stabilization Act — I just pulled 

that one out, for example — you would find that virtually the 

section there which is 25 in that Act, for example: 

 

For the purposes of carrying out this Act according to its 

intent, the Lieutenant Government in Council may make 

regulations: 

 

(a) defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of any 

word or expression used in this Act but not defined in this 

Act: 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2816 

 

And it goes on, so on and so forth, and I think you would find 

that virtually that kind of language used in here. And I don’t 

know that it’s all that unusual. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — You’re not answering my question, Mr. 

Minister. Maybe I can be more direct. Does the Bill that we 

have before us today — is that Bill required for you to 

undertake the changes to the student loan program that you 

have initiated this summer, including the cancellation of the 

student bursary program? Could you answer that question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll try and give you as best an 

understanding as I have of why we’re doing what we’re doing. 

Since the early ’70s what we operated under was ministerial 

guide-lines. They covered most of the items listed, and I suspect 

at that time the numbers of applications we were dealing with 

was 6,000, numbers of dollars in total federal/provincial less 

than 20 million. 

 

Now we have . . . obviously we’ve seen a very major growth in 

our loans, and I think that’s a positive thing in that more 

students are able to take advantage of it and gain accessibility. 

So to be as forthcoming as we can to the public and to provide 

them the greatest degree of disclosure, if you like, as to what 

we’re doing, and as well to effect some administrative 

expediency, we’re still going to have ministerial . . . the 

ministerial guide-lines will be replaced by ministerial 

regulations, if you like. 

 

And whereas today it’s perhaps a bit too simplistic in its four 

pages, I suspect we’ll be dealing with something like two dozen 

or more pages when we put the policy regulations in place, but 

it’s so that we can be clear and expedient in the delivery of our 

process, and so the public do know exactly what they’re dealing 

with. I hope that gives you some understanding of why we’re 

doing what we’re doing. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Mr. Minister, I 

understand what you’ve said, but you still have not answered 

my question. My question to you is: do you require this Bill to 

have legislative authority to the changes in the student loan and 

student bursary program that you made this summer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised, and I think I referred to 

this in the second reading speech, in fact, that in essence what 

this Bill does is deal with some accounting, and the changes 

that were made earlier this year, aren’t . . . this Bill it isn’t 

particularly germane — it’s not relevant; it’s two different 

issues. This is to deal with non-budgetary expenditures in the 

normal sort of fashion, as I understand it, that government deals 

with them. And that’s what this Bill allows us to do. 

 

So much as some of the debate that you and I have engaged in, 

in this, over a . . . and a wide-ranging debate it was. In essence, 

the Bill is a pretty simple Bill. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I understand all that, but I’ve 

had the opportunity over the last few days to go back to look at 

the regulations that were passed under The Student Assistance 

and Student Aid Fund Act, and I find, Mr. Minister, that you’ve 

had no regulatory authority to make the changes to the student 

loan and student bursary  

program that you made this summer. 

 

There are no regulations that I can find that have been passed 

which allowed you to abolish the student bursary program. 

There are no regulations that I can find that have been passed to 

introduce a forgivable loan program, nor, Mr. Minister, are 

there any regulations that I can find that have been passed to 

allow you to force students to borrow $180 a week before they 

are eligible for any forgiveness on their loan instead of last year 

only having to borrow $80 a week before they received 

forgiveness on their loan. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you have passed those 

regulations — and I missed them — would you table them in 

this Assembly and provide them to the legislature now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised, if you’re asking — what 

authority did I have to make the change that we made this past 

summer? — I’m advised that in act authority is vested in two 

areas: number one, The Department of Advanced Education 

(and Manpower) Act and The Student Assistance and Student 

Aid Fund Act. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — But, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: 

where are the regulations that were passed subject to that Act 

that implemented the changes that you brought about this 

summer? There is no sign, for instance, of a regulation 

abolishing the student bursary program. Where is that 

regulation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the 

regulations that you would be looking for would be under The 

Department of Advanced Education (and Manpower) Act, and 

am advised they were passed last November. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I thank you for clarifying that 

point. It would seem hat you’re now giving yourself the 

regulatory ability to make those same regulations under this 

Act. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What we’re doing here actually gets 

back to my earlier response of being more forthcoming with the 

public. We’ve always had the ability under the Acts I referred to 

previously, with some fairly broad and sweeping powers, quite 

frankly. And a lot of it was couched in ministerial guide-lines 

which, if you’re worried about the minister having too much 

power — well, guide-lines are a lot flimsier, I would suggest, if 

you like, in the public’s mind than ministerial regulation and so 

forth and so on up the ladder. 

 

What we’re trying to do here is lay it out in a more explicit 

legislative framework, if you like, albeit that there’s still going 

to be ministerial regulations. But we’re trying to be explicit and 

forthcoming so that, because the numbers are now large and the 

number of students are large, so that we can deal with it in an 

expeditious fashion. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, this Bill gives you the power to 

make regulations respecting the total amount of financial 

assistance that may be provided to students. I take it that what 

you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is that you’re proposing to change 

the making of regulations respecting the amount of money that 

can be lent out to students and the conditions under which it can 

be lent out. And such  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2817 

 

things as the abolition of the bursary program, the introduction 

of the forgivable loan program, you’re proposing now to do that 

under this Act. That’s the only interpretation I can give to 

section 10, and I ask you if you agree with that interpretation. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Section 10 has nothing to do with the 

changes that were made. Those are . . . that is, as I talked about 

earlier, that’s irrelevant to this Bill to some degree — maybe 

some fair degree. We’re mixing apples and oranges a bit here, 

and I think it’s because we’ve had some fair, broad-ranging 

debate in second reading on it. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I am going to ask that we 

not pursue this Bill any further until you can provide me with 

the regulations that you passed in November under the 

Advanced Education and Manpower Act, and I have a chance to 

examine them. And until that time, Mr. Chairman, I beg leave 

to adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. The only motion in 

committee is to rise and report progress on the Bill. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — I’ll move, Mr. Chairman, that we rise and 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If it would help the business of the 

House, Mr. Chairman, we don’t have those regulations here 

under The Department of Advanced Education and Manpower 

Act, and the reason we don’t is because we’re dealing with an 

Act to amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 

Act, 1985. However, to expedite the business of the House I 

will undertake to provide the hon. member with those 

regulations and, in fact, I will also, to back up what I said about 

that power being in section 14 of The Department of Advanced 

Education and Manpower Act, I will just read it for your 

information: 

 

The minister may, for any purpose relating to any matter 

under his administration or for which he is responsible, 

provide financial assistance with respect to any programs, 

and in accordance with any terms or conditions, that are 

prescribed in the regulations to any person, agency, 

organization, association, institution or other body inside 

or outside Saskatchewan. 

 

So that was the authority. The regulations, as I said, were 

passed last November, and I think we’re mixing two Bills, and 

really this one here is largely to accommodate an accounting 

procedure, as I understand it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll withdraw the motion. 

 

I want to — but Mr. Minister, you’re failing to explain hen why 

section 10 of this Act is required. This section specifically says: 

 

The minister may make regulations: 

(a) respecting the total amount of financial assistance that 

may be (available) for a student . . . (and) 

 

(b) respecting the terms and conditions on which financial 

assistance may be provided . . . 

 

And Mr. Minister, that’s much broader than simply accounting 

authority. I suggest to you that that gives you the right under 

this Act to make the regulations that you’ve been passing under 

The Department of Advanced Education and Manpower Act. 

And I ask you to acknowledge that that’s the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, I 

apologize for the delay in consulting with my officials because 

it’s a point of confusion, and it’s a point of some complexity. 

And I’m trying to get it and be able to present it to you and 

other members of the House in a sense that we can all 

understand it. And it’s the first time, I have to admit, that I’ve 

ever found myself defending why we’re trying to be more 

forthcoming with the public, which is usually the opposite, as 

you can appreciate, too often perhaps in this House. 

 

What we’re trying to do here is parallel in this Bill what we do 

in regulations under The Department of Advanced Education 

and Manpower Act. Because the way it is right now, as I talked 

about earlier, is that it’s pretty loose in so far as how things are 

described in its administrative or ministerial guide-lines. And 

we want to formalize to a larger extent what it is we’re doing — 

clarify maybe is a word that might be useful. We’re wanting to 

do more than hide it in ministerial guide-lines. And it’s not 

meant to be relatively specific; it’s meant to be forthcoming; 

it’s meant to be an attempt at more public disclosure as to what 

we’re doing; it’s meant to be more expedient in how we do our 

business. I mean, I guess if I was to say, let’s take an argument, 

maybe you should say we take it out. Well that might mean then 

that I go back to sort of hiding and shuffling stuff around in 

ministerial guide-lines as opposed to ministerial regulations. 

 

I know it’s a bit complex, given the interrelationship and the 

fact that we have the ability in one place, and that’s a different 

Act, and I’m trying to clarify a confusing and complex issue at 

best I can for you. And I hope that’s of some additional help. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’m 

wondering: I have the regulations that you referred to when the 

member from Saskatoon University asked about the authority 

that was given to you to abolish the student bursary program, 

and you referred to the regulations that were passed in 

November — I believe the date is November 19, 1986 — could 

you tell us the specific reference in those regulations that gave 

you that authority to abolish the student bursary program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The authority is in section 14, which I 

read into the record here for the hon. member to help him 

understand where the authority came from in legislation. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Are you referring, Mr. Minister, to the Act  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2818 

 

or to the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To the Act, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — What I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, is, where 

is it within the regulations that flow from that Act? Where are 

the regulations? 

 

The regulations, I take it from what you’re telling me, the 

regulations for this flow from section 14 of the Act. What I’m 

asking you is that in the regulations that flow from section 14, 

what is the specific reference you can give us that gives you the 

authority to abolish the student bursary program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised that the . . . I think the 

sense . . . the issue of your question is, you made this program 

change. And I’ve answered in that, yes, and the authority for 

that came under section 14 of another Act, The Department of 

Advanced Education and Manpower Act, and regulations that 

might flow from it. 

 

And you’re saying, well, in those regulation — albeit we don’t 

have a copy because we’re not dealing with that Act, but we’ll 

get you a copy — you’re saying, what specific line detailed 

change, X or Y, whichever one you’re referring to. 

 

I don’t know (a) because we don’t have a copy, but I’m advised 

— having said all that — that doesn’t matter; it’s not as your 

main question in that the statute itself gives the authority. “The 

minister may for any purpose relating” — I read it into the 

House record here already once. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, it’s a 

pretty sloppy way to do government business to undertake a 

major change in the student loan program, the student bursary 

program, abolish the student bursary program, introduce a 

forgivable loan program and increase by almost two and a half 

times the amount of money that students in this province must 

borrow before having any of it forgiven and not pass a single 

regulation to do it. What you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is that 

that’s what you did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I want to address that point because I 

think that your view is exactly the opposite of what we’re trying 

to do. This very day we have this two-page document that sort 

of outlines our obligations in so far as what I must do, and how 

I can do it, and what I have to tell, and who I have to tell, and 

whether I can do it under my pen, or it’s cabinet, or it’s statute. 

 

So what we’re proposing is going from that to something like 

this. This is some draft regulation — going from two pages to 

25 — so that there is no wishy-washiness about how things 

shall operate. We are trying to be more forthcoming clear in our 

administration, do everything the opposite of what you suggest. 

And I think that’s a laudable exercise, quite frankly. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It seems to me that 

even though you might have the authority under the Act — and 

you said you have the authority under section 14 to abolish the 

student bursary program — it seems to me that in order for you 

to have full force to carry that out,  

that you require a regulation. 

 

And I don’t know how we can proceed on from here. It’s a very 

important issue, and our critic in this department views it as a 

very important issue, as I do. I think we can’t proceed very far 

from here until you give us the specific regulation — and I have 

the regulation here that you referred to. 

 

If you could give us where you have the authority . . . or do you 

believe, are you saying to us, Mr. Minister, that you have the 

authority of the Act, and you can interpret that as you like, so 

you can do anything you want under section 14, or do you 

acknowledge that you require regulation flowing from that Act 

to in fact carry out the dismantling of the student bursary 

program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — One could argue, Mr. Chairman — to 

come at this another way — one could argue that you don’t 

need a regulation to terminate a program. One could argue, as 

well, that when we approved the appropriations for the 

Department of Education, that we, in fact, approved what has 

been done. 

 

But having said all of that, section 14 of the . . . I mean, it’s 

unusual to be dealing with another Act of this degree, or in fact 

the Act in the committee stage here is getting ignored. But I 

read again section 14: 

 

The minister may, for any purpose relating to any matter 

under his administration or for which he is responsible, 

provide financial assistance with respect to any programs, 

and in accordance with any terms or conditions, that are 

prescribed in the regulations to any person, (body), 

agency, organization, association, institution or other body 

inside or outside Saskatchewan. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’ll accept the fact that 

you have the legal authority to make the changes that you’ve 

indicated under The Advanced Education and Manpower Act. 

 

I want to say to you that I think that the way in which you have 

changed the student bursary and student loan program this 

summer without passing a single regulation to do it — because 

I’ve just reviewed the November regulation and there’s not a 

sign of a single regulation that gives you authority to make 

those changes. You’ve simply used your broad legal authority 

under the Act to do it, but that’s a sloppy way to conduct 

government affairs. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you’re now giving yourself 

more specific authority to do that and to make regulations to do 

that under this Act. And as a result of that, Mr. Minister, we’ll 

be introducing an amendment to this Act, when we get to 

section 7, reinstating the Saskatchewan student bursary 

program. And we’ll leave the point that we’ve been debating 

now. I think for the purposes of public debate it’s been 

sufficiently discussed. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to ask you what consultations with the 

scholarship, bursary and loan committee you  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2819 

 

undertook before drafting this legislation, and does that 

committee support this legislation? And do you have any 

written indication of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No discussion relative to this Bill, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, can I ask you why you didn’t 

consult the student loan and student . . . the scholarship, bursary 

and loan committee before implementing . . . or before bringing 

this legislation before the Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well once again we’re mixing what’s 

going on in this Bill with, in fact, some other policy changes 

that have taken place. This Bill is largely a . . . probably any 

other time would be a non-controversial Bill and go to that 

committee, because it largely deals with accounting and some 

technical, legal, administrative in some areas. 

 

And having said all of that, in so far as the discussions that we 

may have had with students or councils or advisory bodies or 

bursary committees or whatever, as you can appreciate, this 

measure here was a . . . some these measures were budgetary 

measures, and there is some discussion, certainly, that can go 

on. And I think specifically of items like tuition fees, where I 

had some fair degree of discussion, and I’m yet to have more 

discussion with university and technical institute students, as 

well as with the boards of governors. 

 

So where we can, we have tried to engage in dialogue with 

them and some of the things that, very specifically, like I said 

tuition fees that affect students. But after that and specifically 

on this Bill — no, there’s been no discussion. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, contrary to your claim that 

this is purely a housekeeping Bill, I just remind you of the fact 

that one of the things that you’re giving yourself authority for 

under this Bill is that you may make regulations respecting the 

total amount of financial assistance that may be provided for a 

student. I don’t consider that to be a matter on which you ought 

not to be consulting students on. 

 

You’re also giving yourself the legal authority under this Act to, 

instead of administering student loan and bursary funds yourself 

as a government department, to pass that administrative task 

over to banks and credit unions as the Canadian government has 

done. I’m not suggesting that that’s a measure that students 

won’t support, but you surely ought to have consulted the 

scholarship, bursary, and loan committee prior to bringing this 

legislation before the Assembly. 

 

I want to ask the minister how many students will lose bursaries 

in the current fiscal year as a result of his decision to abolish the 

bursary program and move to the forgivable loan program? 

 

How many students in effect, Mr. Minister, will receive no loan 

forgiveness as a result of your policy to change the amount of 

money that a student must borrow on a weekly basis under your 

program, and increase it from  

$80 to $180? How many students will be cut off of forgivable 

assistance or the equivalent of bursary assistance in this 

province as a result of that change in the current fiscal year in 

comparison with last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The question was: how many students 

got bursaries last year that won’t get this this year? We don’t 

have that number at this point in time. And I think you can 

appreciate that not all of them are in and, I mean, that’s very 

extensive cross-matching to answer that question. 

 

But having said all that, I mean, one should know, and I should 

remind you what it is that we’ve done here. Yes, changes in the 

bursary; yes, we’ve standardized our guide-lines, the 

Saskatchewan and the Canadian plans. But more importantly, 

what we’ve said to the people and the students of this province 

is rather than have the bursary program the way it was, we’re 

going to take our financial commitment target it to high need 

students in the form of forgivable loan. And what do I mean by 

high need students? I mean particularly single parents; I mean 

natives; I mean disabled. And we have something, at this point 

in time, we have 2,368 in that category. 

 

So I wouldn’t want you to get the impression, nor to leave the 

impression with the public of Saskatchewan, that somehow 

we’re stepping back in our commitment. Because reality is 

we’re still going to assist 15 to 17,000 young people in this 

province this year. And more than that, we’re going to target to 

those who — and I think in your mind and certainly in mine — 

who perhaps are even more deserving, not only more deserving, 

but more in need than some others. 

 

And I could go through in detail how it worked in ’86-87 versus 

’87-88. It was a very convoluted process — very convoluted. 

And by standardizing, by targeting the high need, and by in fact 

maintaining our financial commitment, I think the students are 

well-served, and particularly those who have a high need. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, a question to the minister. Mr. 

Minister, can you tell us how many students in the fiscal year 

1986-87 received a Saskatchewan student bursary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We don’t have that number with us. 

We’re going to phone back to the department and see if we 

can’t get that. So maybe you can go on to some other question. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — I’d be grateful if you could have that 

information ready when we get to section 7 of the Bill, which I 

hope will be about 10 minutes. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to make a point with respect to your claim 

that you have improved financial assistance under the Act to 

native students in this province. That claim is just not true, and 

I’ll give you an example. 

 

With respect to SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native teach 

education program), a program in which native students pursue 

training to be teachers in this province, Mr. Minister, if you go 

back five or six years, SUNTEP students were fully funded by 

the Government of  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2820 

 

Saskatchewan. Apart from their tuition, which I think was paid 

through the Government of Canada, all their other financial 

costs with respect to their post-secondary education studies was 

covered by the Government of Saskatchewan in the form of a 

bursary. And now, Mr. Minister, when they get to year three 

and four of their program, they may well go through their entire 

program without a penny of bursary assistance from your 

government. 

 

And you call that an improvement to native students? I say 

you’re wrong, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We’ve had a discussion earlier in this 

House today about the accuracy of one’s facts — the accuracy 

of one’s facts. And the facts are, when it comes to student 

assistance to natives, you are saying that we are going 

backwards rather than forwards. You have clearly said that to 

this House and to the people of this province. 

 

The facts are these, Mr. Chairman. In ‘83-84 the total assistance 

— and I’m talking now bursaries, grants, supplementary loans, 

federal loans, those kinds of things — was $3.132 million. To 

May 30, ‘86-87, which is the last year I have the numbers for, 

that same number was $6.883 million. 

 

Now how does the hon. member square those numbers with his 

erroneous allegation that somehow we are not more committed 

than ever to helping natives with their education? How does he 

square that? — point number one. How do you square that 

allegation with the public of Saskatchewan? And how too, do 

you square the fact that in ’85-86 we increased, by $75 per 

week, the amount of money available to natives because of the 

reason I talked about; targeting to those with special needs — 

natives, disabled, the handicapped, single parents. We have 

done more under this administration than you ever did. Talk 

was cheap. Talk was cheap with your party for years and years 

and years, and that’s the reality, and you know it. 

 

(1600) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And I get tired of this kind of 

sanctimonious approach that it’s only the NDP that can 

somehow help the students of this province whether it be native 

or disabled or whatever. Because the facts are, when your party 

first come into power in this province, 2 million . . . less than 

$20 million was made available — less than 20 million. And 

there was no special help, none whatsoever. And there were 

6,000 students helped in total — 6,000. And today that number 

is 15 or 17,000. So you stand up and tell the public how you 

square your facts with the true facts, Mr. Chairman. Tell us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, you may be angry, but I’m 

getting even angrier on behalf of the students of Saskatchewan. 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you deny that in 1981, native 

students who were studying in the SUNTEP program had their 

costs under SUNTEP fully covered. And today, Mr. Minister, if 

a student is in their third or fourth year, they may well get a 

loan from your  

government, but they won’t get a bursary. Do you deny that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t have the numbers for ’81-82, 

but I would suggest to you if I did have them before me the 

trend I talked about between ’83-84 and ’86-87 would be 

unchanged, point number one. 

 

Point number two, you say your points about the grant, etc. The 

point I will make here is the numbers have gone up, number 

one. Number two, is yes, there’s a loan there. But secondly, it’s 

$75 higher than it was in ‘85-86 so we (a) have increased that, 

and as well, because of the special needs, and as well, they are 

eligible for the first year, totally forgivable. And as well, their 

adult basic education, as you will know, is totally forgivable, 

too, to use that word again. 

 

So we can argue about whose program was the best and whose 

worked the best. I will argue that the numbers speak for 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, the numbers don’t speak for 

themselves because the numbers that you cite are all loaned 

money that students have to repay and will go in debt for; and 

the numbers that we recite, Mr. Minister, the numbers from 

’81-82, in large part are bursary money which students don’t 

have to repay. 

 

And that’s the key difference, Mr. Minister. And what you have 

done consistently across the board is, ever since you came to 

government in 1982, you’ve eroded the Saskatchewan student 

bursary program, and now you’ve chosen to abolish it entirely. 

And that’s a disgrace. And no doubt, Mr. Minister, after you 

pass this Act, we’re going to see regulations introduced which 

will confirm the fact that that program is gone. 

 

Mr. Chairman, another question to the minister, and it relates to 

. . . it’s more of a . . . simply a question for administrative 

clarification. Going back to page 2075 of Hansard, if the 

minister wants to refer to that, the top paragraph on that page. 

You say, Mr. Minister, that: 

 

The non-forgivable portions of student loans are in fact 

repayable (which is quite correct) and will be repaid to the 

Consolidated Fund. (You say therefore) This is not a 

budgetary expense, and therefore the Act has been 

changed to reflect standard accounting principles for 

non-budgetary expenditures. 

 

Mr. Minister, does that mean that this will no longer show up as 

a budget item when we do estimates? Can you give me an 

explanation of exactly where that will show up? It’s just a 

technical question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I must apologize again for the delay. 

I’m not real quick on this accounting stuff. Some might argue 

I’m not quick on anything, but I hope the hon. member won’t. 

 

This will show up in the province’s balance sheet as a 

non-budgetary loan to the department, point number  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2821 

 

one. Point number two, the fund reports the fund’s annual 

statement to the legislature, and as well, under vote 141 of the 

Supplementary Estimates this year, it showed up as a 

non-budgetary item. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thanks for clarifying that, Mr. Minister. Mr. 

Minister, I presume that by now your officials have the numbers 

for the number of students who received a student bursary in the 

fiscal year 1986-87. Could you provide that information to the 

Assembly, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Seven thousand, ninety-three. And we 

can’t forecast this year, as I said earlier. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, that’s truly incredible that you 

can’t forecast this year. Are you telling this Assembly that you 

have no idea of how many students are going to be eligible for a 

student bursary this year, despite the fact, Mr. Minister, that you 

have made dramatic changes to the program? Surely, Mr. 

Minister, before you undertook the changes to the program, you 

examined how many students would be cut off of student 

bursaries as a result of your changes; surely you have an 

estimate for this legislature for the current fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member says it’s incredible 

or unbelievable that I can’t forecast or supply him with an 

accurate number. Well the reality is, the applications are 

coming in about the same rate this year as last year. We’ve got 

about 12,000. We expect 15 to 17,000. Pick a number. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Mr. Minister, 

you’ve made the most dramatic changes to the student bursary 

program that have ever been made in the history of the province 

since the bursary program was established. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Big increases — most dramatic changes. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — The member for Meadow Lake says the most 

dramatic increases. Mr. Minister, it’s an example of how the 

minister for Meadow Lake continues to try to mislead the 

people of this province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister has made a decision very 

consciously to say to university students in a 33-week program, 

that students who borrowed $2,640 last year before they were 

eligible for a bursary, now are being forced to borrow $5,940. 

He is saying, Mr. Chairman, to students from technical 

institutes that they must now be eligible to borrow student loans 

of $6,840 before they get a penny of that forgiven. He is saying 

to students that they have to borrow two and a half times as 

much as they did last year before they get a penny of bursary, 

and yet he is incapable of telling this legislature how many 

students are going to be cut off as a result of those policy 

changes. 

 

And I say to him, Mr. Chairman, let’s table this Bill until he can 

come up with providing the legislature with the kind of 

information that we need before we can assess the program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I stand by my . . . I mean, he’s 

asking me to do some things that I clearly cannot do, Mr. 

Chairman. I have told him about how many applications we’ve 

got in; how many we expect. We can get some harder numbers 

obviously down the road. And you know, let’s try and be fair 

and rational and reasonable and collected in our view of what 

we’ve done for students here. 

 

And you know I could ask the question: when the NDP were in 

government, did they make 6 per cent money available to 

students? You know, when the interest rates were 20 and 22 per 

cent across the piece, did you ever address that issue for them? 

You know, did you ever address the high needs to the disabled, 

the native; you know, the single parent. 

 

I mean, you know, we can have this happy little debate here and 

go on ad infinitum. We went through this in estimates; we can 

go through it again now. I’ll be happy to trot the numbers out 

again, about the six-fold increase in assistance in the last five 

years, etc., etc., etc. The reality is the commitment is clear. 

More students than ever are having . . . getting access to 

post-second education, and it will be that way and more in the 

future, Mr. Chairman. I assure you of that. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I have no more general 

questions of the minister with respect to clause 1. I simply want 

to say with respect to clause 1, in conclusion, that first of all, 

Mr. Minister, this debate this afternoon has shown the 

sloppiness with which your department has handled the changes 

to the student loan and the student bursary program. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s just thoroughly unfair to students the way 

your government has introduced these changes. It’s obvious 

today, Mr. Chairman, that the Minister of Education made the 

changes to the student bursary program without making any 

attempt to estimate how many students would be cut off from 

student bursaries; how many students would receive 

substantially reduced student bursaries; and he also made the 

changes to the student loan and student bursary program, Mr. 

Chairman, without passing any regulations to introduce those 

changes. He did them simply using his general authority under 

the Act. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we say . . . I want to tell the minister that I 

have dozens of students coming into my office each week 

suddenly discovering that while they had a $1,500 student 

bursary last year, they’re not getting a penny from your 

government this year. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, how do you 

justify that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I think if I was to put 

the question to the hon. member who wants to return to the 

bygone days when there was no attention to high-need students, 

and when they were only helping 6,000 students rather than the 

15 to 17,000 that we anticipate to help, I would suggest that if 

the hon. member was to answer this Assembly honestly, I 

would bet that he had more than a dozen or two dozen students 

into his office when his party was in government, and there 

were no things like 6 per cent loans available; when farm 

children were penalized because of the net worth of their  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2822 

 

fathers, and in fact there was no extra stipend for natives and 

single parents and those kinds of categories. I’ll bet you, you 

had more than dozens of people coming into your constituency 

office then. Would you like to answer that question, hon. 

member? 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to the minister, I just 

want to remind the minister once again that native students 

studying in programs like SUNTEP were fully funded by our 

government when we were in office, and that that’s now not the 

case. A student in SUNTEP after their first year is going to find 

themselves going further and further and further into debt under 

this government. 

 

And the minister can make whatever claims he wishes about the 

old student bursary program, but I tell you, Mr. Minister, the 

students who were studying in the late 1970s and the early 

1980s understood that once they borrowed $1,100 in Canada 

student loan, they were eligible for Saskatchewan bursary. And 

now under your government they have to borrow five and a half 

times as much before they get a penny of bursary. 

 

And instead, Mr. Chairman, I say to the minister that instead of 

under the NDP government when students were graduating with 

debts of 5 or 6 or $7,000, they’re going to be graduating under 

your government with debts of $24,000. You are creating, Mr. 

Minister, a new generation of students who are going to be 

more indebted than any generation of Saskatchewan students 

that ever came before. And I say, Mr. Chairman, that that is 

symbolic of the attack that this government has made on the 

young people of this province, and we stand four-square against 

that. And on that I conclude my remarks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an 

amendment with respect to clause 6 of this Bill. I want to move, 

seconded by my colleague, the member for Regina Centre, the 

following amendment, Mr. Speaker. I want to move with 

respect to section 6: 

 

That we strike out section 6 of the printed Bill and 

substitute the following: 

 

Section 7 amended: 

 

(a) by adding “or any persons designated by the minister” 

after the word “minister” in the first line of subsection (1); 

and 

 

(b) by adding the following subsection after subsection 

(1): 

 

(1.1) The Saskatchewan student bursary program 

established pursuant to this Act and Saskatchewan  

regulations 211-76 is continued. 

 

And for the benefit of the minister, I want to send him over a 

copy of this amendment as well as sending one to the Clerk. If 

you just give me a minute, Mr. Chairman, I’ll have my 

colleague from Regina Centre sign the motion. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I find the amendment in order. 

Moved by the member from Saskatoon University, seconded by 

the member from Regina Centre. Is that Assembly ready for the 

question on the amendment? 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the effect of this amendment 

will be to reinstate a program known as the Saskatchewan 

student bursary program in this province. And I say, Mr. 

Chairman, to the Minister of Education and to all members of 

the Assembly, that the young people of this province are being 

exploited by the Government of Saskatchewan in their decision 

to abolish a program originally established by the New 

Democratic Party in this province to provide direct grant 

assistance to students at the beginning of the academic year, 

depending on the amount of loan that they needed to borrow. 

 

And it used to be in this province, Mr. Chairman, in 1981 that a 

student only needed to borrow $1,100 in loan before they were 

eligible for a student bursary, and that bursary was then given in 

the form of a direct grant to a student to keep their debts down. 

And this government, as a matter of policy, Mr. Chairman, has 

decided to abandon that practice. It is moving to a forgivable 

loan program that will only be paid at the end of the year, and 

will only be paid after students in this province must borrow at 

least five and one-half times as much money as they did in 1981 

before they’ll get any forgivable loan assistance. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, what this amendment will do is what the 

students in this province want to see this government do, and 

that is to have the Saskatchewan student bursary program 

reinstated in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, now the member is 

trying to rewrite history and go back to the way it was. I’ve 

outlined the reasons why we’ve made the changes in the 

program that we did. (a) It was to standardize with the Canada 

student loans, on one hand; and (b) to target more . . . to provide 

additional assistance for those particularly with high needs. 

 

And I don’t apologize for that. I think that’s the right approach; 

I think it’s a sensible approach. And in fact in so doing we 

reach more people than ever in this province and make 

post-secondary education accessible to them more than ever in 

the past. 

 

And that’s notwithstanding the fact that I’ve talked about 

earlier, about the 6 per cent loans, the changes to the criterion 

for farm children who, whether their fathers had a net worth of 

half a million dollars — you, Mr. Chairman, yourself, know the 

farm scene today — they might have had a net worth of half a 

million dollars, but the cash flow might have been virtually 

zero. 

 

And somehow yet all of that is okay, all of that was okay when 

the hon. member was a part of the NDP when they were in 

government. Mr. Speaker, we have laid out our  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2823 

 

plans clearly and the terms of our commitment to Saskatchewan 

young people. We will be voting against this motion because, 

quite frankly, I see it as a budgetary item anyway. But having 

said all of that, I’ll leave it at that. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Very briefly, to the minister. Mr. Minister, in 

1985-86 you did introduce some changes and improvements to 

the supplementary loan program. And then in 1980, just before 

the election, Mr. Chairman, just before the election I 

acknowledged that the minister made some improvements to 

the student loan program that were welcome in this province, 

and at the time I commended him for those. And, Mr. 

Chairman, he promised during the election that he was going to 

make education more accessible to students. His candidates in 

Saskatoon promised, Mr. Chairman, that more financial 

assistance would be made available to students. 

 

And right after the election, Mr. Chairman, his government 

abandoned that promise and did more damage to the student 

loan and student bursary program in a single swing of the axe 

than they had ever improved in the four previous years of their 

government — did more damage to the student loan and student 

bursary program in a single swing of an axe, Mr. Chairman, 

than governments over all the years since the mid-1970s had 

done to improve the program. 

 

And I say, Mr. Chairman, that the minister is being dishonest or 

— I take that back — is simply being . . . is misleading the 

general public in a . . . without intending to, by suggesting, Mr. 

Chairman, by suggesting that the program is being improved. 

It’s true that some improvements have been made to a few 

needy students. 

 

But I say, Mr. Chairman, that many needy students such as 

native people are being hit now very hard by the changes that 

you have made. They’re getting much less assistance, not more 

assistance. They’re losing in effect, Mr. Chairman, they are 

losing approximately $6,000 a year every year as a result of 

these government’s changes, because whereas in 1981 their 

costs were fully covered, in 1987 they’re having to borrow at 

least $6,000 before any of their loan is forgiven. So they are 

paying out hand over fist as a result of the policies of this 

government, Mr. Chairman. 

 

(1630) 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, we’ve seen earlier that thousands of 

students — the minister can’t tell us how many thousands of 

students are going to either have bursaries reduced or lost as a 

result of his changes. I suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that the 

reason that he doesn’t want to bring those calculations before 

the House is because the numbers are too embarrassing for the 

government to acknowledge. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it would be my estimate, it would not surprise 

me at all if at least 3,000 students are going to lose their 

bursaries in this province as a result of the changes the 

government has made, and then many hundreds of others will 

have their bursaries substantially reduced. 

 

And I say, Mr. Chairman, it’s time we moved back to the  

old bursary program that we had last year. And I challenge the 

government to explain to members of this Assembly why a 

program that was so good last year, which you heralded last 

year before the election as a program that was going to benefit 

students, and promised students would not be eroded, why the 

program that in 1986 was so acceptable to your government, 

has now been dropped in 1987. Will you explain that to 

members of this Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I went through 

the rationale three times now as to why we’ve made the changes 

we’ve made. The only additional item of information I would 

like to lay on the table is in terms of scholarships, to point out 

the increased commitment there. 

 

Technical institute scholarships, up 11 per cent. French 

language, for example, up 66 per cent. Saskatchewan urban 

native teachers, up 25 per cent. And it’s a point that the hon. 

member likes to berate. University of Regina, undergraduate 

and graduate scholarships, up 11 per cent and 23 per cent 

respectively. At the University of Saskatchewan the same 

numbers are 6 per cent and 18 per cent. 

 

So while yes, there have been changes, you don’t view them 

positively; I think they’re a step in the right direction in terms 

of some of the broad goals that we have. I could continue to 

trod out measures that support the case of our government, and 

I don’t think you can argue with these numbers. We can have 

the debate, and you will probably stick to your view at the end 

of the day and I will stick to mine. I suggest we get on with the 

vote, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Just one more point to the minister, Mr. 

Chairman, in concluding this debate. I want the minister to 

answer my question, and it’s a very simple one. 

 

In 1986 when you brought forward what you called 

improvements in the student loan and student bursary program, 

you obviously did it just prior to the election. There were some 

welcomed changes, many of them coming from members on 

this side of the House, and we’re happy that you adopted them. 

And you gave the students of this province a commitment 

during the election campaign. 

 

Your party promised, and I’m sure that promise was made in 

any riding where there were a large number of technical 

institute or university students, that accessibility to 

post-secondary education would be improved, that financial 

assistance to students would be enhanced. 

 

And right after the election, Mr. Chairman, this government 

abolished the Saskatchewan student bursary program and told 

students that they would have to borrow two and one-half times 

as much before being eligible for a penny of forgivable loan. 

 

And my question to the minister is very simple: how do you 

square the decision that you made after the election with the 

promise that you made during the election that you would 

enhance financial assistance to students? Will you explain that? 

Because all your programs for needy students were in place in 

1986. You have made no  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2824 

 

significant changes there. Your significant changes have only 

been in the erosion and destruction of the Saskatchewan student 

bursary program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Methinks, Mr. Chairman, the hon. 

member wouldn’t even believe his own rhetoric, using terms 

like erosion and destruction of the plan. Do you really honestly 

think anybody out there buys that? Do you really honestly even 

believe that — what is it the member from Regina Victoria 

would call that — a hyperbolic excess? 

 

I mean, the reality is that we are trying to help as many people 

as we can and we particularly want to help those with high 

need. And I would say to you that now assistance to 15 to 

17,000 young people across this province is something that we 

can be proud of. How does . . . I mean, erosion, destruction — 

surely you cannot even believe that, your own rhetoric. 

 

The question specifically is, how come . . . if the program was 

good last year, why is it not good this year? One of the things 

that became apparent and I talked about earlier as why we made 

some of the changes, was to standardize the Saskatchewan and 

the Canadian programs. We had got a situation where we had a 

bit of . . . we were out of sync, if you like. So standardizing and 

simplification. Because with the add-on mentality we’d got just 

exactly that — a fair degree of stacking and different rules. So it 

was simplification, number one; and number two, 

standardization. 

 

And I don’t know as I can say much more, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, just a few words, because I think 

that they’re necessary in terms of the context and why we’re 

raising the concerns that we have. And the member from 

Saskatoon University has put his finger on it with a single word, 

which is accessibility. 

 

And our concern, and I think it’s your concern as well, sir — 

it’s the question of accessibility, given that we’re now entering 

into the information age; given now that when high school 

students can break into the computers in the Pentagon, for 

example; when high school students who are going through the 

grades 10, 11, and 12 process have the greatest amount of 

information at their fingertips now than any generation before 

them, and that in order to deal with that information we have 

got to provide them with the technical tools. And that includes 

the expansion of opportunities to have a higher education. 

 

Our concern in this whole matter . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’d ask the member to keep 

his remarks pursuant to clause 6 and the amendment. We’ve 

moved off . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. We’ve moved 

off clause 1, so that the members should stay to clause 6 and the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will relate it 

directly to the amendment that’s been put forward. I’m rising to 

support this particular amendment, because if expresses to the 

minister our concern over the question of accessibility, and we 

feel that this amendment in particular will try to guarantee the 

kind of accessibility  

that the minister himself talks about. 

 

We’ve seen in a situation, Mr. Minister, where some of that 

accessibility to education in this past year has been eroded. And 

that’s not rhetoric and that’s not hyperbole. It’s a fact, given the 

waiting lists at the university. And we think that some of that 

question of accessibility relates directly to the financial needs of 

students. The member from Saskatoon University has pointed 

that out. 

 

So my question to you, Mr. Minister, is very simply this: if over 

the course of the next year or the next two years we find a 

decrease in the accessibility to education, will you agree then to 

scrap the program that you’re now introducing and to revert to a 

program which opens up opportunity for students, as opposed 

to, as we think — and we may be wrong, but we don’t think we 

are — that restricts accessibility to education. Will you make 

that commitment, that you will review this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I make the commitment that on an 

ongoing basis, the practice of our government has been to be 

very proactive and, in fact, make accessibility to post-secondary 

education indeed just that, more accessible. 

 

And the numbers once again . . . I mean we can go back, if you 

like, six and seven years ago to when 5,400 young people were 

receiving help; we can go back to those days if you want. But 

the track is clear — 5,400, ’81-82; 10,500, ’85-86; ’86-87, 

17,000. To me that’s a clear expression that more young people 

have had more assistance than their studies at a post-secondary 

education level — point number one. 

 

Point number two, to address that very question of accessibility, 

that’s why we’re going to get into distance education initiatives 

into a much larger degree than we have. And that’s why, as the 

hon. member from Saskatoon University will know, that’s why 

the regional college concept is being so widely and roundly 

acclaimed out there across rural Saskatchewan, because they 

see that as a method of delivering more institute programming, 

more university programming into their communities — not 

just into Saskatoon or Regina, but into their communities — 

and make it truly accessible and not bound by the limits of 

geography or a five-hour drive to Regina two times a week to 

study a particular course. That’s accessibility in my mind, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — One final question to the minister. Mr. 

Minister, I want to ask you: do you think it’s fair that under 

your new policies, a student that is eligible to borrow $6,800 in 

Canada student loan and Saskatchewan student loan, attending a 

38-week program at Kelsey or Wascana or STI (Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute), is not eligible for a penny of bursary under 

your government? Do you think that’s fair? Are you telling the 

people of this province that that’s fair? Because that’s the effect 

of your policy, Mr. Minister, and if you don’t think it’s fair, 

then vote for this motion. 

 

But before we vote on the motion, I want to hear from you 

whether you think that’s fair or not, because members on this 

side of the House do not think it’s fair that a technical institute 

student in a 38-week program, borrowing  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2825 

 

$6,800 doesn’t get a penny of bursary, whereas five years ago 

they would have gotten thousands of dollars in bursary if they 

were in that situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Now the hon. member, and we all 

heard it, being a little loose with facts again, talked about how 

several years ago he would be eligible for thousands of dollars. 

Those are the exact words, thousands of dollars of bursary. 

 

But what were they eligible for on a 33-week program in 1981? 

— $1,800 of bursary, $1,800 of loan — 1,800 and 1,800. That’s 

what they were eligible for. And somehow the hon. member 

hasn’t got his head around the concept that we’re talking about 

here yet. The bursary, the changes there, on the other hand, 

what are we saying? Forgivable loans, okay, that’s what we’re 

saying, and particularly with an emphasis on high needs 

students — 8,250 in ’87 would be what a regular student will be 

eligible for, 2,750 forgivable. A special high needs student 

could get 11,880 and about 6,000 would be forgivable. Now 

that sounds pretty reasonable to me, especially when you look 

at inflation at 34, 35 per cent. That’s the two different concepts, 

you know — the bursary, forgivable loans. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — A further question to the minister. The 

minister knows full well that under his program now the student 

borrowing $6,800 would not get a penny of that forgiven, not a 

penny. Will he acknowledge that? Now one penny will be 

forgiven. 

 

As he rightly said, that student before would have got $1,800 in 

bursary in 1981 when costs were substantially less for that 

student to go to school, and this year, will he not acknowledge 

that not only will that student not get a penny of bursary, but 

that student in the 38-week program at a technical institute will 

not get a penny of forgivable loan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, you know, the simple answer to 

your question is, it’s needs based, and give me the specific 

examples, and we can go through them one by one. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, this is an example of sheer 

incompetence. Here you are sitting with three of your officials 

in the House, and you’re telling me, Mr. Minister, that you can’t 

do a simple calculation of what the cut-off point is for where 

students cut into your forgivable loan program. 

 

Mr. Minister, let me tell you your own regulations — $180 a 

week is what you need to borrow before you are eligible for a 

penny of forgivable loan, multiply that by 38, sir, and it comes 

to 6,840. And what you’re telling the students of this province, 

in a technical institute program right across the technical 

institutes of Saskatchewan, is that if they borrow $6,800 in loan 

from your government, they don’t get a penny of bursary, and 

they don’t get a penny of forgivable loan. And as you yourself 

acknowledged way back in 1981, where costs were at least 30 

per cent less than they are now, they’d have gotten $1,800 in 

bursary and grant right up front. By your own admission now, 

in this Assembly, you’re demonstrating how you’ve eroded 

your program. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, a question to the minister. He 

hasn’t answered by question. Does he deny that a student in a 

technical institute today, in a standard course 38 weeks long, 

borrowing $6,800, will not get one penny of that in bursary, and 

not one penny of that in forgivable loan? Does he deny that? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, the hon. member makes the 

point that somehow we’re denying people now, as opposed in 

1981. Well, I am advised, and I gave you the numbers about 

3,500 in ’81; in ’87 it’s 8,250; and 11,880 for high need 

students; 2,700 forgivable in the first instance; 6,000 forgivable, 

approximately, in the second instance. 

 

Now the kicker of course, the kicker of course, and where I 

might disagree with your facts is, is that somehow you had 

suggested they just sort of automatically got this bursary in 

1981. As I understand it, first of all, the Canadian student loan 

kicked in; then the Saskatchewan loan program; and then, if 

there was a demonstrated need, the bursary. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the minister is displaying 

unbelievable ignorance about the way the student loan and 

student bursary program operate. And I’m starting to see now 

why the minister made the changes he did in the program. He 

didn’t understand how it worked before, and he doesn’t 

understand how it works now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And, Mr. Chairman, if the students of this 

province were to tune in to their television sets at this time of 

the afternoon — unfortunately they have to be at their studies 

— there is not a single one watching who’d vote for this 

government after this display of ignorance this afternoon. 

 

I want to inform the minister that in 1981, no, the student did 

not have to apply for a Saskatchewan student loan before 

getting a Saskatchewan student bursary. They simply . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes they did. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — The member from Meadow Lake says, yes 

they did. And the member from Meadow Lake doesn’t know 

any more about the student loan program than the Minister of 

Education does. He’s sorely mistaken. Mr. Chairman, the 

minister is trying to get off the hook . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Allow the member for 

Saskatchewan University to make his remarks. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The minister is not 

listening to me, Mr. Chairman. He’s got his back turned to me. 

He’s talking to his officials. I’ll wait until he’s ready to listen to 

me. 

 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2826 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister is trying to get off the hook by 

citing a high need case. In the average class-room in a technical 

institute with 35 or 40 students in the class, not more than three 

or four of them are likely to be high need cases. 

 

So I want to talk about the other 36 of the 40 students that are in 

the class-room. And of those 36 students, Mr. Minister, many of 

them will require very substantive student loans. Many of them 

now, as a result of your policies, will require student loans of 

above $6,000. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, once again: will 

you deny to members of the public and members of this 

Assembly that the average student in a technical institute 

class-room, engaged in the average length of course, 38 weeks, 

in a 38-week program, if they borrow $6,800 in loan under your 

government’s policies, do you deny that they will not get a 

penny of forgivable loan and not a penny of bursary from your 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Okay. Point number one, you have 

somehow suggested that three students in a class of 40, was it, 

would not . . . would be only high need. Our view is that is not 

the case from past experience, it’s one-third. Point number two, 

an example I used and read into the record was not a 38-week, 

but a 33-week — regular student, $8,250, 2,750 forgivable; 

special high-need student, 11,880, and about 6,000 forgivable. 

 

I mean, I’m not trying to argue that there haven’t been changes. 

Yes, there have been changes; yes, there are more students 

receiving assistance than ever; and yes, there are more having 

accessibility; yes, there is a 6 per cent money where there 

wasn’t before. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just cannot believe this 

minister. And if he’s wondering why this Bill is being delayed, 

it’s because of his own incompetence. Here he is surrounded by 

his officials, and he can’t answer my simple question. 

 

Mr. Minister, once again: will you deny that the average student 

in a technical institute class-room, not classified by your 

government as a high need student, but just the average student 

in this province, studying in a 38-week program — not a 

33-week program — Mr. Minister, for your information it’s the 

universities that have a 33-week program. It’s the technical 

institutes that generally have a 38-week program. It goes up as 

high as 41. 

 

But in a 38-week program, do you deny that a student that 

borrows $6,830 from your government in the form of a 

Saskatchewan student loan and a Canada student loan will not 

get one penny of that forgiven in the form of a bursary, and not 

one penny of that forgiven in the form of a forgivable loan? Do 

you deny that, because it’s precisely the question that I’m 

asking that is leading to the amendment here today? That’s why 

we’re bringing forward this amendment, Mr. Chairman, 

because of this change in policy which means that students who 

do borrow over $6,000 from this government in a 38-week 

program don’t get a penny of it forgiven? So will you finally 

answer my question, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — They are . . . I will acknowledge that 

in some instances your mathematics may well be  

correct. And the hon. member says in the majority instances, 

and then I would say, how does he know that? Because we 

don’t know yet this year how many will in fact be high need, 

but I can tell you what: your number of three or four I have no 

doubt will be wrong. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Maybe we could 

deal with a few specifics. Well look at a student . . . and I’ve 

dealt with some of these through your office, Mr. Minister, 

which has been appreciated, and your staff have been very good 

about that. 

 

But the one student in particular got a student loan last year — 

got the supplementary loan, and this year she didn’t get it, and 

virtually there’s no change in the circumstances; hasn’t gone 

from a special needs student to a non-special need; the parents 

work in the same job; she had the same summer job. And this 

year it’s no student loan from your department. 

 

And she asked me whether or not it was easier in an election y 

ear to get a student loan than it is in a non-election year. And it 

would appear to her to be kind of logical, because in 1986 she 

received a student loan just days before the election was called 

and got her student loan. And now in a non-election year she 

doesn’t get any student loan from the provincial government. 

 

Now how could a student’s circumstances change so much, and 

virtually they’re exactly the same circumstances, last year 

having got a student loan, this year not qualifying for a student 

loan. How do you explain situations like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can’t comment on the individual 

case particularly. What I can tell you is, yes, there are instances 

like this, and the reason there are instances like this is that the 

criterion have been standardized between the Canada student 

loan program and the Saskatchewan loan program. 

 

They were not last year, and we have this year, and yes, that 

has, in some instances, accounted for the change. At least 

there’ll be one reason; there may be others, but that might be 

one that would account for what you’ve seen in some instances. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — And how many students, Mr. Minister, have 

fallen into that category? Do you have any figures at this point 

in time this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, we don’t. And it’s because, as I 

said earlier, we’re running about the same level as last year in 

terms of loans, at 12,000, we expect it to peak out at somewhere 

15 to 17. 

 

And I think, as you can appreciate, as has other members who 

have had inquiries about student loan programs, incorrectly fill 

out applications, etc., etc. If we don’t have our statistical 

analysis right up to date in a retrospective sort of fashion, it’s 

because we’ve been trying to deal with individual cases to make 

sure that students had what was coming to them. But I have no 

doubt we’ll have those numbers, that kind of analysis, done 

down the road. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well there are a good number of students  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2827 

 

in Saskatchewan this year that don’t feel they’ve got coming to 

them what they have not received in way of student loan. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Minister, there are other cases. For 

example, another case I dealt with your office, this particular 

student went into a two-year program and successfully 

completed the course of study for that particular semester; led 

to believe that she would receive a bursary and a certain dollar 

amount; can’t afford to go back to school this year because the 

family doesn’t have the means to send her to school, and your 

department refuses to grant the bursary. Why does the person 

have to — if they successfully complete their course of study at 

that stage — why do they have to start now repaying that loan? 

Why can’t they have the bursary granted to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We’re a little unclear on the 

member’s question. But what exists is the six-month’s grace 

period, and then if there’s somebody who is unemployed or 

underemployed and needs additional relief, they can apply for 

up to 18 months of interest relief as well. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


