













































August 26, 1987 Debates


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 26, 1987 

 

 

2069 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I rise under rule 11 to present a 

petition. This petition adds to the thousands of other names 

which have already been filed with this Assembly, protesting 

the elimination of the school-based children’s dental program, 

and calling for the reinstatement of the dismissed dental 

therapists and assistants. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Saskatchewan from 

Rockglen, Lisieux, Killdeer, Fife Lake, Conquest, Regina, 

Coronach, Gravelbourg, Saskatoon, Kindersley and Moose Jaw. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Duties on Saskatchewan Potash Industry 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Trade. My question deals with the 

threat to Saskatchewan’s potash industry posed by the U.S. 

commerce department’s ruling to apply huge tariffs on 

Canadian potash sold in the United States. And even though 

thousands of Saskatchewan jobs are at stake and this decision 

has been in the works for some months, on Monday when we 

asked about this, the minister would not indicate what concrete 

steps his government planned to take to protest and fight this 

ruling. 

 

My question is this: can the government be any more specific 

today; what concrete steps do you propose to take in order to 

protect the Saskatchewan potash industry and the Saskatchewan 

jobs which are associated with it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated to the 

hon. members, I believe on Monday, and to various people of 

the media, that we are studying and looking at various options 

that those . . . that decision will be taken very soon. And when 

that decision is taken, we will certainly let this Assembly know, 

and the rest of the world know, as to what our position is going 

to be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, the ruling was a decision brought about by political 

pressure, and I suggest to you that we need to counteract that 

with our own political pressure. And our best ally in this case, 

as in other cases, will be the U.S. farm lobby who doesn’t look 

kindly on the idea of paying 40 per cent more for potash. 

 

And so I ask you, sir, what concrete steps have you taken to get 

this message across to American farm state politicians about the 

impact of this decision? Why isn’t the Minister of Agriculture, 

for example, down in Iowa today, spreading the word? Why are 

we not taking steps to convince U.S. farmers, farm 

organizations, and farm state politicians that it’s in their  

interest as well as ours to fight this decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it rather 

amusing that the Leader of the Opposition would now have us 

. . . and would suggest to this Assembly that somehow the 

Premier should go to the United States and lobby for the 

interests of Canada, and particularly the interests of 

Saskatchewan. The Premier has done that on many occasions, 

and the Leader of the Opposition is very quick to criticize him 

for traveling out of the province into the United States. Now he 

seems to change his view the other way. 

 

With regard to the initial question: will the U.S. farm lobby 

counteract the lobby of the New Mexico potash producer? We 

were of the view and attempted that particular strategy, And it 

would appear that the U.S. farm leaders and particular lobbyists 

in the U.S. are not biting on this particular issue. One would 

have expected Senator Bob Doyle, for example, representing a 

state like Kansas, to be on to this one very quickly. 

 

The advice that we received from some of the people that are 

much more expert at lobbying in the United States than we are, 

is that the U.S. lobbyists are of the view that the farmer (a) is 

looking with his hand out in the United States for even a larger 

subsidy to the farmer down there, and as a result he wants to get 

everybody on board, including New Mexico or the people from 

Texas or the people from California. 

 

So one would be surprised that the U.S. farm lobby group did 

not take an interest in this, particularly if one could look 

potentially at the ruling having an impact of increasing the price 

of fertilizer to the U.S. farmer by as much as 25 to 35 per cent. 

One would have thought that the U.S. farmer would be 

interested in that. 

 

We will continue to use whatever channels we have, 

particularly through Washington, to see if we cannot bring that 

to the attention of the very powerful farm lobby group in the 

United States, and hopefully try to effect some change prior to 

final determination. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Minister of Trade; I deal with the same issue. The minister will 

know that the state of Iowa is now alive with politicians, and 

last Sunday in Des Moines all seven of the declared candidates 

for president of the Democratic Party were there, and I would 

be surprised if they wouldn’t be interested in something that 

affects so many farmers of the mid-west. 

 

And I ask you, sir, with that opportunity what steps did your 

government take to get across our message to these politicians 

and the many others who were with them in Iowa now 

contesting the Iowa caucuses, and why, in your judgement, Mr. 

Minister, do you feel that your efforts should be restricted to 

speaking from Regina or through lobbyists in Washington, and 

neither you nor any of your colleagues are down in Des Moines 

where all the political action in the United States is now taking 

place? 

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2070 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me make several observations. 

Observation number one is the Premier has, perhaps more than 

. . . certainly more than any other Premier in this province, in 

the history of this province, lobbied into the United States, 

lobbied on the farm question, lobbied on the trade question 

more than anybody else – tenfold, twentyfold, fiftyfold more. 

 

Now one goes to the view that all of the politics in the United 

States is taking place in the Iowa primaries; I doubt that. If you 

were to look at the Democratic candidate that has the closest 

roots to the farm vote, it’s Richard Gephardt from Missouri. 

One often thought that the Democratic Party in the United 

States was a great champion of open trade, and it’s gone exactly 

the other way. And what I think is a mindless and stupid and 

ill-conceived policy, by most of the people within the 

Democratic Party, that in fact don’t want open trade with any 

one. They want higher and higher trade barriers. They want 

policies of protectionism not seen since the 1929s. 

 

It’s the Democratic Party that now control the Congress. It’s the 

Democratic Party that is so mindless in the way they’re 

approaching it. I would guess if you were to ask somebody like 

Dukakis from Massachusetts, he might question whether or not 

what was potash and what was farming. So I think it is still the 

administration is the best chance that Canada has to solve its 

problem. And if we are to rely upon the Democratic Party in the 

United States with their mentality towards trade and 

protectionism now, we’d better run for cover, I’m telling you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I direct a 

question, my supplementary, to the minister. If he is unwilling 

to enter the fray in Iowa, my question deals with whether or not 

he’s prepared to enter the fray in New Mexico; and has your 

government spoken with the Government of New Mexico to 

devise a strategy for protecting the New Mexico potash industry 

without massive tariffs on Canadian potash, as was devised the 

last time the New Mexico industry flexed its political muscle? 

Have you made those moves with the Government of New 

Mexico, and if not, why not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me answer in this 

way. What we have been dealing with in this particular situation 

is an anti-dumping action, and it’s not a countervail action as 

many would have seen in the softwood lumber issue. 

 

Now as the hon. member should know – is the one member in 

that caucus that would know – that an anti-dumping action 

involves (a) companies in United States complaining against 

companies in Canada. They’re not alleging somehow that 

there’s a subsidy as they alleged in the softwood lumber thing. 

So at this point in time it’s been company versus company 

appearing before the Department of Commerce. In fact 

governments really do not have status before that particular 

situation in a dumping action. 

 

Now the question is, the preliminary determination has  

come down and the question is: how do we respond to that? Do 

we respond to it by, as the hon. member says, going to the Iowa 

primaries, trying to buttonhole these people to see if they can 

get some Canadian votes, or do we go down to New Mexico? 

What we are advised is the driving force behind this particular 

action, both on potash and on uranium, is Senator Pete 

Domenici from New Mexico, not, in fact, the governor of the 

state of New Mexico, but Pete Domenici, if you really got down 

to it. And that’s the one that appears to be trading off his potash 

for support for the grain farmer, or trading off uranium with 

support for somebody else. 

 

As American protectionism grows harder and harder and 

harder, and as we in Saskatchewan trade so much with United 

States, whether it’s in our red meat industry, or whether it’s in 

our resource industry, it is very important that we maintain that 

access to the U.S. market. Now clearly we have tried to 

accomplish that. But I think we all admit that the way the 

Americans are looking at the rest of the world – their attitude 

towards protectionism; their attitude that only they are playing 

fair and everybody is playing foul – makes it very difficult. 

 

And on the one hand, one would like to throw up his hands and 

curse and cuss the Americans, but on the other hand, they’re the 

only market that you have for much of that product, and 

therefore I think one should see, and one would hope to see, the 

diplomatic solution to this rather than trying to get into a price 

war or some kind of fight with the Americans that we wouldn’t 

win. We’ve always in this country approached that on a 

diplomatic course, and I think the diplomatic course is a proper 

approach to take at this point in time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As the 

minister indicates, if we have problems with the Democrats, we 

also have some problems with Republican Senator Pete 

Domenici. 

 

My question to you is this, Mr. Minister: do you not agree that 

the last time this problem arose in the late ‘60s, it was an 

anti-dumping action by producers in New Mexico? And do you 

not agree that premier Thatcher acted; that an arrangement was 

set up which did not involve tariffs but still protected the New 

Mexico industry, and that arrangement was sustained by our 

government when we came to office; and that that is far 

preferable to a 40 per cent tariff or a 50 per cent tariff where the 

only person who gets cash in hand is the U.S. government, and 

neither the potash producers or the American farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I think one would have to 

acknowledge the following: that the attitudes, whether in 1981, 

’82, when the last countervail action in softwood lumber was 

dealt with before the U.S. regulatory authorities, or whether it 

was back in late 1960s, early 1970s when potash was at issue, 

or you can go through a series of steps. But the political 

environment in United States – and it’s not all the Democratic 

Party; I would be the first to acknowledge that; it’s clearly both 

of them. It’s clearly the American attitude that somehow the 

world is trading unfairly against them, that they are fair traders 

and everybody else is, by implication, a foul  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2071 

 

trader. 

 

Now are there a variety of options that we are studying at this 

point in time, whether they’ve been done in the past, or whether 

they haven’t been done in the past? Clearly, those things are 

being looked at today. We will be taking a decision very, very 

shortly as to what our response will be and how we will pursue 

in this particular area. And when we make that decision, we will 

tell you, and we will tell the world. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the same 

minister, relating to the U.S. trade action against our potash. 

 

In the last number of days the minister has speculated publicly 

about a number of actions that he might take. He has spoken of 

selling, or not selling, part of PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan). He has spoken of closing mines. He has spoken 

of writing off, or not writing off, a certain portion of PCS debt. 

He’s talked about other dramatic actions, presumably to 

counteract the rationale being used by the U.S. Commerce 

Department. And in all of that talk, Mr. Minister, there seems to 

be the implied concession that maybe, just maybe, some of the 

American allegations about dumping might in fact be correct. 

 

And I think it’s important, Mr. Minister, and I ask you to do this 

in this House, to clearly and categorically set the record straight 

on that matter and give us the unequivocal view of the 

Saskatchewan government that there has been no dumping; that 

our potash industry is in fact clean in this regard, and that the 

U.S. allegations are not well-founded. I think we need that 

strong political statement, and I would invite the minister to 

make that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I like those kind of questions and I 

will entertain those questions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Let 

me explain very clearly and succinctly for the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg the position of the Government of 

Saskatchewan with regard to the alleged dumping of 

Saskatchewan potash into the U.S. market. Let me make it very, 

very clear. We have said all along, and we believe that the 

problem is an international, global problem. And it’s not unlike 

the problem in the grain business or the world wheat market. 

 

Now if Saskatchewan is dumping potash into the United States, 

then every U.S. farmer is dumping wheat around the world, and 

every Canadian farmer is dumping wheat around the world – 

which we don’t accept. We accept it as a reality that there’s a 

cost/price squeeze, or supply/demand problem in potash and 

agriculture products world-wide. And that goes back into the 

United States. 

 

Now what the Americans are saying in their recent ruling is the 

following: we’re going to establish rules for companies that 

operate outside the United States, but those rules don’t apply to 

companies that operate inside the United States. One set of rules 

for them; another set of rules for the rest of the world. And we 

say that’s not fair. But the Americans don’t accept that. I guess 

that’s their prerogative. 

I believe that is the direction that they have taken. That is 

wrong. If the Americans were to apply to their own businesses 

the standards that they try to superimpose upon us, they would 

close down every department store in their Boxing Day sales 

after Christmas each year because they would be doing exactly 

the same thing. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. It’s my 

understanding that in a week or so, as soon as the Commerce 

department ruling is officially published, that our potash 

producers are going to have to begin posting bonds in the 

United States, equivalent effectively to the duties that have been 

imposed. 

 

I want to ask the minister, in view of the crippling impact that 

those bonds, or the requirement to post those bonds could have, 

is your government making plans, or are you prevailing upon 

the Government of Canada to make plans, for at least some 

temporary financial support to our potash producers in 

Saskatchewan to offset the heavy new cost that may be imposed 

by those bonds, at least while this issue is not finally resolved 

through the American regulatory system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well let me make it very clear . . . is that 

these actions are by U.S. producers against Canadian producers. 

And the Canadian producers are for the most part “big boys” by 

anybody’s standards – Noranda, Rio Algom, IMC, Government 

of Saskatchewan – and I don’t think it would be proper, quite 

frankly, to ask the general population to pony up some money 

to help these guys in their legal actions. I doubt that the people 

of rural Saskatchewan or rural Quebec or the Maritimes would 

want their tax dollars paid in to somehow help Noranda, who 

has the biggest tariff against it, Noranda Mining Company. I 

would doubt that we would want to do that. I haven’t really 

discussed that with anyone, but I think my idea and my answer 

would be: no, we’re not contemplating that, and no, I would not 

support that. 

 

Wintergo Hydro-Electric Project 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of the Environment. And, Mr. 

Minister, it was clear yesterday in the legislature from 

statements by the minister responsible for SPC (Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation) that your government has resurrected the 

notion of a dam on the Churchill River, specifically the 

Wintergo hydro-electric project which the minister of SPC 

yesterday called the single best hydro project left to be done in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, this is extremely surprising because this 

project was the subject of a two-year public inquiry in the late 

1970’s. Ninety-two per cent of the submissions to that public 

inquiry opposed the dam on the Churchill. And that inquiry 

ended up recommending that a dam on the Churchill not 

proceed because it was undesirable economically, 

environmentally and socially. 

 

My question to you, sir, is: why has your government decided 

to ignore the recommendations of the Churchill River board of 

inquiry on the views of many Saskatchewan people who 

opposed the Wintergo project during that major public inquiry? 

Why are you now deciding to ignore that inquiry, Mr. Minister? 

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2072 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, let me respond to the hon. 

member this way. I appreciate the fervour with which you put 

your question, and I think that you go back quite a ways in 

history to drag up some of those skeletons. 

 

What the member was saying yesterday was that if we were 

looking for a water powered station, that’s the only one 

remaining, the only capable one of delivering service to the 

people of Saskatchewan. But as you know, the Government of 

Saskatchewan is not proceeding with the direction at this time, 

but rather are proceeding with the Shand project as the method 

of meeting the needs of Saskatchewan citizens. And we’re a 

long, long ways from looking at the Churchill project. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well a new question to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, yesterday the minister for SPC clearly 

stated in this House that Mr. Bruce Campbell of SPC had been 

retained by your government specifically to work on the 

Wintergo project. So all we need to do is go back to yesterday’s 

citations, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you know that a dam on the Churchill 

would destroy the outstanding scenic beauty of the Churchill. It 

would destroy 25 rapids and waterfalls on the Churchill. It 

would destroy the way of life of the people who live in that 

area. It would destroy a major wilderness and historic river, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is simply this: will you 

give this legislature and the people of Saskatchewan your 

assurance that this magnificent Churchill River will be 

preserved for future generations of Saskatchewan people to 

enjoy, and that your government will never build a dam on the 

Churchill River? Will you give us your assurance of that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I doubt very much as I 

would, as one minister, have the authority to give any one that 

kind of assurance. Let me assure you this, that before any 

project of that type would go ahead, there will be many studies 

and many people looking at it. There will have to be an 

environmental impact study that the world can address, and all 

the people in the province could address. 

 

We’re a long, long ways from that proposal. There’s been no 

proposal come forward at this point dealing with this particular 

project. 

 

Drinking Water for Cumberland House 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the 

minister in charge of the Environment. Mr. Minister, the people 

from Cumberland are trying to get their children clear drinking 

water, rather than be forced to drink from the polluted 

Saskatchewan River. They’re trying hard to make a living, Mr. 

Minister. Yet you, in the last question period about a week ago, 

you stated that they should come and co-operate with you. 

Why do you take such an arrogant and authoritarian position? 

Why don’t you come off your high horse and ivory tower 

approach and go and meet with the people from Cumberland 

House and co-operate with them at the community level? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the comments that the 

member makes as he asks his question about the government 

being arrogant and uncooperative, the government has 

legislation in place that it must live with. And the people of 

Saskatchewan also must live with that legislation. It was passed 

by this legislature. 

 

The people at Cumberland House have made a decision that 

they were going to put a weir across, or a dam across the 

Tearing River. They said that they were breaking the law at the 

same time they were proposing to do it, and that’s exactly what 

they were doing, is breaking the law. When they contacted the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation and asked for forms to make 

application to build that weir, the forms were supplied. And it’s 

my understanding that the application forms arrived, filled out, 

at the water corporation office this morning. 

 

I believe that the government’s place of business is here in 

Regina. If the people of Cumberland House had wanted to meet 

with me, they certainly knew where to find me. They have 

made no contact with my office to ask for a meeting. And if 

they do make a contact, we can consider it at that time. But it is 

their decision if they want to contact me; they know the phone 

number; they know where I am. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, I have given notice to the 

Minister of the Environment . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is this a supplementary? 

 

Mr. Goulet: — No, it’s a new question. And he’s had a week to 

think about it. He’s also had a week to act on this request from 

the people at the community level. The people want to 

co-operate with you, Mr. Minister, but they want you to get off 

your ivory tower approach. They want to be able to solve their 

problems of drinking water and the levels. They want this 

government not only to stay at the legislature but to go around 

to the community level. Why won’t you go down to the 

community level, Mr. Minister? Why won’t you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member 

earlier, there has been no contact by the people from 

Cumberland House, asking for a meeting with this government 

to deal with the issue that the member is raising, until now. And 

they have now made application to Sask Water, and that 

application will be dealt with. But this is the first contact that I 

have had, since I’ve been minister, from people from 

Cumberland House dealing with this particular issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order. Order, please. Time has elapsed; that’s obvious. 

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2073 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Extension of Rafferty-Alameda Environmental Impact 

Public Review Period 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform the 

Legislative Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that the 

public review period of the Rafferty-Alameda environmental 

impact statement will be extended for an additional 30 days. 

The public review period was originally scheduled from August 

17 to September 16 of this year, but will now run until October 

16. 

 

Over the past few days I have received a number of requests 

from individuals and organizations who have requested more 

time to review the environmental impact statement. And as a 

farmer, I certainly recognize and understand the time 

constraints and the busyness of many Saskatchewan people 

during the harvest season. I believe that extending the public 

review period until October 16 should allow everyone ample 

opportunity to present their comments regarding the proposed 

Rafferty and Alameda projects. 

 

This extension will not have any effect on the recently 

announced board of inquiry which will be holding public 

hearings on the project next month. Copies of the 

environmental impact statement are available at municipal 

offices throughout the Souris Basin area, and also at public 

libraries in Estevan, Weyburn, Regina, and Saskatoon. Our 

government wants to ensure that anyone interested in these 

projects have sufficient opportunity to provide their comments. 

Through the extended public review period, and the public 

hearings by the board of inquiry, I believe that this will be 

achieved. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, first of all I’d like to congratulate yourself on 

recognizing that there is need to extend the period of hearing for 

the Rafferty and Alameda dam projects. I believe that the 

reasons you have outlined, or at least some of the reasons that 

you have outlined, back up the case that we have put forward in 

terms of extending the public review period. But, Mr. Minister, 

as you well know, sir, there are two tracks to this public review 

period that we’re dealing with in regards to Rafferty and 

Alameda. 

 

Certainly the first track is the review by the Department of the 

Environment, which, as you said, began August 17, would 

extend to September 16 of this year. August 17, I might remind 

you, Mr. Minister, was a scant six days after the release of the 

2,000-page, 18 volume, Rafferty dam environmental impact 

statement. 

 

But that, Mr. Minister, is only one part of the review process. 

There is the other part of the review process which people have 

been asking you, have been asking you to extend, sir. For the 

reasons that you have already outlined, for the reasons that you 

have already outlined I’m requesting and suggest, sir, that you 

extend the other part of the environmental review project; that 

is, the public hearings, those hearings which are held publicly 

and which will allow all Saskatchewan people to see what kind 

of scrutiny is being given the Rafferty and Alameda dam 

projects. 

Mr. Minister, I have here, I have here a number of affidavits, 

legal documents, which will be submitted to the court in a very, 

very short period of time by people who want the public hearing 

portion, which is scheduled to begin, I believe, September 9, by 

people who want this public hearing portion extended by 

another 30 days so that they can present their case publicly to 

the people of Saskatchewan. And I want you, sir, to listen while 

I read you the affidavit. It says: 

 

Whereas not enough time has been allocated for citizen 

groups to properly assess the environmental impact 

statement; and 

 

Whereas only 50 copies of the environmental impact 

statement have been made available under tightly restricted 

circumstances. Therefore I, the undersigned, request the court 

to delay by 60 days the beginnings of the public hearings into 

the Rafferty-Alameda projects in the interest of democracy, 

so citizen groups can properly evaluate the environmental 

impact statement and make proper submissions to the public 

hearings. 

 

Denote, Mr. Minister, the emphasis was on the public hearings. 

You, sir, were requested to extend the hearing period of the 

public hearings so that the people of Saskatchewan will have 

access to the information to be presented by opponents of the 

Rafferty and Alameda dams; not some closed doors hearings, 

not some kind of closed door proceedings undertaken by your 

department, but to the public hearings which will be held under 

the scrutiny of the public and of the news media of this 

province. 

 

I ask you, sir, and I request, since you have already granted that 

the time sufficient was insufficient time . . . pardon me, that 

there was insufficient time to deal with this internally within the 

Department of the Environment, will you now, sir, will you 

now extend and grant an extension of time to put back, to delay 

the opening of the public hearings so that public of 

Saskatchewan can see, can see in the broad light of day, 

precisely the kind of political boondoggle that Rafferty and 

Alameda represents. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 – An Act to provide for the Postponement of the 

Tabling of Certain Documents 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my 

seat mate, the Minister of Justice, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the order for the second reading of Bill No. 8, An Act to 

provide for the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain 

Documents be discharged and the Bill withdrawn. 

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2074 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 15 – An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 

Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the outset 

I would like to remind the House that The Student Assistance 

and Student Aid Fund Act allows the pursuit of post-secondary 

education. The federal and provincial governments have 

co-operated for many years, as I’m sure all members of this 

legislature are aware, in rendering such assistance to students 

who might be denied further education purely for lack of 

necessary financial means, the issue there being then, Mr. 

Speaker, a question of accessibility and extending that 

accessibility to as broad a cross-section of our young people as 

we can. 

 

In fact the federal government initiated their Canada student 

loan plan back in 1964, at which time $2 millions was provided 

to 3,000 Saskatchewan students. In 1971, the province of 

Saskatchewan initiated a student assistance plan to further help 

those students whose needs were not met by the federal plan. In 

that initial year, the province provided $800,000 to 2,000 

students. And I would underline that, Mr. Speaker, because it 

will be a basis to show you how far we have come in terms of 

helping our young people, and making our young people 

accessible to post-secondary education. 1971 – there was 

$800,000 provincially to 2,000 students. 

 

Both levels of governments have concurred that responsibility 

for the costs of post-second education to the individual students 

remains primarily with the parent and/or the student. Neither 

level of government can supply post-second education at no 

cost to the individual student. Rather, the purpose is to 

supplement – and I would underline that word as well, Mr. 

Speaker – the purpose is to supplement the family student 

resources, where needed, to ensure that all qualified students 

have the opportunity to reach their educational potentials. 

 

Since 1982-83, Mr. Speaker, this government has been active in 

ensuring that needy students did receive assistance for 

post-second education. In ‘82-83, less than $20 millions in 

federal and provincial funding was authorized for student 

assistance, while in ‘86-87 over $80 millions was authorized for 

the combined federal and provincial plans. We went in that 

five-year period . . . four-year period, Mr. Speaker, from 20 

million to 80 million. 

 

From ‘82-83 to ‘86-87, the federal government component 

increased by nearly fourfold, from 11,700,000 to 43,700,000. 

Mr. Speaker, during that same period of time the level of direct 

provincial assistance to students increased sixfold, that is from 

6.1 million in ‘82-83 to 38 million in ‘86-87. 

 

So often the question is asked, Mr. Speaker – and I raise  

these numbers as debate today – because the question that is 

often raised by students and other: is the government continuing 

to put forth, if you like, the share of the money that some people 

think is earmarked specifically for post-second education? Is 

that finding its way into the students’ pockets from the federal 

treasury? And I think that these numbers would point out that it 

has, and more. 

 

And the federal government funding increased by fourfold; in 

that same period, Mr. Speaker, provincial funding increased 

sixfold. This is a dramatic increase, Mr. Speaker, and shows our 

commitment to assisting those in our society who would 

otherwise be denied a post-secondary education. We authorized 

more assistance to needy students in ‘86-87 than was authorized 

by the previous administration in the last seven years of its 

administration, Mr. Speaker – more money authorized for 

needy students in ‘86-87 than was authorized by the previous 

administration in its last seven years, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 

I talked about a commitment, a Progressive Conservative 

government’s commitment to our young people. 

 

Nevertheless, in a tighter economic environment it became 

apparent available funds needed to be targeted to high-need 

students. Consequently the government has shifted its emphasis 

on support from bursaries to loans, requiring students who can, 

to repay their assistance. Those students who have higher needs 

will receive additional assistance in the form of loans, but these 

additional loans will be forgiven for high-need students upon 

satisfactory completion of their program. 

 

Along with the growth and assistance over the past few years, 

there has been the development of a variety of different student 

assistance programs, each with different yardsticks measuring 

the needs and resources available to the student. It became more 

and more apparent that this caused the student to be confronted 

with a complex, sometimes contradictory set of rules governing 

the programs, at a minimum, Mr. Speaker, a confusing situation 

for many of our young people, and it also lends itself to 

administrative inefficiencies. 

 

Our government has taken the steps this year to standardize the 

criteria of all its student assistance programs, so that all federal 

and provincial assistance will be based on only one set of 

criteria, and not one set of rules for the Canadian program and 

not another set of rules for the Saskatchewan program, Mr. 

Speaker. But as so often people accuse us, and rightly so, that 

governments should get their act together and to simplify and 

minimize the red tape, and if we’re going to have rules, can’t 

the two levels of government get together and have a standard 

set of rules. And so that’s what we’re doing here, Mr. Speaker. 

This will greatly simplify the application process for the student 

and for the program administrators. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the proposed changes to the Act now 

before the legislature are housekeeping in nature and are 

designed to improve the efficiency of the student assistance 

program. 

 

The dramatic rise in the level of student loans provided to 

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2075 

 

Saskatchewan citizens is that the time has come to correct the 

previous practice of funding student loans with budgetary 

moneys. The non-forgivable portions of student loans are in fact 

repayable and will be repaid to the Consolidated Fund. This is 

not a budgetary expense, and therefore the Act has been 

changed to reflect standard accounting principles for 

non-budgetary expenditures. 

 

Also Saskatchewan loans are currently issued and collected 

in-house, that is to say, by the department, Mr. Speaker. As the 

Saskatchewan loan portfolio increases, it may be advantageous 

for the province to have these funds issued and collected by 

private financial institutions, much like the present practice with 

Canada student loans – banks, credit unions, that sort of thing, 

Mr. Speaker. A proposed change in the Act would make it 

possible to transfer loans to the private sector should economic 

conditions indicate this is the desirable course to follow. In 

other words we would like to have the capacity to do so if such 

a situation would arise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only have we provided more dollars for student assistance, 

but we have provided that assistance to more students, which 

we attribute to the fact that more and more of our people are 

seeing the value of post-secondary education. This need is 

being addressed both by our student assistance programs, as 

well by the ongoing development and streamlining of our 

post-secondary education institutions, which I think we’ve had 

some fair debate in this House already, Mr. Speaker, throughout 

the estimates. 

 

In ‘82-83, approximately 6,000 students were authorized 

assistance through the provincial student aid program. Four 

years later, Mr. Speaker, 15,000 students were authorized 

assistance through the provincial student aid program, and we 

anticipate a similar number this year. I think that speaks well 

for our government’s commitment to making post-secondary 

education accessible to our young people. 

 

(1445) 

 

We’ve gone from a situation where four and five years ago we 

had the funds to assist 6,000 young people, and now in this past 

year, and again this year, we expect to be able to assist some 

15,000 students, Mr. Speaker. It speaks well for our priorities 

and our commitment to help these young people to supplement 

their earnings or, in some cases, their parents’ or guardians’ 

earnings. I re-emphasize those numbers – we’ve gone from 

6,000 to something in the order of 15,000 in four short years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this record, and these proposed changes to the 

Act, indicate an ongoing commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan, a commitment to improve and facilitate the 

provision of assistance to students who most need help in 

realizing their educational potentials. This reaffirms the budget 

speech commitment to be responsive to the needs of students. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 

15, An Act to amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid 

Fund Act, 1985. 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

say to the minister, first, that we did witness, under your 

government, initially some improvements in student aid and 

student assistance for which, in the past, I’ve commended you 

for. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, we are witnessing a major deterioration 

in the student aid program in this province. The minister, I note, 

talked about the increased numbers of students who’ve received 

assistance from the government, and that’s true. Obviously a 

large portion of that increase is as a result of the increase in 

enrolment that we’ve seen in our post-secondary education 

institutions. And to the extent that people are enrolling in 

university and technical institutes because they wish to pursue 

an education, that’s something that we all rejoice in. 

 

To the extent that students have been forced to go back to 

school because they can’t find a job, due to the economic 

policies of this government, that is much less welcomed. And I 

might say, Mr. Speaker, that unfortunately there are a good 

many students at our post-secondary education institutions 

today, who, while they’re pleased to study, would have been 

even more pleased to have been able to find a job, but, with the 

doubling of unemployment that we’ve seen in this province in 

the last five years, they’ve simply not been able to. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister has made reference to making 

post-secondary education more accessible as a result of the 

policies that his government has initiated in the last year. And I 

say to him, and to all members of the Assembly, that it’s simply 

not true that post-secondary education has been made more 

accessible in the last year as a result of the initiatives of this 

government. 

 

On the contrary, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve witnessed in this 

province, first of all, is the virtual elimination of the student 

bursary program in Saskatchewan as we knew it. I would point 

out to the minister, and to all members of the Assembly, that 

last year, in the fiscal year 1986-87, a student was eligible for a 

bursary if they were in a 33-week university program, providing 

that they were eligible for a student loan of $2,640. Today, Mr. 

Speaker, a year later, that same student must borrow $5,940 in 

Canada student loan and Saskatchewan student loan before they 

are eligible for a single penny of assistance by way of a bursary 

or what the government now is terming a forgivable loan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that means that, in effect, students must 

borrow $3,200 more in Canada and Saskatchewan student loans 

this year than they needed to borrow last year before they’re 

eligible for a penny of bursary assistance. And this will 

obviously mean, Mr. Speaker, that thousands of young people 

in Saskatchewan – and I may say that dozens of them have 

already contacted my office and are saying that while they were 

eligible for a Saskatchewan student bursary last year, they’re 

not eligible for one this year. And if the Minister of Education 

suggests that that action is resulting in increased accessibility to 

post-secondary education in this province, he must be 

dreaming, Mr. Speaker, because no one else other than the 

minister believes that statement. 

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2076 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I must also point out to the minister that he 

has imposed an additional obstacle on assuring accessibility to 

post-secondary education in this province by saying to students 

that their opportunity for a forgivable loan, providing that they 

can be eligible for the $5,940 that they have to borrow before 

they . . . before a penny will be forgiven. But if they are 

eligible, shall we say, to borrow 7 or $8,000, and $1,000 of that, 

perhaps, is forgivable, they have to be assured, Mr. Speaker, 

that they will pass at least 60 per cent of their courses before 

any of that loan will be given back. And that’s a very, very 

significant change in the way the bursary program used to 

operate. 

 

The bursary program has been changed into a forgivable loan 

program, and for many young people who have been out of 

school for a number of years, and are then deciding to go back 

to school and perhaps complete their adult upgrading or take a 

course at a technical school after, shall we say, being out of 

school for seven or eight years, many of them will naturally be 

uncertain about how they will get along upon returning to 

pursue their education. 

 

And it’s our view, Mr. Speaker, that the technical institutes, the 

universities, and the community colleges of this province are 

perfectly capable of making a decision about whether students 

should be eligible to return to school or not, based on their 

performance, without the government having to decide to 

withhold assistance from students who don’t do well in their 

studies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make one final point about the general 

student loan program before specifically turning to the Bill, and 

that is, that I point out that the government has chosen to further 

reduce portability, under the student bursary forgivable loan 

program in this province, by making a decision this year to cut 

off all students who are Saskatchewan residents and wish to 

study outside of Saskatchewan – all those students, Mr. 

Speaker, for the first time, are made ineligible for any assistance 

under the forgivable loan or bursary program. 

 

In the past, Mr. Speaker, those students used to be eligible for 

bursary assistance, and now they are not eligible for bursary 

assistance. And we on this side of the Assembly consider that to 

be a very narrow view on the part of the government, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s our view that we ought to be encouraging 

young people to travel to other parts of Canada, to study in 

other parts of Canada, to learn about this great nation. 

 

And instead this government, Mr. Speaker, is saying to 

Saskatchewan young people that they’re only eligible for 

bursary assistance if there is a program that they wish to take 

that isn’t available in Saskatchewan and therefore they have to 

go outside the province to take it; and unless they’re pursuing 

that, they’re not eligible for any assistance from this 

government. And I consider that, Mr. Speaker, to be very 

unfortunate. 

 

I want to turn specifically to Bill 15 and to acknowledge the 

minister’s point that large parts of this Bill are in fact 

housekeeping. But one section of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is not 

housekeeping. And I want to draw the minister’s attention and 

the attention of all members of the  

Assembly to section 10 of the proposed amendment to The 

Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund (Act, 1985). 

 

Section 10, Mr. Speaker, in my view and in the view of 

members on this side of the Assembly, grants the Minister of 

Education unnecessary and irregular powers with respect to 

being able to make regulations as they pertain to the total 

amount of financial assistance that may be provided to students 

in Saskatchewan in the form of student aid; gives him unusual 

powers with respect to making regulations respecting the terms 

and conditions on which student aid may be provided. 

 

The minister is also being given, Mr. Speaker, in this amended 

legislation, powers to make regulations determining the 

eligibility criteria for awards and for various types of financial 

assistance. The minister is being given the power to make 

regulations respecting applications for student assistance, 

determining the period during which financial assistance is to 

be provided, and respecting the information that’s to be 

provided by students in connection with obtaining financial 

assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to members of the Assembly 

and members of the public, that it’s general practice that it’s the 

cabinet that sets these regulations. In other words, they’re set by 

the Lieutenant Governor, Mr. Speaker; they’re not set by the 

minister. It’s highly unusual that the minister should be making 

these regulations, Mr. Speaker, instead of the cabinet. And we 

on this side of the House consider that to be highly 

inappropriate. It would be much more appropriate if the cabinet 

made these regulations, rather than the minister having the 

arbitrary power to make those regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In a small way, Mr. Speaker, this particular section of the 

legislation that’s before us today, section 10, is an extension of 

the kind of power grab that we saw in Bill 5, Mr. Speaker, 

where the government gave themselves the authority to make a 

great many decisions with respect to the organization of 

government without coming to the Assembly. And what this 

minister wants to do, Mr. Speaker, is have the power to make 

regulations respecting the student aid program and change very 

substantial regulations, Mr. Speaker, that could very 

specifically affect the livelihood of students in this province. He 

wants to have the authority to do that without going to cabinet, 

Mr. Speaker, and we on this side of the House say that that’s 

inappropriate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to give notice to the minister now that 

when we go into clause by clause reading of this Bill, that I will 

be moving an amendment to this legislation striking, Mr. 

Minister, your power and authority to make regulations without 

going to cabinet, and instead making provision for cabinet to 

make these regulations rather than you, sir, to make these 

regulations alone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to draw the attention of members of 

the Assembly to subsection 10(1) of this Bill which states: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 

regulations defining, enlarging or restricting the  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2077 

 

meaning of any word or expression used in this Act but 

not defined in this Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the list of current definitions under this Act 

are small indeed. There’s only five terms in fact that are 

specifically defined. The definitions are provided for the words: 

committee, department, fund, minister, and trustees. 

 

There are a large number of other important words in this Act, 

Mr. Speaker, that could easily be defined in a way that would 

very much affect the livelihood of students. For instance, the 

definition of a student could be defined under this Act without, 

Mr. Speaker, any amendment to legislation being brought 

before this Assembly. In fact, under subsection 10(1) of this 

Act, the cabinet could choose to define student in whatever way 

they wanted to by way of regulation, without ever bringing an 

amendment before this Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I consider that to be inappropriate, and I urge 

the minister to withdraw subsection 10(1) of the Bill. I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that section 10 of the Bill is providing the Minister of 

Education with an unnecessary power grab. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

call on the Minister of Education to change, Mr. Speaker, the 

provisions in the legislation that I’ve made reference to. 

 

I have a number of other questions about the Bill. I’ll be 

sending the Minister of Education a letter asking for 

clarification on these questions. I don’t want to keep the time of 

the House on it. Mr. Speaker, until I receive a reply to the 

minister from those questions and have a chance to consult with 

student organizations and other post-secondary institutions 

around the province, I would like to beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

 

Bill No. 28 – An Act to provide for the Postponement of the 

Tabling of Certain Documents (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 

second reading of The Tabling of Documents (Postponement) 

Act, 1987. It was the practice in previous governments, and it 

has become the practice in our government, to postpone the 

tabling of certain documents required to be tabled in the fall 

session to a date in the following spring session. 

 

The reason is obvious. It is normally very difficult to have all 

departments’ annual reports prepared for the required December 

filing date. With the House sitting the summer of this year, the 

filing date occurs on July 22, 1987 for agencies whose fiscal 

year has a year ending March 31, 1987. It is obvious that if the 

December filing date is a problem, then the July date is even a 

greater problem. 

 

Unlike previous postponing legislation, this Act only postpones 

the tabling of documents where the documents were required to 

be prepared with respect to the period ending March 31, 1987. 

Documents required to be prepared prior to that date are subject 

to the usual rules as far as I’m aware. Virtually all those 

documents  

have in fact been submitted. 

 

The Act then goes on to postpone the tabling of documents until 

the first sitting day in the 1988 . . . and that is largely consistent 

with the last and the past practices. 

 

I would therefore move second reading of An Act to provide for 

the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain Documents (No. 2). 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

make a few brief comments on this Bill which is asking for a 

postponement of the tabling of certain documents. 

 

I listened to the minister’s explanation, and I heard what he 

said, and he was accurate to a large extent except to one, which 

I will come to later, in which he was not quite as lucid as he 

might have been. I listened to the minister, Mr. Speaker, to hear 

some assurances that the public of Saskatchewan might get so 

that they might allay . . . so that he may allay their fears and 

their concern over the kind of secretive approach that this 

government has taken with regards to providing information to 

people about the operation of their government. I say, having 

listened to what the minister said, that there was nothing in his 

remarks that could have allayed those fears and those concerns. 

 

And I think that is significant, Mr. Speaker, and important. I say 

that because it is my belief, and it is shared by my colleagues on 

this side of the House, that public confidence in the institutions 

of government are important. They are extremely important if 

our system is to work at its best. It is not the kind of system that 

can stand on its own. It is the kind of system that can only 

operate if the understandings that develop over time are carried 

out by whoever is sitting on the treasury benches of 

government. 

 

And that means, Mr. Speaker, that public confidence in the 

ability and the desire of their government to act within 

long-standing requirements of forthrightness, honesty, and the 

requirement of providing timely information. And there’s more 

that, I say with regret, that this government has chosen not to 

meet those requirements. 

 

I say that more, Mr. Speaker, with regret and concern than out 

of desire to score a political point here today because I think the 

experience that we have had in recent years should make us, 

each and every one in this House who are concerned about the 

democratic system which we cherish so much, we should be 

concerned when we have documents which provide information 

to the public about the actions of their government, about how 

their government spends their money, taking as much as two 

years before they are provided in this Assembly. That is a very 

serious matter and should not be ignored, either by members of 

this House or by the public. I give you two examples. 

 

The budget, which is a document of this legislature presented 

by the Minister of Finance . . . We had this year, Mr. Speaker, a 

budget that was presented months after the time it should have 

been. The fiscal year ends on March  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2078 

 

31 and the new fiscal year begins on April 1 of every year. 

Never in the history of this province since it was first organized 

and recognized has there been a budget that did not come until 

June, which kept municipalities and school boards – which the 

Minister of the Environment will know about – all of those 

organizations like those and others who rely on government to 

redistribute the wealth of this province so that they could carry 

out their functions, could not do their appropriate budgeting and 

planning until June of this year because this government was 

either unable to, or unwilling to, provide a budget when it 

should have been provided. 

 

And although this Bill in itself will not affect that, personally I 

think it is time that there is legislation produced in this 

legislature which will require a government to provide a budget 

by a certain time – after the experience we’ve had. And 

although this Bill won’t deal with that question, I think it’s just 

an example of how a government can begin to undermine the 

confidence that people might have in the institutions of their 

government. 

 

I bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, another document which 

is extremely important in order for the public and the legislators 

here to be able to see how the government is managing the 

affairs of the province, and that is the public accounts. We 

received in this Assembly, tabled by the Minister of Finance, 

the public accounts tabled in July – for the year 1984-1985 – in 

July of 1987. That, Mr. Speaker, is unacceptable. That is an 

attempt to keep the information hidden from the public until it 

is so late that its timeliness is gone, as the provincial auditor has 

said, so that it’s almost irrelevant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — We can’t operate effectively as a 

legislature on behalf of the people we represent if that kind of 

information is not provided in a timely way. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

there are possibly two reasons for this: (1) the government 

either has been unable to get its work done and get its act 

together so that it can provide this in a timely way – that would, 

too, be the first time in history of Saskatchewan – or, the 

government has deliberately held back reports, such as they did 

with the public accounts, so that the public would not be able to 

have their legislators scrutinize what the expenditures of this 

government has been. 

 

In the final analysis, Mr. Speaker, it is a matter of how the 

public money is being spent because, whether his personal and 

direct or indirect taxes are of individuals, or whether it is 

resource revenues, it is the public’s money. 

 

The government doesn’t own the resources of this province, if 

we talk about resource revenue. Resource companies don’t own 

the resources of this province. The people of Saskatchewan own 

the resources of this province, and all they do with those 

resources is rent them to the developer, whether it is the Crown, 

or whether it is a private concern. So those are public revenues, 

and when a government withholds or, by incompetence, is 

unable to provide the annual reports or the Public Accounts 

when they should be provided, it is keeping from the public 

knowledge about how their  

money is being spent. And this institution then cannot work 

effectively. 

 

Now I say, Mr. Speaker, that when partisan political 

considerations determine every decision of government, then 

you have the worst form of government. And there can be no 

other reason for the delays that we have seen in the last two or 

three years than partisan considerations. And I regret that very 

much. 

 

As the minister said, the Bill asks for postponement of the 

tabling of certain documents; but I say to that, it is reasonable 

for the public to ask why some have not been tabled and, in 

fact, may not be tabled for an indefinite period of time. 

 

Normally, I wouldn’t ask this question because the minister is 

right – there has been a postponement Bill every year for a long 

time. But these are not normal times, Mr. Speaker. These are 

not normal times. Will we have another session of the 

legislature and another budget not brought in until next June, or 

next July, or whenever it might be? That’s never been a concern 

or a consideration we’ve had to make, but we have had to make 

it now because of what happened this year. 

 

If that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, if there is not another budget 

presented until next June, then some of those annual reports 

which the minister referred to will not be tabled in this House 

except 15 months later, after the end of the fiscal year of that 

department or that Crown corporation. And I say to you that 15 

months is far too long – 15 months is far too long and should be 

unacceptable here, and is really irresponsible of the government 

not to provide them earlier. 

 

Now if the minister would stand up when he . . . or the Minister 

of Finance, or this minister when we get into the committee of 

this Bill on another day, and assure this House that the Public 

Accounts will be provided even when the House isn’t sitting, 

then I think we will have come a long way. And I will be asking 

the minister if he can give the House that assurance when we 

consider this Bill in committee. 

 

But there are other examples. We have, for example, Mr. 

Speaker, the prescription drug plan annual report. Its year ended 

on March 31, five months ago. That report hasn’t been tabled. 

And we have to ask, why? Is it unreasonable to believe that five 

months is an adequate time for the report to be audited and 

signed by the minister and printed and presented to this House? 

I think not. 

 

Now there is even a more blatant example, and that is the 1986 

report of the Crown Investments Corporation – more commonly 

referred to by this government as the Crown Management 

Board – the 1986 report which works on a calendar year. The 

Crown Management Board calendar year ended at the end of 

1986. Mr. Speaker, that’s eight months ago. Surely it is not too 

much to ask of any government, this government in this case, 

that the report of the Crown Management Board should be 

tabled before a period of eight months. 

 

I raise these because I want to highlight what I said about this is 

not a normal circumstance, a normal situation, as  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2079 

 

the minister said. It’s normal from the point of view that these 

kinds of Bills have always brought into the House, but it’s not 

normal in the kind of environment of keeping information 

which the public wants to have, needs to have, in order for it to 

judge whether its affairs – the affairs of the public – and 

whether the tax dollars of the public are being spent 

appropriately by the government of the day. 

 

That has not been happening. That has been raised before. And 

that will be raised again. I will want to have a few more 

remarks to make on this, Mr. Speaker, but for now I wish to ask 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1515) 

 

Bill No. 32 – An Act respecting the Emission of Air 

Contaminants 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Clean Air Act. The Clean Air Act, which we are 

considering today, will replace and improve upon the existing 

Air Pollution Control Act which was adopted in 1965. The new 

Act will ensure that all industry is treated equally and fairly, 

place a greater emphasis on industrial needs, streamline the 

process of obtaining approvals, clarify various aspects of the 

previous legislation, and make my department’s air quality 

program more effective and efficient. 

 

This Bill has been reviewed by approximately 50 industries, 

corporations, government agencies, and environmental interest 

groups. The comments received were favourable, and many 

suggested changes have been incorporated into the Bill are 

acceptable. The Clean Air Act represents a substantial 

improvement in environmental legislation in this province. It is 

a tough but fair piece of legislation which will not only bring 

Saskatchewan into line with other Canadian legislation but will 

also help to protect and enhance the quality of life for residents 

of this province. 

 

This Act will be welcomed by the general public and those with 

an interest in the quality of our environment. It will also be 

favourably received by industry. The Clean Air Act will ensure, 

with minor exceptions, that air pollution emissions from all 

industrial sources, incinerators, and fuel-burning equipment will 

be subject to an approval issued by the department. 

 

The existing Act only applied to new sources constructed after 

January of 1976, and this has led to an unacceptable double 

standard. At present, new industries and facilities are required 

to obtain an approval to control air pollution emissions, while 

older operations are exempted. By requiring every major 

facility to obtain an approval, this Act will ensure that all 

operations are treated equally and fairly. 

 

The normal term of permits written under The Clean Air Act 

will be five years, as opposed to the current period of one to 

three years. Extended permit terms have been requested by 

industry in order to facilitate long-range  

operational planning and sales. 

 

Obtaining a permit to operate an industrial source will be a 

straightforward task with The Clean Air Act. The information 

required in an application is clearly itemized, and typical 

conditions that may be included in the approval are outlined to 

avoid any misunderstanding. The Act provides the ability to 

amend permits and issue control orders to deal with problem 

situations, if these are required. 

 

The Clean Air Act contains improved definitions and 

terminology which will facilitate the resolution of problems and 

complaints received from the public. Jurisdictional overlap and 

some gaps with legislation, administered by the Department of 

Energy and Mines, have been eliminated. Tertiary oil 

production and oil-gas processing facilities, which have the 

greatest potential for air pollution emissions, will be regulated 

under The Clean Air Act. 

 

Longer permit terms will reduce costs for the department. The 

air quality section will be reorganized to place a greater 

emphasis on industrial approvals, inspections, and the review of 

data submitted to the department. 

 

As a result of this Act, the level of service to the public will be 

increased and, in the long run, the quality of life for all residents 

will be improved. 

 

In closing, careful examination of The Clean Air Act will show 

that it is a progressive piece of legislation which is worthy of 

support from anyone who’s concerned with the integrity and 

quality of our environment. I invite the support of all members 

for this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those comments I move second reading of 

Bill No. 32, An Act respecting the Emission of Air 

Contaminants. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will make just 

a very brief comment and then I will ask to adjourn the debate 

because the critic, my colleague, the member from Rosemont, 

will want to say a few things on the Bill. 

 

All that I want to say, for the purposes of the debate today, is a 

comment on the minister’s remarks about streamlining the 

process. I don’t think anybody can object to the streamlining of 

any process. It’s something that I think we would all find 

worthy. But the one thing that I think we have to be very careful 

about is when, in the streamlining of the process the provisions 

of the Bill are weakened, or of the enforcement is weakened, 

then I think we destroy the whole intent of any environmental 

protection legislation. I don’t know if that’s what’s happening 

in this Bill because it would take some more study. But I only 

raise that as a concern which I would certainly have initially 

with any legislation that deals with the environment. 

 

And so we’ll be looking at it, and we’ll be asking the minister 

to give us his assurances and show us how the enforcement of 

the provisions is not weakened by the streamlining of the 

process. 

 

The other point I want to make is that one of the  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2080 

 

shortcoming of many such laws that we have in Saskatchewan 

and in Canada is that the penalties, on many occasions, are so 

low that it’s actually profitable for those who might break the 

law or abuse the environment to pay the penalty rather than 

meet the requirements. And I regret to say that governments 

tend to err on the side of making the penalties low so that 

corporations – or they may not be corporations, they may be 

municipalities or individuals – decide well, I’m going to pay the 

fine because it’s cheaper to pay the fine, and I’m just going to 

continue to go my merry way because it will cost me a little 

more money. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that we have to guard against that, because 

this environment that we live in is only given to us once, and if 

we abuse it and destroy it, it’s not going to be here again. And 

so in this industrial age with growing populations and the 

development of larger urban centres with more people 

concentrated in smaller areas, we’d better act responsibly and 

make sure that that “once in the lifetime of the earth” gift that 

we get, our environment, is something that we cherish and 

protect, because not only is it in our interests but it’s in the 

interests of generations of people who are going to come after 

us, and we ought to be just as concerned about them as we are 

concerned about the interests that apply to us today. 

 

As I said, my colleague, the member from Rosemont, who is 

the critic for the Department of the Environment, wishes to 

speak on this further, so therefore I, at this time, ask leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 20 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

Before proceeding with the examination of the estimates in my 

department, I’d like to move a motion, an erratum for the 

supplementary estimates making a correction in a typing error. 

It’s a rather long motion. I would ask possibly that the members 

opposite could take it as read and we would send them a copy. 

It merely corrects a footnote. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chairperson, I’ll be directing my questions 

then to the Minister of Human Resources, Labour and 

Employment. Mr. Minister, my first series of questions relate 

on a more specific level again to the economic development 

aspect, you know, for Indian and Metis people, and your 

proposal. 

 

I checked back and sure enough, of course, the economic 

development proposals work out to about $15 per person – it 

was $1.5 million. But as I checked a little bit more closely, on 

last year’s budget, on Indian economic development, you had 

budgeted $3 million. But as I checked the record, there was 

only $1.5 million that actually went to the reserve level. And 

I’m wondering,  

Mr. Minister, where the other $1.5 million went? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, last year’s 

budget had $3 million for Indian economic development. The 

process is that the government examine the proposed projects. 

And last year after we examined the projects, we found that half 

of them – to the extent of $1.5 million – had merit. 

 

The other half have gone back for further review. Some of them 

have little economic development value. Some of them dealt in 

such matters as setting up small computer centres on reserves 

and things of that nature, and we have to examine whether these 

are economically viable or feasible, or have any long-term 

benefit to the residents of the Indian reserve requesting the type 

of project. In addition, a lot of those requests are from 

individuals, and we have to look at the merit. 

 

So we felt that $1.5 million worth of these projects had value, 

and the other projects requested have been deferred – either 

rejected or deferred; most of them are still being considered. 

And so it’s not that the money was there and disappeared. I 

would say that the deficit is $1.5 million less because we didn’t 

expend all of the money in the budget. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — How many applications were there for that 

Indian economic development program? And how many were 

accepted; how many were rejected? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — There were, in the last fiscal year 61 

projects approved. We don’t have the exact figure on the 

requests, but we expect they would have been in the range of 

about 120 to 130, approximately double. About one-half of the 

requests were approved. Some are under study and some will be 

rejected or have been rejected. 

 

Should also answer the question that we left off on last day 

where you wished to know the changes made in the department 

staff. You wished to know what percentage of the department 

staff was of Indian or Metis origin prior to the government 

down-sizing this spring. Prior to government down-sizing this 

spring, 50.8 per cent of the department staff was of Indian or 

Metis origin. Now that we have streamlined the department, 

down-sized it by seven people, 61.2 per cent of the department 

staff is of Indian or Metis origin. So it’s actually gone up, 

according to our calculations, by about 10 per cent . . . or an 

increase of 10 per cent. It’s gone up by more than that, of 

course. Statistics are very easy to manipulate. But the 

percentage before was 50.8 per cent to 61.2 per cent. The 

increase would probably be in the range of 18 per cent, but the 

numbers there, between them, is 10 per cent. 

 

In addition, of the seven people who left the department, one 

went to early retirement, there were four vacancies not filled, 

and two people transferred to other departments. But you know, 

you could calculate the percentages, and we will, of the 

percentage of increase of Indian and Metis people. My quick, in 

my head, calculation is that it’s about an 18 per cent increase. 

But the net figures are from 50.8 per cent to 61.2 per cent. 

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2081 

 

Mr. Goulet: — In regards to your senior management, how 

many senior management positions have you got; how many of 

them are Indian or Metis ancestry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The situation is that there’s always 

some question on definition. We feel that, considering the 

traditional definitions of senior management, three out of six 

senior managers would be of Indian or native ancestry. We had 

three before there was any departmental staff change, and we 

still have three. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — In regards to that approximately $1.5 million 

worth of grants that you gave out to the 61 Indian businesses, 

could I have the information on who the Indian businesses 

were; and how much did they each get in terms of the grants, 

you know; and for what type of business; for what time period; 

how many people-years of work did each one of them produce; 

and finally, how many of those were joint ventures? 

 

You may want to . . . if you haven’t got the information 

immediately available, I could give you notice and you could 

probably send me all the information tomorrow, unless you 

have the information handy immediately in front of you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I do have the information, and I’m quite 

prepared to put it on the record for you, and we can send you a 

copy in addition, but it will be on the public record. 

 

The approvals last year . . . and most of them were joint 

ventures where there was federal funding, and provincial 

funding, or band funding, or bank loans, or joint ventures of 

some sort. I can’t tell you offhand whether all of them were 

joint ventures, but I would think very nearly all of them were 

joint ventures of some sort. 

 

You’ll have to excuse my pronunciation on some of the band 

names here. You have to realize that my background, of course, 

is German and I speak that language quite well. I’m not too 

good on some of the pronunciations, but: Beardys and 

Okemasis Band, Dave Cameron, expansion of a horse racing 

and breeding business, $35,000, three jobs; Beardys and 

Okemasis Band, development of a corral cleaning business, 

Floyd Gardypie, $35,000; the same band with A. Douglas 

Gamble, $20,000, one job; the same band, Brian Peeteetuce, 

$20,000, three jobs, development of a sewer and water 

construction business; the same band, member Alex Gamble, 

$2,475 development of a landscaping business, three jobs; Big 

C band, Frank and Beatrice Piche, $35,000, four jobs, 

expansion of a general store business, Athabasca constituency; 

Big River band, George Netmaker . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I would accept the minister’s words that he will 

send me that information, you know, from across, you know, in 

terms of the businesses and amounts that they were allowed. So 

that in order for us to get on with further questions – and get 

nitty-gritty information. So I’ll get that later on if the minister 

will do that. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The minister did indicate he was going  

to read it into the public record, so the option is his. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’ll abbreviate as much as possible. I 

believe we were on Big River band, George Netmaker, 

development of a skidder business, $16,000 and two jobs; Carry 

the Kettle band, Isabelle Gray, expansion of a hardware 

business, $25,000, three jobs; Carry the Kettle band, 

development of a fibreglass/plastic products manufacturing 

plant, $10,000 for a study; Cote band, establishment of arts and 

crafts retail outlet, $10,000, two jobs; English River band, Joe 

Everett, $35,000 for a service station and restaurant business, 

nine potential jobs; Fishing Lake band, Merv Sunshine, 

expansion of a roofing business, $25,000 and two jobs; Fishing 

Lake band, Bernard Desjarlais, expansion of a construction 

business, $20,000 and three jobs; Flying Dust band, expansion 

of a gravel and paving business, $45,000 and two jobs; 

Gordon’s band, Kenneth McNab, expansion of auto wrecking 

and repair business, $10,000 and two jobs; Gordon’s band, 

Harold L. McNab, $30,000 for purchase of a garage business, 

two jobs; James Smith band, Ernie Sauve, expansion of a 

horticultural business, $14,000 and three jobs; James Smith 

band, Dick Sanderson, expansion of a market garden, $11,500 

and two jobs; John Smith band, Vernon Night, establishment of 

a convenience store and gas bar, $25,000 and three jobs; John 

Smith band, development of a tourist recreational complex, 

$10,000 for the study; John Smith band, Eric and Rosalie Bear, 

expansion of a strawberry farming business, $5,000 and three 

jobs; Kahkewistahaw band, undertake an oil and gas 

exploration study, $25,000 and four jobs; Keeseekoose band, 

Albert Musqua, development of a road grader business, $35,000 

and three jobs; Keeseekoose band, Arthur Shingoose, 

development of a building construction company, $10,000, 

seven potential jobs. 

 

The Lac la Ronge band is getting closer into your area, 

expansion of a marina, $35,000 and four jobs; Lac la Ronge 

band, feasibility study of a retail shopping mall in La Ronge, 

$10,000 for the study; Little Pine band, purchase of 7 per cent 

interest in a drilling company business, $30,000; Mistawasis 

Band, Cecil Watson, undertake a bulk fuel station feasibility 

study, $5,000; Moose Woods Band, undertake a golf course 

feasibility study, $10,000; Mosquito G.B.H. Band, a 

development of a road grader business, $20,000 and two jobs; 

Muskeg Lake Band, a development of a café business, and 

that’s Freda Arcand, $12,000 and three jobs; Muskowekwan 

Band, Harvey Desjarlais, establishment of a convenience store 

and garage business, $23,600 and two jobs; Ochapowace Band 

and Keeseekoose Band, Lester Henry and Ted Quewezance, 

undertake of a feasibility study for custom van conversion 

business, $5,000 for the study; Ochapowace Band, $70,000 and 

eight jobs for the Ochapowace Ski Resort – might say I was out 

there and they were doing an excellent job last year and seem to 

have a lot of clientele from all over southern Saskatchewan. I 

did actually see the eight people employed, and it was a very 

good operation last year. 

 

The One Arrow Band, Karl Prosper, purchase of shares in a tire 

service business, $28,750 and one job; Pasqua Band, Bernard 

Gordon, purchase of a backhoe attachment, $5,500, two jobs 

involved there in his business; Peepeekisis Band development 

of a business  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2082 

 

planned for integrated ethanol/feedlot business, $12,500 – this 

is for a study. 

 

In addition, since I know a bit about that particular economic 

development, that development is in my constituency. And the 

provincial government – not because it’s in my constituency but 

because my band members thought of the idea of an ethanol 

plant – has spent $500,000 towards the feasibility of ethanol 

plants in Saskatchewan. And there’s a very good chance that 

this ethanol plant will be a major type of Indian economic 

development. They have a tentative contract signed with 

Mohawk Oil who are producing ethanol in Manitoba right now. 

This government is encouraging ethanol production and there’s 

a very good possibility, with co-operation from the federal 

government, this 10 to $12 million project will proceed. 

 

(1545) 

 

Continuing, the other development was in the Peepeekisis 

Band, Mervin Dieter, development of a fencing business, 

$23,000 and four jobs. Now not all of these developments are 

actually on the reserve. I believe that some of these are band 

members who belong to that given reserve who are expanding 

their businesses in cities. And I believe he operates his business 

in Regina. The Pelican Lake Band, expansion of a saw mill 

business, $45,000 and six jobs; Pelican Lake Band, Leonard 

Thomas, purchase of a skidder, $10,500 and four employees 

working with him, or four people employed. Peter Ballantyne 

Band, expansion of a construction company, $50,000, eight jobs 

in the construction company. The Piapot Indian Band, 

development of a grader business, $35,000 and two employees; 

Piapot Band, Ken and Brian Carrier, development of a road 

gravelling business, $35,000 and two jobs. Piapot Indian Band, 

Don Carrier, expansion of a men’s hair styling and beauty salon 

business, $10,000 and five jobs. The Poundmaker Band, Harvey 

Tootoosis, $24,000 on two jobs, expansion of a consulting 

business; Saulteaux Band, expansion of a construction business, 

$20,000 in two jobs; the Saulteaux Band, study of developing a 

resort complex, $10,000 for the study; Saulteaux Band, Stella 

Gopher, expansion of an arts and crafts business, $9,500, six 

jobs . . . five jobs involved there; Starblanket Indian Band, 

development of a seed cleaning plant, $100,000 and 12 

potential jobs; Stony Rapids Band, establishment of a Black 

Lake mini-market, $43,700, four jobs; Sturgeon Lake Band, 

Wesley Daniels, establishment of a fitch farming business, 

$5,600, one job; Whitebear Band, Joe Sheepskin, expansion of 

a wicker business, $7,300 and two jobs. He operates that 

business in Saskatoon. Whitebear Band, Bernard Shepherd, 

development of a wood-working operation, $4,500 and one job; 

Witchekan Lake Band, Harvey Jim, development of a gas bar 

and arcade business, $5,800 and three jobs. 

 

In addition, there were a few province-wide type projects. The 

Battlefords Treaty 6 Tribal Council, development of an 

authentic Indian village, $40,800 and 25 jobs; Prince Albert 

District Chiefs, expansion of a trucking business, $63,000. They 

employ 15 people. Prince Albert Development Corporation, 

expansion of a security and janitorial business, $50,000 and 25 

people employed in that business; Saskatchewan Indian  

Agricultural Program, development of a rainbow trout raising 

business, $16,000, 8 people are employed; Saskatchewan Indian 

Agricultural Program, purchase of equipment for berry picking 

business, $15,000, 60 people are involved in the berry picking 

operation; and the last over the 61 that referred to, the Silver 

Sage Construction and Maintenance Corporation, expansion of 

Silver Sage Construction and Maintenance Corporation in 

Regina, $10,000. They employ 20 people at this time. 

 

I think you can see that the money that we do put into economic 

development goes to a wide variety of . . . and last year it was to 

treaty Indian people. This year we’re hoping to expand that to 

Metis people as well. It goes to bands. It goes to individuals. 

And you can see that many of the people are very busy in a 

broad area of construction and business and things of that 

nature. And we follow up on these projects to see how well 

they’re doing, and we’re quite satisfied with how well they’re 

doing in these businesses. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, the other day you gave me a lot 

of rhetoric about self-sufficiency, decision making by Indian 

and Metis people in regards to economic development. Today 

you come back here and tell me that you have rejected the 

majority of the Indian economic development proposals. You 

can talk about self-sufficiency and say people can do and make 

their own plans, but yet you will not give the proper dollars. 

 

I’m still trying to wonder, Mr. Minister, where have you got the 

$1.5 million? Did you shove it in Weyerhaeuser’s sleeve? 

Where have you got that $1.5 million? Where did it go? You 

budgeted for it; where are you hiding it? Where did it go? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, you know, here, check my 

sleeves, the sleight of hand – it’s not there. I mean, that’s 

money that didn’t exist. That’s money that the government 

didn’t borrow. That’s deficit we don’t have. 

 

And had we found . . . I listed to you the projects that we 

okayed last year, and had we found more, we would have 

approved more. We’ll probably be able in a few minutes to give 

you some indications of the things that we did turn down or 

deferred. And you have to realize that that is not money that 

was really put elsewhere. It’s money that this province does not 

have, and did not borrow, to spend on development projects that 

we felt didn’t have a very good chance, or needed further study 

before we could okay them. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, you give Weyerhaeuser a chance 

to develop for a period of 20 years. They are given a chance on 

a 20-year period to be able to come out and do their economic 

development aspect by exploiting our northern resources. And 

you also give them a write-off for 30 years if they cannot make 

that profit level. 

 

Why is that you’re treating the big corporation with a different 

set of standards, and an Indian economic development 

corporation with another set of standards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m sorry. I was trying to get you some 

information sent over there, and I missed the last  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2083 

 

part of your question. Could you just run the last part of it for 

me? 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Why is it that there is unequal treatment when 

it come down to a big corporation like Weyerhaeuser, where 

you spend and provide them a $250 million forestry industry 

when with all the land – that’s more than all the reserves across 

Canada – you give that to Weyerhaeuser. But when Indian 

people try and get economic development, you reject their 

economic development, you reject their economic development 

proposals and you’ll get the 30-year sweetheart deal with 

Weyerhaeuser. Why the unequal treatment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I told you last day, you’ve got to stop 

your hatred for Weyerhaeuser. They are a corporation that 

employ a lot of people. As I indicated earlier, 14 per cent of 

their construction staff is of Indian and Metis ancestry right 

now on their construction project. You should be changing your 

attitude and talking to Weyerhaeuser to see how Indian and 

Metis people can get involved in the lumbering industry. And, 

you know, to have an attitude of hostility towards 

Weyerhaeuser makes it extremely difficult to try to get more 

jobs for Indian and Metis people if you are typical – and I don’t 

think you are – of the attitude towards Weyerhaeuser. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, I will point this out to you again 

in regards to Weyerhaeuser. People would appreciate definite 

jobs of a long-term nature when it came down to Weyerhaeuser. 

People would appreciate the same terms of agreement that 

you’ve given to Weyerhaeuser in regards to land and regards to 

the interest-free loan for 20 years. People would appreciate that. 

 

It’s not specifically Weyerhaeuser that people attack – it’s the 

sweetheart deal that you made, the give-away deal that you 

made. That’s what people are worried about because it costs 

them in the long run. It costs them in terms of the Indian 

economic development loan structures – the amount has to 

come down because we have to pay Weyerhaeuser. That’s why 

people are raising the Weyerhaeuser issue. 

 

I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, what are you going to do? 

Have you mentioned this in regards to the Metis economic 

development aspect – that you have given the Metis economic 

development fund, a new native economic development fund, 

500,000? 

 

I would like to know, Mr. Minister, have you consulted 

AMNSIS (Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of 

Saskatchewan) in regards to the criteria for the development of 

the native economic development program? Have you consulted 

the people in that regard, and have you already developed the 

criteria? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now in the case of the Metis economic 

development fund, we will discuss this with AMNSIS, most 

likely during the month of September, and see what can be 

worked out with respect to how this money can best be spent. I 

can indicate to you there also that the money should be spent on 

individuals rather than specific group projects, unless the group 

project is of a  

major significance. The money would be allocated where it will 

do the most good for the individual Metis people in the business 

field. 

 

Clearly, and you referred again to Weyerhaeuser and 

give-aways and you talk about unfair treatment, but it seems to 

me that Weyerhaeuser took over existing leases in northern 

Saskatchewan that a government Crown corporation was 

operating, and not particularly to the benefit of Indian and Metis 

people, and it seems to me that you, as a member of the NDP, 

supported very strongly that government Crown corporation. 

And you will see that already Weyerhaeuser is employing more 

Indian and Metis people than the Crown corporation did. And 

you will see in the future, should you be able to convince the 

Indian and Metis people to co-operate – and we will do very 

hard to do that, and I’d hope that you would join in with us – 

that you will see such more economic development in northern 

Saskatchewan as a result of the Weyerhaeuser sale and the 

Weyerhaeuser business. 

 

When the Government of Saskatchewan and a Saskatchewan 

Crown corporation couldn’t do a proper job of running a paper 

mill, because governments are not very experienced in the paper 

business, and when the best bureaucrats you could find couldn’t 

run the paper business, it was losing 91,000 – I believe $400 a 

day – but 91,000 is very accurate. When that isn’t working, 

surely the government should sell that to somebody who knows 

what they’re doing, who has the markets, who can build a paper 

mill, who can use the aspen trees that have been rotting there 

for generations and generations, falling down and rotting, and 

they will now be put to use – surely that can benefit Indian and 

Metis people and all people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, I was asking you a question 

specifically related to a situation of Indian-Metis people, and all 

you could do is gloat about the benefits of an American 

corporation like Weyerhaeuser. 

 

You keep on gloating and gloating away at the tremendous 

advantages of Weyerhaeuser, yet it controls more land – it 

controls more land than what all the treaty Indians in Canada 

own in terms of reservations. Weyerhaeuser includes new 

regulations that forces treaty Indians to have a third party 

arrangements wherein an American corporation now affects 

treaty Indian bilateral arrangements. They need to go to 

Weyerhaeuser to get a 180-day notice, and also that 

Weyerhaeuser has the first shot on the land. And it’s only 

through another process that you will get an agreement. So 

when you can stand there and gloat about an American giant 

that, in fact, what you are doing is completely going away from 

your responsibility as a minister in charge of Indian and Metis 

affairs in this province. 

 

(1600) 

 

We are talking about people fighting for jobs and fighting for 

economic development grants, yet you haven’t given me the 

proper evidence on where the 1.5 million went. You just 

laughed about it. The $1.5 million that could have gone into 

Indian business would have been an important aspect in 

confirming a positive self-sufficiency  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2084 

 

approach, at least in a partial direction, but you have cut it back. 

You have cut it back. You have taken it away. 

 

You feel that this $500,000 that you offer, and made without 

their consultation, is going to all of a sudden be the step for 

self-sufficiency? It amounts to $5 per person for a year. 

 

But the situation, Mr. Minister, is indeed bleak, as you know. 

People still want involvement into the decision making that 

affects their lives, especially in terms of economic 

development. What are you doing to involve the Metis people 

in regard to that native economic development program funding 

of $500,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, I can assure the member opposite 

that Metis people will be involved in an advisory capacity as to 

screening what would be an adequate project and what wouldn’t 

be an adequate project, and we will take that advice in making 

the final decisions before the orders in council go through 

authorizing payment on a project. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, I might add in regards to your last 

statement, that the same type of colonial paternalism that I 

mentioned the other day exists in your statement that we will 

use the Indian and Metis people as advice, but we will make the 

final decision and cut over half of them out because we have the 

final authority. That’s exactly what you’re telling me. 

 

Yet on the other hand you can come in and make an 

introductory reply and speak at great lengths about economic 

self-sufficiency where Indian and Metis people make the 

decisions themselves. But that isn’t the case. What you do with 

large-scale corporations is completely the opposite. 

 

With Indian and Metis people you have already made the final 

decisions. You know the types of businesses you are going to 

make decisions on, and you don’t accept the decision making, 

you know, that comes from Indian and Metis people. 

 

In regards to the question of employment, a lot of people have 

mentioned that large-scale corporations will not voluntarily, on 

a long-term basis, in regards to permanent employment, on the 

permanent jobs, they will not hire Indian-Metis people in the 

long run. 

 

What was established was the affirmative action lease 

agreement and affirmative actions programs. And through that 

process about 60 per cent of the people were hired, for example, 

in Key Lake. When the Conservatives came in, they took apart 

the monitoring committee that was supposed to look after that, 

the monitoring committee that was supposed to look at the 

numbers of Indian and Metis people that were employed in Key 

Lake. That monitoring committee and George . . . and the 

Minister of Health said, I did that. And of course he did that. 

 

As the minister of the North, the first thing that he did was 

attack northern Saskatchewan people and the employment 

benefits that they were getting. The first job, when he was the 

minister at that point, was to tear down  

that fact. And within two years there was only 20 per cent 

people working in the mine in Key Lake, and that was the 

record of the minister when he was supposed to be representing 

the people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now in your case of employment, when the PCs come in, in 

terms of Weyerhaeuser they say, yes, we will hire Indian and 

Metis people, when they are put the question. I look at the 

clause in the Weyerhaeuser agreement; it says “encourage.” 

Encourage, what does that mean? It doesn’t mean a thing. It is 

just a statement to do nothing; that in fact all he will do is make 

short-term summer projects as a basis of your argumentation 

and you will not look at permanent staff as a viable alternative 

and a way of getting at it in the Weyerhaeuser agreement. 

Because all you say is, oh, we will agree with the big 

corporation that we should only . . . Indian and Metis people do 

not need the encouragement. They already have the motivation 

to find jobs, but you are blocking them with your policies. 

 

What are you going to do, Mr. Minister, to change this aspect in 

regards to employment in any large-scale development that 

occurs in the province of Saskatchewan? Are you going to 

apply the affirmative action lease concept to these major 

developments in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the information I 

have is that while the numbers are down at Key Lake, in the last 

six months they have hired 100 per cent Indian and Metis 

people in the last six months. And it’s not always easy to keep 

up with an exact quota system. You have to have people 

applying for the jobs; you have to have people qualified for the 

jobs. In the last six months they’ve been quite successful in 

hiring 100 per cent Indian and Metis people. 

 

The allegations you make about the uselessness of 

Weyerhaeuser in development of the North, I would suggest 

that the 14 per cent of the construction workers working on site 

would hardly agree with you. 

 

You have a problem in that you continue to emphasize the 

negative, and the negative really never achieves much. It never 

develops anything. It’s a problem that is consistent with the 

NDP party, as I recall it, in my younger days. 

 

I never saw such a negative group of people all gathered in one 

place. And the problem is . . . the reason I didn’t really fit into 

the party you’re in is that I had a positive attitude. I felt that the 

world could be improved, it could be changed; that if people 

went out and did something, they could get something done. 

But I recall going to NDP conventions, and the constant theme 

was that somebody else out there is bad; therefore, we are 

suffering. Somebody else out there owns everything; therefore, 

we have no jobs. And it was a very negative group. 

 

I’ve never seen a political organization – and I’ve had some 

association with three now – that was so paranoid. I mean, it 

was really disappointing. And I felt that if you were ever going 

to have any progress, you could not have an NDP government, 

and that’s why I got disillusioned with socialism and the 

negativism of your party. And you  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2085 

 

continue that trend. Everything is negative. What you should be 

saying is, let’s go out and find some more corporations to come 

in and help us develop the North. We have other government 

corporations. We have a plywood plant that Indian and Metis 

could buy. We have all kinds of other things that Indian and 

Metis people could invest in, in the North, in all parts of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Let’s not chase away investment. Let’s not chase away 

technology. No one in Saskatchewan has the knowledge or 

ability to build a paper mill – Indian and Metis people don’t; 

German people don’t. Canadians of every kind do not have in 

this province the expertise to build a paper mill. As a matter of 

fact, the paper mill is not designed in Canada. Nobody in 

Canada builds paper machines, so therefore we have to draw on 

what’s in the rest of the world. We can either sit here and stare 

at the trees or bring in a paper machine and make them into 

paper. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, I wasn’t talking about the paper. 

I’m talking about the existing jobs that out there that anybody 

can do in Saskatchewan. There’s a lot of unemployed workers 

in this province that are looking for jobs in regards to the 

forestry industry. There’s a lot of Indian and Metis workers in 

northern Saskatchewan that are looking for jobs that are not 

getting them. That’s the reality of the situation. 

 

In regards to the question of funding, I would like to know – 

you never did answer the question – the issue of funding to 

AMNSIS (Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of 

Saskatchewan)? AMNSIS is fighting for their constitutional 

rights of self-government. Self-determination, self-sufficiency 

is what they are fighting for, but yet you cut all funding just like 

that. Because the Premier was given a little bit of a hard time in 

Ottawa, you choose to beat up on Metis people in this province. 

You just beat them up just like that because of a statement. You 

were vindictive. They did not, at that point, feel that they could 

do real justice to native people. They had to cut off the means 

for developing their constitutional rights. 

 

But the association wanted to find out a couple of weeks ago 

whether or not the minister would approve of at least 

wind-down funds. The Premier said it would be business as 

usual when he came back from Ottawa; that in fact it appeared 

that there would be at least funding, as was done in other cases, 

for wind-down dollars. I asked the question a couple of weeks 

ago whether or not you would provide money for the 

wind-down phase, and I haven’t heard any reply yet. Are you 

going to at least provide the dollars for the people who are 

working during that period in time, and do it in the just and fair 

way that it should be done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well we’ve indicated earlier that we 

will not be providing wind-down funding because you’re not 

talking about money there for the average Metis citizen of 

Saskatchewan, you’re talking about money for administration, 

money for travel; you’re talking about . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. If the member would want to 

get into debate, just stand up and I will recognize you. 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — If the member for Moose Jaw North, 

when he shouts across the House, would take his hand away 

from his mouth, I could hear what he’s saying and I might be 

able to reply to him. I couldn’t quite hear what he was saying. 

 

So the answer that I’m giving you is that the AMNSIS money 

was used totally for administration. They’ve received $9 million 

from the federal government for economic development and 

have quite a clear mandate to put that to use. In addition, we are 

putting up $500,000 for Metis development. 

 

The budget of the organization has salaries for area directors, 

$40,000, plus 12 per cent for benefits, plus $500 for travel. 

Here’s an organization that is spending more on administration 

than MLAs are paid in this province. You know what you 

receive as an MLA. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s overpaid. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — And you’re asking that the taxpayers 

. . . My colleague suggests he’s overpaid. I would say that the 

member opposite is paid just about right. Others here are 

underpaid. 

 

The question here is that the taxpayers . . . you’re asking the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan to pay administrative people, area 

directors, a total organization of some form of government that 

is not really yet recognized in this country in any way, you’re 

asking us to pay on behalf of the taxpayers to administrative 

people more than MLAs receive in this province, more than you 

receive, and the list of requests and expenditures goes on and 

on. 

 

(1615) 

 

And I have an entire budget submitted for this year and, you 

know, the legal fees and the consulting fees, and it goes on and 

on. None of it, none of that money is spent on jobs for Metis 

people. 

 

I just read you a list of 61 projects, one and a half million 

dollars. All of that money went directly to jobs for treaty Indian 

people. None of that AMNSIS went to jobs for Metis people. It 

went to administration, to travel and bureaucracy, and that is 

not what you can build a nation on; it is not what you can 

operate a nation on. A nation cannot operate that way, a 

province cannot operate that way, and a people cannot operate 

that way. 

 

A people have to have a broad spectrum. They have to have 

economic development. They have to have social institutions, 

educational institutions, and the money we’re talking about here 

in economic development is not all. You know very well that 

the province spends money on Indian and Metis people for 

education, and for health, and social services, and all other 

forms of benefits. And you know that is a substantial amount of 

money. 

 

So don’t say that somehow your friends are hard done by by 

losing their administration money. They should generate it 

themselves in whatever manner they think is appropriate, or 

else cut their administration costs. 

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2086 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, the basis of your remarks again 

show your paternalism and unequal treatment. It’s the type of 

statement that promotes the racism in this province. What you 

are doing, Mr. Minister, you’re expecting Indian and Metis 

people to be pushed out of work. You are expecting Indian and 

Metis people to be used only for cheap labour. You’re 

expecting Indian and Metis people to have a higher 

unemployment rate than the rest of this province. You’re 

expecting Indian and Metis politicians to be able to be paid 

nothing. And yet you pull a high salary for the nonsense that 

you pull across in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Minister, your treatment, you as a politician, in regards to 

public funds, you’re getting paid from the public funds of this 

province. Municipal politicians do. The political 

self-government structures and the political governing 

structures of Canada receive dollars. But what you are saying, 

Mr. Minister, is this: when it comes down to Indian and Metis 

people on their political structures, they are supposed to 

received absolutely nothing. That, to me, is racism in terms of 

political control, and I find that absolutely not amazing. 

 

We have heard a lot of statements of this sort come out where 

you expect Indian and Metis people to work for nothing, to 

work for less than anybody else. You expect them to do things 

that developed the constitution. We get paid. I get paid and you 

get paid in this legislature. But the same principles that accrue 

to us as politicians of this province should be the same 

principles of operation that accrue to Metis forms of 

self-government, which is precisely what the Association of 

Metis and Non-Status Indians was. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you trying to say that the Indian and Metis 

forms of government . . . are you saying that they are supposed 

to receive absolutely nothing while we get paid as we talk here? 

Is that what you’re saying, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Here you go again on racism. I really 

don’t know what you mean by racism or what accusations you 

intend to make here. 

 

But lets . . . I’ll come here and I’ll bare my soul. I’ll give you 

some personal information. You bare yours. I can tell you that, 

as a cabinet minister, I believe I get a clear cheque for $1,700 

extra as compared to an MLA, for two portfolios which is about 

. . . I clear about $800 a month for each portfolio I have, and 

that’s not totally clear because at the end of the year I have to 

pay my income tax. Now last year my income tax was $41,000. 

My family paid over $50,000 in taxes. The first three years – I 

stopped calculating – but the first three years that I was an 

MLA here, I paid more in taxes than I received in a pay cheque 

from the government. 

 

And I don’t know what you mean by racism. Are you saying 

that we are not caring people on this side of the House? 

 

I’m not objecting to paying those taxes, but what I’m saying to 

you is that at a certain stage the people of Saskatchewan have to 

balance between how much they pay in taxes and how many 

services are provided to people. It costs an awful lot of money 

for the people of this  

province, as I’ve given you an example, to bankroll the 

Government of Saskatchewan and to bankroll the Government 

of Canada. And we are now going into negotiations with 

another form of government, that is referred to as 

self-government, and it’s going to have to be decided who’s 

going to bankroll that form of government and to what extent. 

And we’re prepared to sit down and go into those negotiations. 

 

But don’t come here and call me a racist. I think that’s a 

cop-out. I think you should sit down here in this legislature or 

anywhere else in this country and work out solutions to these 

problems rather than come here and call me, a member of the 

Assembly and a taxpayer who pays his taxes regularly, call me 

a racist. 

 

I feel that the people of this province are very generous to those 

in need, regardless of whatever their colour or creed or religion 

is. The people of this province are struggling to help everyone 

as much as possible. So I think you should put such 

terminology aside and stop coming up here and insinuating that 

I am a racist. Because I believe that that is the kind of language 

that is demeaning, not to me, but to the people who are saying 

it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, in regard to the statements I have 

made, there is a distinction between individual forms of racism 

and policies of systemic racism. You all know the law in this 

province of what systemic racism is, and institutionalized 

racism is. You bring out, as usual, your individualistic views 

about racism and try and say that I am talking about individual 

forms of racism between you and I. That’s not what I am 

talking about. 

 

I am talking about the policies of this government that 

systemically eliminate more jobs for aboriginal people in this 

province than there is for the rest of the people. I find that, in 

regards to the racism question, that there is a failure to 

understand that in the context of systemic and institution . . . 

But we have a law in this province and, as a lawyer, he should 

recognize that law on the human rights in this province. That 

there is . . . And he should understand the law of systemic 

discrimination which we are trying to fight. I am challenging 

you with statements such as affirmative action, which is a law 

that came into this province to fight the systemic discrimination 

that exists. 

 

I have not been pointing to you as to whether or not you are 

individually racist, I’ve never said that. What I am talking about 

is policies and practices that promote racism in this province, 

And sometimes statements that are taken off the cuff that 

promote and incite that type of hatred. 

 

For example, when we went into the constitution there was a 

statement that was made that we spent $1 million a day on 

Indian and Metis people in this province, and this was presented 

on national TV. Statements like that are made to incite and 

mislead the public, to assume that there is way, way too much 

money spent on Indian and Metis people. That works out to 

about $365 million for the whole year, and you mentioned 

today that there was about $375 million spent in this province. 

But when I  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2087 

 

travel around, people are asking me: where’s this $375 million? 

 

In economic development alone, where the basis of an existence 

of a people, of any people, is a basic requirement, what the 

policy of your government shows is that you slashed that by 50 

per cent this year. You slashed it by 50 per cent. And you can 

come out to me and say that it is a fair policy, it is an equal 

policy; we are giving equal treatment to everybody. But you’re 

not giving equal treatment to everybody. 

 

I’ve given you countless examples on the Weyerhaeuser deal, 

specific cases on the unequal treatment. I am talking about 

unequal treatment between aboriginal people versus big 

corporations and the friends of the government. That’s what I’m 

talking about. 

 

I’m not talking about the racism of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan as you imply – definitely not. Most people that I 

work with throughout the province, and everybody knows that 

they don’t like . . . and dislike racism, that racism is just a form 

that should be eliminated from society. But they are systematic 

forms that contribute to that. And those types of forms that have 

helped alleviate that problem are the type of things that you are 

doing away with. 

 

And I’ve quoted specific cases before. I talked about the 

problem of even the concept of a leadership when I challenged 

the Premier on a statement on AIDS and aboriginal people. I 

challenged that question over a year because the information 

that I got was that the only national group, or ethnic group, that 

was mentioned when the Premier said if AIDS ever hits the 

native community, it would be hell on wheels. 

 

That kind of statement coming from the leadership, and I don’t 

mean the Premier as an individual, I mean the leadership. The 

concept of a position that’s that important in this province is the 

type of thing that I really find very discouraging as a person 

who tries to fight against racism in this system. And I’m not 

going to . . . (inaudible) . . . around and say that it doesn’t exist 

– it does exist. It is said in so many words from this and that, 

and by so many practices and policies. That is what I’m talking 

about when I talk about racism. 

 

When you look at the history of racism, and the types of 

strategies that have been used on racism, what you do in the 

first place is this – and this has occurred even in modern day 

racism – is that you look at a people that you want to put down 

and you tie them in with a dangerous or inhuman situation. You 

either say that they are mere animals – and this has been 

brought about in the history of literature on racism – that you tie 

them in and make a connection with them as nothing but 

animals, or just people who will work like animals. And so the 

racism is tied in with something that you look down upon. And 

our western society, of course, looks down on that concept of 

animals. So you tie that in with the people. 

 

(1630) 

 

The other aspect that has been used in the history of racism has 

been this. You tie a people, you tie a people  

with a dangerous – not animal – but with a dangerous disease 

that everybody finds should be something that is resolved in 

this province and all over the world. But you tie them in with 

that, and the basis of racism is this: that if it indeed is true that 

only one group was tied in, then somebody has to challenge that 

and bring it out into the open. And that is precisely what I did at 

that point in time. When I checked out the situation later on, 

they said: oh, we were mentioning everybody. I found out that 

that wasn’t the case. 

 

When specific questions were asked about the Premier as to 

which other nationality or ethnic group was mentioned, he 

could not come out with one proper answer – not one. He kept 

talking about youth; he kept talking about women; he even 

brought out seniors when pressed under a question. He was 

trying to hide the fact that, in fact, he did not bring out the 

question of nationality and ethnicity in his statement. And that’s 

the type of thing – it would have been a lot better if he said: oh, 

I may have slipped up; I never really meant to say that, and I’m 

sorry that if somebody ever thought that I said that, then that 

isn’t exactly what I meant. But he kept on trying to defend his 

position. 

 

You cannot defend a position like that. It’s futile to try and 

attempt to hide that type of thing. So I am giving you examples 

of systemic racism where chief positions of policy-making in 

this province, and practice, can be seen to be affecting a group 

of people. It is interesting that right after the Premier said that, 

and in conjunction with his treatment of aboriginal people at the 

constitution, Mr. Minister, this is what happened in La Ronge. 

 

Even in a simple hockey game, even in a simple hockey game, 

it said there was a poster at a hockey rink in La Ronge – right 

after Devine did not agree to the constitution. I said – the people 

understood that: Devine beat . . . the Premier beat. It says: the 

Premier . . . well the quote is this; it says, and I quote: 

 

Devine Beat the Indians; The Beavers Will Too. 

 

And I find that . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. I 

thought it was the practice of this House to refer to members 

either by their constituency or by their portfolios, as opposed to 

by their names. And I consistently hear the hon. member 

referring to our Premier and the Minister of Agriculture by 

name. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chairperson, I did not mean to name the 

Premier. I was doing a quote in regards to that fact, so I will 

continue. 

 

So those are the types of things that I am talking about. I am not 

talking about an abstract thing that I cannot understand myself. 

A lot of people know . . . Mr. Minister, you mentioned that 

people should be positive. I will tell you this – when I entered 

the legislature – I stand here because we know we can do 

something positive in conjunction with all the people in this 

province. I know we can do something positive in conjunction 

with  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2088 

 

Indian-Metis people in this province. I know, and I firmly 

believe that, and that’s why I am here. 

 

And that is why, when issues come up that are of a 

contradictory nature, my position is one of standing up and 

fighting those types of positions. I know the majority of people 

in this province will do the same thing. So when I see injustices 

being done, I will have to stand up to that injustice. When I 

want to be positive – people I see fight for jobs in northern 

Saskatchewan, and they’re told that jobs are not there. 

 

When you look at the aspect of Indian economic development, 

those people who did the planning, over half who got knocked 

off in that Indian economic development program were very 

positive. But I’ll tell you something; they must be frustrated 

now. They must be down-hearted, because they don’t have the 

economic development base that other groups are provided for, 

like big corporations. 

 

So I would like to pin-point that fact. It’s not an abstract thing 

that I do not understand, Mr. Minister, it’s something that I 

could relate to in terms of policy and practice, and in terms of 

institutionalized structures in this province and in Canada. And 

so when you brought up the issue of racism, that is my 

explanation, Mr. Minister. 

 

I would like to get into the concept of the land question. I feel 

it’s very important that the land issue be addressed. When you 

look at the Indian-native secretariat, the new division, and you 

look at the record, we need to get some action on that. 

 

I overhear people saying that because of the high 

unemployment rates, because of the lack of economic 

development funds, Indian people are being forced into 

positions where they have to accept money rather than land for 

settlement. Money loses its value after you use it in one term. 

But you know, and the people in here know, that land retains its 

value as history goes on. And land could be used by the 

children and the grandchildren for many years because it will 

always be there. 

 

But you try and use a modern day beads and trinkets approach 

to the solution of the land question. Sure, people would 

appreciate the fact that we cannot . . . because of the economic 

pressures people are forced to accept this position. And it is my 

thinking that you’re trying to get a policy where you want to 

provide the dollars in exchange for the land. But there’s still a 

lot of land in this province, as you know, Mr. Minister, in 

regards to Crown land throughout the province that people 

could use for economic development purposes, the very basis of 

self-sufficiency that you, yourself, talk about. 

 

What, Mr. Minister, are you going to do in the future in regards 

to this question of land? What substantive thing are you going 

to do to make sure that a solution, once and for all, in regards to 

the land question, can be resolved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, that was a rather 

long question. I’ll try to give a shorter answer. I would say to 

the member opposite that my reading of the situation is that the 

people of Saskatchewan are tired of  

listening to his musings on racism. My observation would be 

that he’s perfectly suited to be a member of the NDP and should 

be there for all of his life because he has the true attitudes of a 

member of the NDP. He fits in perfectly. 

 

We get into this question of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He 

keeps suggesting racism. Everything he sees or hears is 

somehow turned into the context of racism. And I would submit 

that there is a difference between realism and racism, and 

therefore the matter should be discussed in a realistic manner 

and considered realism. 

 

The member opposite wants to know about expenditure on 

Indian and Metis people in Saskatchewan. We have estimated, 

as closely as possible, provincial expenditures in health, $133 

million per year; in social services, $112 million per year. 

 

Now for fear of being accused of being a racist, I won’t go into 

any form of explanation, or any kind of answer as to how these 

costs are calculated, or why they arise. I leave that for the 

member opposite to comment on because I’m simply giving 

him the figures. 

 

We should really go into the reasons for these expenditures and 

how they might vary from normal expenditures, but in any 

event, health is $133 million a year, and I will not say why it’s 

that high; social services, $112 million a year; justice, $62 

million a year; education and training, $40 million per year; 

economic development and employment development, $10 

million per year; other, $18 million a year – for a total 

expenditure of $375 million per year from the province. In 

addition, as far as we can calculate, exclusive federal money 

spent in Saskatchewan is an additional $253 million a year, for 

a total expenditure from Canada and Saskatchewan of 

approximately $628 million per year, in this province, on Indian 

and Metis people. 

 

And surely, money alone cannot solve all the problems related 

to the Indian and Metis people. The department of northern 

Saskatchewan poured as much money as could be poured into 

two constituencies and still not break the provincial treasury. I 

believe they were running in a range of expenditure of $130 

million a year in northern Saskatchewan. And when we became 

government, the problem was not solved. And we have to look 

at other alternatives, and we believe economic development and 

self-sufficiency are the other alternatives. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Just another little comment on the issue 

because you keep raising the topic, and that’s the fact that you 

seem to imply that what I talk about is always one of an issue of 

racism. This morning I raised questions in this House that didn’t 

have anything at all to do with racism. And I raised three 

questions the other day, and others as you look for the record. I 

haven’t posed that question . . . I’ve only posed that question 

when it has occurred. And I will continue to do that when and if 

it will occur in the future. I will not back down in this House 

when it comes down to the issue of systematic discrimination, 

and I’ll have you know that. 

 

One of the important things and that’s at issue, in regards to this 

budget, has been the cut-back on the communications budget, 

the New Breed budget. The  

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2089 

 

New Breed was providing an important communication link to 

the community level. And when I look back at the history and 

connections with the Saskatchewan Indian, they also provided 

very important communications systems. 

 

And these were at very crucial times in history of the 

development where the initial stage of the constitution was 

coming in, in regards to the Saskatchewan Indian in 1982. And 

that money was cut back by the PC government. Now it was cut 

back in regards to the aspect that goes to the . . . that was used 

utilizing the AMNSIS budget for the New Breed. 

 

And to me that’s a signal that you are trying to silence the 

people. The people want to communicate with the membership, 

and not only the membership, but the public at large. Specific 

ministers from across have had their voice heard through the 

New Breed. It was balanced. We heard your arguments through 

that paper, but because a few people chose to voice their 

concern strongly and criticize the government through it, you 

chose to do the cowardly act of doing away with it. In much the 

same way, when AMNSIS challenged you, you did away with 

them. You just do away with any challenge that you have in this 

province. 

 

(1645) 

 

It’s not a matter of being negative, Mr. Minister. It’s a matter of 

standing up strongly for your rights. You have to know the 

difference between standing positively for your rights and just 

being mere negative. 

 

What I’m trying to get at in terms of economic development is 

to get stronger affirmative action agreements so that you can 

hire more Indian and Metis people in this province. What I’m 

asking for is land claims so that the grandchildren can walk on 

Indian and Metis people’s land. That, in fact, what I am looking 

for is improvements in the economic development grants that 

you’ve given to Indian and Metis people. Those are positive 

suggestions and implications of my questioning. 

 

So when we state over here, when I make a statement in regards 

to issue such as race, when it comes from time to time, I will 

stand up and say so. I will not be muffled; I will not be silenced. 

I will not be silenced like the New Breed. I will not be silenced 

like you did to the Saskatchewan Indian. I will never be 

silenced as long as I stand in this legislature while issues like 

that come out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — In final, Mr. Minister, the issue of the 

constitution was extremely important for Indian and Metis 

people. When you cut back the budget, for example, on Metis 

people, you cut out the mechanisms, one of the important 

mechanisms of self-government that they had. They had, you 

mentioned, even consulting dollars. The consulting dollars were 

used to try and find out new means and methods of dealing 

fairly with Canada in regards to the self-government question. 

And as we looked at the constitutional talks, it became very 

apparent that this government was not willing to have a strong 

Indian and Metis self-government structure, when  

the strong structures represented in Ottawa there were torn 

down by the Premier, at that point in time, and he tried to 

introduce a weak, watered down version. And we’re talking 

about the highest level of governing for Indian and Metis 

people in much the same way that we talk about the highest 

level of governing for this province. 

 

The constitution was an extremely important position. When I 

looked at it and the comments that were made by the Premier, it 

was very different than the comments he was making one 

month later in the Meech Lake agreement – very, very different. 

There was one way of dealing with aboriginal people, and one 

way of dealing with the Meech Lake accord. Remember when 

they dealt with the Indian and Metis issue of self-government, 

Devine said, well, we have to . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would caution the member to not use the 

member’s name. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Okay. 

 

When the Premier said that we will have to go back and get 

public hearings, we have to define this thing specifically and in 

detail before we accept it, we have to make sure and take the 

greatest care that Saskatchewan and Canada has ever seen. 

That’s what he seemed to be implying. 

 

But when it came down to Meech Lake, he will try and sell the 

Meech Lake agreement without public hearings. You will get us 

to accept the concept of distinct society without defining it. Mr. 

Minister, that is what I mean by unequal treatment – that the 

government that you represent, and the position that you hold as 

upholding the rights of Indian and Metis people, are 

contradicted by your very practice. 

 

You have one way of dealing with aboriginal people and one 

way for dealing with, for example, the Meech Lake accord. 

That is what I find disturbing. This is what a lot of people find 

frustrating, but in the end result, people will stand up for their 

rights. Indian and Metis people will stand up for their rights in 

Saskatchewan and all over Canada. Although a lot of barriers 

will be put in their place, and be put in by specific ministers like 

yourself in terms of policy and practice, that in fact in the long 

run justice will prevail as far as Indian and Metis people are 

concerned; that, indeed, what the majority of the people in 

Canada and Saskatchewan want is that justice and equality must 

prevail for Indian-Metis people in this province and right across 

Canada. 

 

That’s what people of Saskatchewan want. That’s what they 

would like to see. They would like to see a Premier that stands 

up for the rights of Indian-Metis people. That’s what they 

would like to see. They would like to see a minister in charge of 

Indian and Metis affairs that will stand up for the rights of 

Indian and Metis people. They don’t want you to just gloat 

about the Weyerhaeusers of the world. They want you to be 

able to work with them and see that their issues of economic 

concern, political concern, cultural concern, educational 

concern are done in co-operation with this provincial 

government and the Government of Canada. 

 

  



 

August 26, 1987 

2090 

 

I will ask the minister: what is he going to do in the future to 

make sure that this co-operation, the positive building that is 

required for this development that I’m talking about – what is 

he going to do to substantively change what has been happening 

in the past five years? What are you going to do, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I . . . Mr. Deputy Chairman, in this 

country it has been traditional that magazines would be 

supported by subscriptions and advertising. And many 

magazines in this country – almost all magazines in this country 

– operate that way. 

 

With case for the New Breed Journal, we find that the federal 

government annually contributes $128,000 towards the New 

Breed Journal; and in addition, the province of Saskatchewan is 

contributing $96,000. And we felt that the $96,000 could be put 

to more important use than the subsidization of a magazine. 

And traditionally magazines that have had merit, and where the 

readership was interested in the magazine, would have had 

subscriptions and advertising, and it would fund the magazine. 

 

In this case, I understand that the New Breed Journal has 

changed its operation procedure and is still operating on the 

$128,000 that the federal government contributes towards the 

New Breed Journal. I’m not aware as to what their advertising 

revenue is or what their subscription revenue is, so we couldn’t 

really say whether the $96,000 was necessary to the operation 

of the New Breed Journal or not. 

 

However we felt that the $96,000 of taxpayers’ money should 

be put to other uses. And despite the allegation by the members 

opposite that there are cuts in health care, you should take into 

account that the health care budget is up $36 million this year, 

and $96,000 doesn’t go too far towards paying those additional 

expenditures. 

 

But I can assure the member opposite that that $96,000 is being 

spent on Indian and Metis people through health care, social 

services, justice, education, and all other services that the 

government of this province provides. 

 

When you speak about rights, I have to caution the member 

opposite that in the NDP their education is deficient – I learned 

that when I was there – and that they never got beyond rights in 

any kind of education they ever received, and haven’t yet 

discovered that with rights come responsibilities. And so 

therefore you will never hear the NDP talk about 

responsibilities like: my responsibility to pay my income taxes 

– my family considers it a heavy responsibility to pay in excess 

of $50,000 a year in taxes. That’s responsibility, and that’s the 

kind of responsibility that the NDP don’t understand. And the 

NDP have this view that I should keep working myself to the 

bone, and that’s almost the case because I do a lot of my own 

physical labour – I have crooked fingers to prove it – and that I 

should keep doing that to keep the NDP in the style they are 

accustomed to. And I can tell you that the majority of people in 

this province are getting sick and tired of working for the NDP 

to keep the NDP in the style that they are used to, living off the 

work of the average citizen of this province. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — That is the caution that I give to the 

member opposite, that with rights come responsibilities. And in 

the constitution of Canada there are special rights for Indian and 

Metis and Innuit people that are not there for other Canadians. 

There are a few special rights for French Canadians as a result 

of the situation in Quebec. But my ancestry is German; my 

wife’s is Ukrainian. There are Polish people . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I thought I heard a Polish person speak to me 

just now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes there it is, in the 

opposition. 

 

These people do not have special rights in the constitution, but 

they continue to have responsibilities. And I say to you that I do 

not begrudge or deny Indian and Metis and Innuit people 

special rights in the constitution of Canada. But I do caution 

you that with special rights – with all rights – comes 

responsibility. With self-government comes a responsibility; to 

finance your government becomes a responsibility of dealing 

with your people in a fair manner and leading your people. 

With rights come responsibility and that should never be 

forgotten. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — And that is something the NDP have 

never, ever used. I have never, ever heard them use the word 

“responsibility” because I don’t think it is in a socialist’s 

dictionary. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 

 


