













































July 23, 1987 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

July 23, 1987 

 

1321 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Deputy Clerk: I beg to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker 

will not be present to open this sitting. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Koskie: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on Monday next move: 

 

That this Assembly hereby expresses its lack of 

confidence in the Deputy Speaker, the member for 

Shellbrook-Torch River, because of his ruling on a 

question of privilege on July 22, 1987, with respect to the 

misleading statements made by the Minister of Justice 

regarding his use of the government’s executive aircraft. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, on behalf of the 

Premier and all members of the House, introduce to you and 

other members, a group of around 35 students, I believe, sitting 

in the Speaker’s gallery. They are between the ages of 13 and 

18. They’re spending the month of July with Saskatchewan 

families around the province. They’re French high school 

students. 

 

This is a summer program that’s organized by NACEL, an 

international organization which promotes the continuation of 

traditional ties between Canada and France. The purposes of the 

visit are to increase the students’ familiarity with our way of 

life, our province, and to give them an opportunity to improve 

their English. 

 

Some of the students who are staying in the Regina area, they 

are with the group, are staying in the Regina area; others in and 

around the province. They are escorted here today, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, by two supervisors, Miss Hermant - I hope I have that 

right - from France, and Mrs. Rebecca Maloney from Regina. 

 

I would ask that all members join with me in offering a very 

special Saskatchewan welcome to this group of students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: Merci, Monsieur le président. Comme le dèputé 

chef du parti, je voudrai parler bienvenue à Saskatchewan. À les 

étudiants, et . . . j’éspère vous avez un grand bon temps ici dans 

nos province. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Monsieur le président, au nom du premier 

ministre et du gouvernement de la Saskatchewan, bienvenue ici 

aujourd’hui. J’éspère que vous allez enjouir de votre visite à la 

législature et à 

Régina. Bonne chance. Bienvenue. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Justice Minister’s Trip to Calgary 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Justice. It deals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 

confusing and misleading information that the minister has 

provided to his legislature, over the past three days, about his 

use of the government aircraft, at taxpayers’ expense, to attend 

a wedding in Calgary. 

 

Sir, the integrity of this Assembly and your government 

depends on public confidence. You have clearly lost that 

confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: As one example, I refer to the editorial in 

today’s Regina Leader-Post under the headline, “Even a Bob 

Andrew must play by the rules”. 

 

The editorial states, in part, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

A ruling by the deputy speaker notwithstanding, the 

suspicion lingers that he was not as forthright as he might 

have been. 

 

Continues on: 

 

Parliamentary tradition . . . demands honest questions and 

honest answers. . . . Ultimately, upholding the tradition is 

more important than saving the political career of an 

individual minister. 

 

Sir, will you now do the honourable thing: stand in your place, 

apologize to the people of Saskatchewan, and step down from 

your position in cabinet? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have set out the 

facts in this Assembly as to . . . as accurately as I can to the hon. 

member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you want to, listen to 

the answer to the question. 

 

I have acknowledged, I think on Tuesday, and I readily 

acknowledge today that the answers that I gave on Monday and 

Tuesday - both inside and outside the House - have led to some 

confusion. And I’ve indicated . . . I’ve indicated yesterday and I 

indicate today that I regret that confusion. I regret that 

confusion both for myself and for the members of this 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Deputy Speaker, I honesty had no intentions, in those 

statements, to in any way mislead this Assembly. I honestly had 

no intention of misleading this Assembly, and I stand behind 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the question of the use of the government airplane - I 

believe the use of the government airplane by myself was 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1322 

 

proper given the circumstance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated to you I regret that confusion. I’ve 

indicated to this House on several occasions I do not intend to 

resign my seat from cabinet, and I do not intend to resign my 

seat from the constituency of Kindersley. That is what I’ve said 

before, and that is what I stand by. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Legal Aid Commission Fees 

 

Mr. Mitchell: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Social Services who, whether he likes it or not, is 

the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 

Commission. 

 

Yesterday I asked the minister a question with respect to the 

new schedule of fees which the Legal Aid Commission has 

instructed the various legal aid offices to charge to the poor 

people who come to the clinics for legal advice and legal 

services, and the minister in responding to my question 

yesterday said, and I quote from page 1319 of Hansard: 

 

. . . I believe the member opposite knows that I have no 

direct control over the Legal Aid Commission and very 

little influence over what they do. I am merely the minister 

who sends cheques to the Legal Aid Commission to pay 

the bills. 

 

Now I remind the minister that he and his government sets the 

budget for the Legal Aid Commission and, in fact, appoints five 

members to the board of directors of the Legal Aid 

Commission, including the chairperson, and finally that the 

commission reports to this legislature through him. Now in light 

of these facts, Mr. Minister, do you deny full ministerial 

responsibility for the actions of the Legal Aid Commission? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: Well, as I indicated yesterday, I am the 

minister responsible technically for the Legal Aid Commission, 

but I have no administrative control over the commission. And I 

ask: is the member suggesting that I replace the members of the 

commission to have people that will follow my will directly? 

 

Mr. Mitchell: All I’m suggesting, Mr. Minister, is that you are 

the minister responsible, and so you must behave in this 

legislature as though you were the minister responsible . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: You can’t stand in your place and ask questions 

of me as to what’s . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order, order! Does the member have a 

supplementary question? 

 

Mr. Mitchell: Indeed, I have. Minister, it’s common ground 

between us that the purpose of the legal aid program in 

Saskatchewan is to provide legal services for 

people who don’t have any money. Now the commission has 

introduced a policy that requires people to have money before 

they can engage the services of the Legal Aid Commission 

lawyers. Now you’ve known about this for several days . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order, order, order. Supplementaries do 

not need a long preamble. I would ask the member to get to his 

question. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: Minister, in light of the fact that you’ve known 

about this policy for several days, may I ask you if you have 

contacted the Legal Aid Commission about the policy; have you 

expressed your concern to them about this policy; and have you 

discussed any options to the ridiculous program with the Legal 

Aid Commission? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: I say to the member opposite: your sources 

of information are wrong. You have inadvertently misled the 

House; you have given misinformation, because this morning I 

spoke with the acting chairman of the Legal Aid Commission 

and he advised me that they haven’t decided yet as to what they 

are going to do, and I asked him to advise me when they’ve 

decided. Now how can I do anything about something they 

haven’t decided yet? 

 

Mr. Mitchell: Supplementary. Minister, it is your information 

that is wrong, and it is you that is inadvertently misleading this 

House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: The fact of the matter is that this new policy will 

go into effect on August 3, and will be reviewed as to whether it 

works or not at a later date. Now it’s your budgetary moves of 

cutting $500,000 from the budget of the commission that has 

led to this problem. And my question is: in light of the 

obviously absurd notion of charging people who haven’t got 

any money for legal services, will you either reinstate funding 

or ask the Legal Aid Commission to consider another option? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: The member opposite should apologize to 

the acting chairman of the Legal Aid Commission. He is 

suggesting that a QC in this province . . . that that man’s word 

should not be accepted, and the word of his NDP spies should 

be accepted. 

 

I spoke to the acting chairman an hour and a half ago, two hours 

ago. I spoke to the acting chairman and he told me they hadn’t 

decided yet. Now you’re telling me that your NDP spies know 

more than the acting chairman? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Hagel: Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is to the same minister. Let me review the reality, Mr. 

Minister, for you. In Saskatchewan today we have a legal aid 

plan which exists for people who cannot afford a lawyer. You 

are aware, as well as I am aware, that as of Monday, August 

3 - a week and a half 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1323 

 

from today - schedules will be implemented which will require 

payment of 100 to $400 up front, cash in advance, in order to 

get legal aid, by people who cannot afford a lawyer. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that this leaves poor 

people in Saskatchewan only two options: one, to represent 

themselves; and, secondly, to plead guilty because legal aid will 

only charge $20 for a guilty plea, is this your idea of fairness in 

Saskatchewan today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: Well, when it comes to criminals, I can tell 

you . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. I’d ask members to be quiet while 

the minister is answering the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: What we’re talking about here is a 

hypothetical because I have tried to ascertain the decision, and 

it hasn’t been made. When it is made, I will deal with it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: Mr. Deputy Speaker, again to the minister. Mr. 

Minister, I have in my hand a document of a memo dated July 

7, advising that as of August 3 fees will be implemented, 

ranging from 100 to $400, to be represented in court by people 

who cannot afford a lawyer in this province. 

 

My question to you is: what action have you taken on behalf of 

people who cannot afford a lawyer in this province to protect 

their right to the principle of representation in court in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: Mr. Deputy Speaker, I haven’t seen the 

document. If the member could table it, I will examine it and 

comment on it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: Mr. Minister, I think you would be enlightened if 

you paid attention to the responsibilities that you have for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

My final supplementary to you, Mr. Minister, is this. You and 

your government have preached restraint unendlessly for the 

last several months. In light of the fact of the cut-back that has 

caused this decision to be made by the Legal Aid Commission 

has been $500,000, one-twentieth of the cost of the political 

staff of the government cabinet ministers . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. Order. Does the member have a 

question? Would the member get directly to his question. 

 

Mr. Hagel: My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this. In light of 

the performance of your government and the patronage, the 

pay-outs to the George Hills and the Paul Schoenhals and the 

Gordon Dirks and the Tim Emburys, in light of that kind of 

priorities in your government, how can you justify putting the 

boots to poor people in Saskatchewan while fuelling the coal of 

the gravy train of the government opposite? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: What was the question? 

 

Mr. Hagel: My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: how do you 

justify the patronage that your government gives to the defeated 

political members of your party, in light of this injustice that’s 

imposed upon people in Saskatchewan who cannot afford a 

lawyer? How do you justify that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: I don’t know of any party members 

working for legal aid, so I don’t know what you’re talking 

about in patronage. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: A further supplementary to the minister. Just 

assuming for the moment . . . just assuming for the moment that 

you’re right, minister, and that this policy is not coming into 

effect August 3. In light of what you’ve read in the media and 

heard in this House, and as the minister responsible for so many 

programs affecting the poor people of this province, will you 

prevail upon the chairman, the acting chairman of the 

commission, to abandon any idea of adopting this ridiculous 

policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: When legal aid, the commission, has made 

their final decision on how they’re going to operate legal aid, I 

will assess the entire situation, and then I will deal with any 

problems that may arise. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

you’re saying you’re just going to sit idly by and wait until a 

letter comes to you saying that the worst has happened, and that 

the commission has implemented the policy. 

 

I’m asking you, as the minister responsible for so many of the 

programs in this province affecting poor people, whether you 

will take the initiative of speaking to the acting chairman of the 

commission, and asking him to prevail upon the commission to 

abandon any thought of implementing such an absurd policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: I spoke to him this morning. I indicated to 

him that I was concerned if there would be any limitation of 

services with respect to single mothers. He said they would take 

that into consideration, and I said I would take that into 

consideration. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. While you’ve 

got him on the phone, Mr. Minister, will you please explain to 

him how it’s going to work for welfare recipients who don’t 

have an extra dime of cash to put to anything, and how they’re 

supposed to raise the money to come in and pay for these 

services that they’re going to have to pay for if they run afoul of 

the similar law. Are they to do it out of their food allowance, or 

how are they supposed to do it? 

 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1324 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: If there are any special needs, we will deal 

with them. 

 

Changes to Medical Care Insurance Commission 

 

Ms. Atkinson: Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of health, and it deals with the fact that you and your 

government are so incompetent and have mismanaged the 

affairs of this province so badly that you can’t even make 

medicare payments to Saskatchewan doctors on time. On May 

14, you issued a news release to announce that the Medical 

Care Insurance Commission was to be phased out and that 

medicare payments would become the direct responsibility of 

you and your department. You said the change would make 

operations more efficient. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is going on, and what have you done to get 

the problem fixed? Is this latest problem just another example 

of your government’s incompetence, or is this part of your 

ongoing strategy to undermine the medicare system in our 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: First of all, Mr. Speaker, if I can keep the 

series of question is order, the first one was related to the rolling 

in of the Medical Care Insurance Commission into the 

department, which is to take place on January 1, 1988. So the 

present circumstance that’s happening with the erratic payment 

to some doctors is not related to the rolling in, into the 

Department of Health - that’s number one. 

 

The problem, as I have said for a couple of days now, after 

having had a discussion with Dr. Scharfstein, the president of 

SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association), is that we will solve 

this in a very short order, in fact, in a matter of days - days, not 

weeks. And I readily admit that there have been some troubles 

for a period of a few weeks. 

 

As far as the questions in terms of some underlying strategy, the 

answer is no. And the question as it relates to her perception in 

her rhetoric about incompetence, the answer to that is no, as 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: Mr. Minister, I’d be interested in knowing why 

we have this ongoing problem at the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission? Can you explain to this House why it is that, 

hundreds of doctors in this province are not being paid, and 

aren’t being paid for several weeks? Can you explain that? Can 

you somehow describe to us what is happening in the Medical 

Care Insurance Commission? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: This has been blown out of some 

proportion, and that perception continues with the question 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is not an ongoing problem. This 

is a problem that, as I have said to you and have said to the 

House, was a problem for a period of some weeks - will be 

rectified - very short 

order. 

 

The fact is . . . The reason there was a problem is because we 

had 18 people from the Medical Care Insurance Commission 

who took advantage of the government’s global early retirement 

program. And they took the early retirement program and we’re 

now in the process of refilling those positions. But we have, as 

well, put temporary people into those positions to fill up the 

backlog, and we will be moving on it and are moving on it 

presently, as a matter of fact. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: Mr. Minister, it was you and your government 

that forced those early retirements. If was your plan. You 

worked on it for months at secret cabinet meetings. 

 

Do you mean to tell the taxpayers of this province that when 

you sat down and plotted how to get rid of hundreds of people 

in the civil service, no one thought to ask, how are we going to 

maintain services after all of these people are gone? And if you 

did think about those problems, why are you scrambling to hire 

new people now? 

 

It sounds more and more like this is part of some hidden agenda 

to undermine the credibility of medicare with the people of this 

province. Is that what it’s all about, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: Mr. Deputy Speaker, first of all, as I said, 

the program of early retirement was one which went across all 

of government. It was a voluntary early retirement program. 

Eighteen people took advantage of it in the Medical Care 

Insurance Commission. 

 

As it relates to me as a minister of the government, apologizing 

to that member, or to anyone, for the fact that we are reducing 

the size of the public service in Saskatchewan in a global sense, 

we do not apologize for that because the people of 

Saskatchewan say: provide those services as efficiently and as 

effectively as possible. And I will say that there will be, because 

of the number of people in the small unit that is the Medical 

Care Insurance Commission took early retirement, there has 

been some problems for a period of a few weeks. 

 

But I might add to the member as well, the onerous sort of 

circumstance that she portrays to this House is not, in fact, the 

case. It’s not, in fact, the case. I mean, we’re not talking about 

people who are really in some serious circumstance here. We’re 

talking about people who are being inconvenienced. And I 

regret that inconvenience, but I don’t want it to be portrayed by 

the member that these people are in some kind of very onerous 

and difficult circumstance. I admit their inconvenience, and I 

regret that, and that will be solved. But they’re not in very, very 

difficult circumstances. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: We are talking about people who are in onerous 

difficulty. Many doctors in this province are young doctors, and 

they’re just starting out and they 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1325 

 

don’t have the kind of capital required to keep an office running 

on a day-to-day basis. 

 

Mr. Minister, the budget for the administration of the Medical 

Care Insurance Commission was cut by 17 positions and 

$350,000 this year. And I refer you to page 47 of your own 

budget estimates. You knew that 17 positions had been cut and 

that the budget had been cut months ago. My question to you is 

this: what are you going to do so that this problem is not a 

constant problem and that doctors can get paid in this province? 

And is this not a long-term strategy to undermine medicare? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: Well, Mr. Speaker, the last portion of the 

question, in terms of her perception of some long-term strategy 

to undermine medicare, does not merit a response. It is not the 

fact, and I’ve said that on many occasions, as have all of us. 

That’s number one. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have said on several 

occasions, outside the House and here to the member today, 

said on several occasions that we are working actively to have 

this solved. It will not be an ongoing problem. It’s a 

circumstance. It’s a very particular one for a very short and 

particular period of time. It will be solved very shortly and, in 

fact, is in the process of being solved now. 

 

And that’s in conjunction with the SMA, and I have had 

discussions with the president of the SMA. When he brought it 

to my attention, action began almost immediately after he 

brought it to my attention. 

 

Study Regarding Government Policies 

 

Mr. Goodale: Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a supplementary 

question to the same minister on the same subject. The minister 

is telling us that the problem that has been identified here is 

merely an administrative problem of a short-term nature, and it 

does not constitute a policy decision on the part of the 

Saskatchewan government. 

 

I want to ask the minister: if the Coopers Lybrand study group 

that was dealing with government restraint and cut-backs and 

making recommendations on that subject to the government, if 

that study group has considered recommending to you, Mr. 

Minister, or to the government, that you delay making payments 

to physicians and that you shift certain administrative duties to 

doctors from the government, and thereby make a saving of 

potentially something close to $1 million a year? Has the 

Coopers Lybrand study looked at that, and have they made such 

a recommendation to the government? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: There are many very specific things that 

are looked at and will continue to be looked at over a period of 

time. One of the things, and I believe what the member is 

referring to, is that there’s a system of coding of bills and so on 

which goes on, and which is done inside MCIC (Medical Care 

Insurance Commission) at present, and continues to go on 

inside MCIC at present. 

 

I must say to the member and to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

this is the only province in Canada where that kind of 

coding is done by the commission or its equivalent, whatever 

that may be in the other provinces. Every other province, the 

doctors themselves do the coding in the office before sending 

their submissions to the . . . But that’s a discussion that’s 

ongoing as well with the SMA. The SMA executive and the 

members of the SMA are very aware of those discussions, and 

they’ll be ongoing. And that relates as well to the effective 

delivery of the services, whatever they be, including the 

payments to physicians for the services that they render to the 

people. 

 

Mr. Goodale: Mr. Deputy Speaker, again to the same minister. 

I gather the minister has not denied that Coopers Lybrand has 

looked at the coding issue that the minister refers to. And I 

gather he has not denied that Coopers Lybrand has, in fact, 

looked at the proposition of delaying payments to physicians as 

a deliberate strategy to save money for the government. 

 

I wonder if the minister could say very clearly to us in the 

House whether that option of either delaying payments as a 

long-term policy decision, or transferring coding as a long-term 

policy decision, is an active option being considered either by 

the Coopers & Lybrand study group or by this government. Is 

the issue still on the table, or is the minister killing it and 

stopping it at this moment? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: What I will say is that I am not aware of 

any discussion about delaying payments as an ongoing thing. I 

don’t believe that that’s the case; in fact, I will reject that. 

 

But I will say, as it relates to the coding issue which I refer to in 

my previous answer, that’s a suggestion that I have made, the 

deputy minister of Health has made, others of us have looked at 

that and said, that would make some eminent sense, given what 

has happened in the rest of the country for the very similar sort 

of things. 

 

And the SMA does not disagree with it, but they would want to 

have a period of time for implementation and for some 

discussion, and they have been granted that, and that’s what’s 

going on now. The discussion goes on as it relates to the way 

the coding is carried out. 

 

Waiting Lists in Saskatoon Hospitals 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is to the Minister 

of Health. Mr. Minister, this deals with the growing waiting 

lists at the Saskatoon three acute care hospitals and the fact that, 

in spite of these waiting lists, your government is responsible 

for the closure of 308 hospital beds in Saskatoon this summer. 

 

On July 9, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature you said, we are 

working on that problem specifically with surgeons in 

Saskatoon and with hospital administrators and the hospital 

boards. Mr. Minister, what specific steps have been taken to cut 

into the critical waiting lists at Saskatoon hospitals since you 

made that commitment on July 9? And how many of the 308 

closed beds that you are preparing to close will you reopen? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: As I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1326 

 

said on earlier in July, and as I will repeat again here today, 

those measures which are, as I said at that time, both short-term 

for now and for the length of time that some of those beds are 

closed, that trying to diminish that or reduce that length of time, 

those discussions are ongoing right now. 

 

As it relates to the long-term strategy of rationalizing some of 

the service and so on that goes on in the three acute care 

hospitals, in the three acute care hospitals in Saskatoon, that’s 

as well ongoing. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

 

Mr. Chairman: Before we being the questioning I would ask 

the minister to please introduce his staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated beside 

me to my right is Bill Clarke, deputy minister; seated 

immediately behind me is Doug Cressman, assistant deputy 

minister; beside Mr. Cressman is Brian Woodcock, acting 

assistant deputy minister; to my left is Ross MacLennan, 

executive director, operations; and to the immediate left or the 

far left on this side is Keith Rogers, assistant deputy minister. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

want to make a few opening remarks before I get into my 

questioning of your department. As the folks will realize, you 

now have a very big department and a very important 

department in Parks, Recreation and Culture, and I will have a 

lot of questions on all three parts of your department as we go 

through your estimates. 

 

As I indicated, Mr. Chairman, at the start of my remarks, that 

this is a very important department, a department that can take a 

leadership role in providing the citizens of Saskatchewan with a 

better way of living. And I want to, first of all, start in northern 

Saskatchewan in my constituency of Athabasca, where I want 

to say to you, Mr. Chairman, that things are in bad shape. And I 

think that the Department of Recreation and Culture can take a 

leadership role there and should take a leadership role there, and 

I will be pushing for, and my colleagues, to see that this takes 

place. 

 

When we take a look at the unemployment rate that we have in 

northern Saskatchewan and then we see programs that are being 

cut off by Parks and Recreation, such as the campsites, and the 

forestry division, nurseries are being cut back; these are taking 

much-needed jobs away. And what they should be doing is 

maintaining these departments so that we can keep the jobs that 

we have, not lose them. 

 

I think it’s important that, as I say to you, Mr. Minister, that 

you take, and your department take a leadership role in trying to 

solve the problems of this province, not adding to the problems 

that we have. 

 

You have already cut back on the nurseries in the province. You 

and your government have given away, without any down 

payment, 800 million acres of Saskatchewan’s prime forest land 

to Weyerhaeuser Canada, and this is something that should not 

be tolerated in this province. But it has taken place, and you, 

Mr. Minister, as the head of your department and representative 

of the government of Saskatchewan, have had great input into 

the give-away of our resources and the closure of our public 

facilities in the province. And I would get into the campsites 

and things like that a little later on. 

 

But as I said, when I see the give-away of 800 million acres of 

prime forest land to Weyerhaeuser Canada, I see the closure of 

public campsites, I think that - and I’m going to get to the 

private members - they’re going to have to stand up here and 

take a stand on this. 

 

We see in the far North a $250,000 food transportation subsidy. 

You can’t put up the money for that, but yet you can give 

$200,000 a year to the chairman of Sask Power. The money that 

you allotted to Mr. Hill, the chairman of Sask Power, Mr. 

Chairman, would almost pay for the food transportation subsidy 

cost in the far North. But that’s not a priority. 

 

And I want to say that, especially in Parks and Renewable 

Resources in the North, you also brought in your compulsory 

retirement program, and that, I tell you, Mr. Chairman, is a 

disaster. There are many citizens in this province, men and 

women, who have worked for 25 and 30 years and were in the 

best years of their life, in the last four and five years of their 

life; the family had been raised and now they were starting to 

put money away for retirement, and all of a sudden this early 

retirement package was offered to them. 

 

And it was offered to them and they couldn’t resist it. Because I 

tell you, it was a compulsory program. I know an individual 

who thought, well, maybe I’ll just hang on and they’ll let me 

remain in my job, but he found out that that job would be 

eliminated. So there was an individual with 30 years seniority, 

five years left to go. His family was all educated. They were out 

working, and he had an opportunity to start putting money 

away. And what happens? Early retirement! You have a 

philosophy that is literally destroying this province/ 

 

And I say to the back-benchers, the private members of the 

Conservative Party who occupy the back benches, that when 

you were out campaigning in last fall’s election, you didn’t go 

to the doorstep and say that if you were re-elected that you were 

going to close down campsites, that you were going to give 

away the campsites. You didn’t say that you were going to 

implement a new drug plan. 

 

And I tell you that is a vicious plan. I witnessed an individual 

the other day who went into the drug store and had a 

prescription that cost him $60. The conversation went like this: 

he was asking the druggist if he could get 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1327 

 

one week’s supply - pay $15 for one week’s supply because he 

only had the $15. Had it been under the other plan he would 

have paid $3.85 and he would have had his prescription. That 

individual was bartering to try and get a week’s supply of 

drugs, and that’s the policy of this Conservative government. 

 

And you didn’t; and I say to the private members back there, 

I’m sure that’s not what you campaigned on. I’m sure you never 

indicated that you were going to cut the dental program and lay 

off 400 dental therapists and nurses, and that your government 

was going to, if re-elected, sell all the dental equipment that has 

been built up in the schools. And I say to the private members 

across there, that’s not what you campaigned on. You didn’t 

campaign on that. You didn’t campaign to close down the 

campsites. You didn’t campaign on the drug program. You 

didn’t campaign that you were going to increase the sales tax to 

7 per cents, and that takes the individuals who are travelling 

across this province. Now it’s hitting them hard. You didn’t 

campaign on that. 

 

And I say to the back-benchers, who occupy the back seats of 

the Conservative party, I think it’s time that you stood up, and 

it’s time that you stood up and fought for Saskatchewan. You 

didn’t campaign on the fact that you were going to close down 

just about all of Kelsey, that you were going to get rid of 137 

teachers, and that there was going to be 500 less students. You 

didn’t campaign and say that the resource program would be 

eliminated from Kelsey - the resource program that works in 

conjunction with parks and renewable resources. The diploma 

nursing program - you didn’t indicate that when you were 

campaigning. 

 

(1445) 

 

So I say, Mr. Chairman, that it’s time for the members who 

occupy the back benches of the Conservative party - the private 

members - to stand up and fight for what you believe in because 

this is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll tell you, Mr. Member, 

what I believe in. I believe in fairness for this province, and I 

tell you it’s going to come, and it’ll come under a New 

Democratic government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: So I say . . . I’m going to start my questioning 

now, Mr. Minister, but I say this in all sincerity to the members 

who occupy the back benches. You didn’t campaign on that 

type of a program, and I ask you to stand up. I ask you to stand 

up in this House and question the government on what they’re 

doing, and take a stand, because if you don’t this will be the end 

of your political careers. I can assure you that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to now turn to the minister and direct a 

number of questions to him. And first of all, Mr. Minister, I 

wonder if you could supply me with the names and titles and 

salaries of each individual on your personal staff, and has any 

of those individuals had a pay change in the past 12 months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, if I may be permitted to 

have a brief response to some of the introductory remarks the 

hon. member from Athabasca 

has made in his preamble. 

 

He touched on a couple of areas that are certainly out of my 

responsibility - they belong in education or health, and I really 

don’t want to dwell on those. However, I would be remiss if I 

did not point out to the hon. member, because I think he made a 

serious mistake, that we did not, in fact, wipe out the resource 

program from Kelsey Institute. What we did was take a 

conscious decision, some three, four years ago, that we would 

move that program to Prince Albert Technical Institute. 

Furthermore, it would not only be closer to the type of activity 

which we’re trying to teach, it would also be based on a 

competency based module of learning. That was the idea, so we 

could encourage other people to apply for the program who, 

hitherto, perhaps felt that they were not academically qualified 

to get into that program. 

 

And another thing we did with that program, Mr. Chairman, 

was we re-examined it from top to bottom. We took the 

instructors, we sent them off for retaining and upgrading, so 

that when they came back they would be more able to teach our 

students the types of skills that have become necessary with 

changes in the forest industry and changes in The Wildlife 

Act - all those other things that have gone on in the last number 

of years, including some of the good things that happened when 

the members opposite were in power. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is remiss in that. The 

program isn’t wiped out. The program is transferred. And I 

offer that for his information. 

 

One other thing he referred to was a compulsory retirement 

program. At no time, Mr. Chairman, did this government say 

that retirement, the early retirement program, was 

compulsory - at no time. And I’m not aware of anybody who 

was told: you must retire. In fact, I seem to remember the 

SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) doing 

precisely the opposite, and calling meetings around the 

province, and bringing in their members to explain to them the 

ramifications of the early retirement program. 

 

When it comes to the question of campaigning and what we 

campaigned on, I know how I campaigned in my seat. I 

campaigned on the basis of fiscal responsibility and reducing 

the deficit. And I heard that on farm after farm after farm. And I 

heard people saying, we know times are tough, and we know 

that when you are re-elected there will be some difficult 

decisions ahead of you, and we fully expect as a responsible 

government, that you will take those difficult decisions and 

you’ll implement them. And that’s precisely what we have been 

doing. 

 

Now, specifically, I was asked about my staff. I’ve prepared a 

list for the hon. member because I know we’ve debated back 

and forwards. And I must say I’ve always looked forward to the 

spirit and the spirited debates we’ve had in the past. I 

anticipated he would ask me this, so I prepared this list for him, 

and I’d be pleased to pass it over for his perusal. 

 

He asked me if, in fact, anybody had a pay raise in the last 12 

months. I searched my memory. I believe not. But I’m going to 

have that checked with the officials to make sure 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1328 

 

that I’m giving the member completely accurate information. 

He’ll note the number of members on my staff, and he’ll note 

also on there the monthly salary being paid to each one. 

 

I’ve heard bandied around in the House, Mr. Chairman, all 

kinds of stories about the massive staffs that we have, the 

number of political hacks we have, and the huge salaries we 

have . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: True. Very true. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: And the member for Quill Lake is joining 

in from and through the seat of his pants again, yelling true, and 

yes. So I did a little research. And here’s what I found out for 

the hon. members opposite. 

 

I found out that in 1982, prior to us taking power, there was one 

Clint White, minister of culture and recreation, and he had four 

staff. He had a Darlene Marchuk at 2,219 a month, secretary; he 

had Jill Robinson, executive assistant, $3,315 a month; he had 

Sandra Vanstone, secretary, $1,770 a month, and he had a 

Gregory Zaba as an executive assistant at $3,013 a month - or 

$10,317 per month in salaries. 

 

But I also took a look at one Reg Gross, who was minister of 

tourism and renewable resources, as it was called at that time. I 

looked at his staff because, Mr. Chairman, in our down-sizing 

of government we’ve a much smaller cabinet, certainly a 

smaller cabinet than they had - fewer ministers, with fewer 

expenses, with less staff. So I took the portfolios of culture and 

recreation and parks and renewable resources and have 

combined them. 

 

Now I’ve read out the staff and the salaries of Clint White. Now 

let me tell you what Reggie Gross had. He had B. Kenny, 

executive assistant, $2,486 a month. He had D. Beach, 

executive assistant, $2,262 a month; D. McCormick, secretary, 

$2,219 per month; L. Dunsmore-Porter, secretary, $1,570 a 

month and D. Wedhorn, secretary, $1,049 per month. Now if 

we add that up, that’s $9,586 per month that was being paid out 

to those individuals. 

 

And if you take those two salaries and add them together you 

find that it’s about twice what my staff gets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Minister, does any of your staff have a 

government car or a car allowance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, hon. member, nobody on 

my staff has a government car or do they have a travelling 

allowance. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, can 

the minister detail for us the out-of-province travel which has 

taken place in 1986-87 by the minister and his staff, and I refer 

to out-of-province travel by the minister and his staff separately 

and together - the minister alone, staff alone, and the ministers 

together. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, hon. member.  

There is a time-honoured fashion in this House by which such 

information is provided to members opposite. The pertinent 

information which the member requires will be forwarded to 

him in due course in that time-honoured fashion. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, are you going to 

provide me with the details and the total cost of the flights in 

the province and out of the province, also? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, hon. member, details such 

as those I have provided in previous years in the estimates will 

once again be provided to the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, would you 

agree that you will provide us with that information before we 

get finished with your estimates here in the House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: I’ll undertake to have that information at 

the earliest possible moment, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Thompson: So I have to repeat my question, Mr. 

Chairman. Will you have that information before we’re finished 

your estimates here in the House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: As soon as it’s ready, it will be sent over 

the floor. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, as soon as it’s 

ready - that doesn’t really tell me anything. Would you indicate 

whether you plan to provide us with that information while we 

are doing your estimates in the legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, the information won’t be 

passed over this afternoon. It will be passed over as soon as I 

have it all together. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Minister - sorry, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, I didn’t get your last remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: I’m sorry. I said I don’t have it this 

afternoon, but as soon as I do have it all, it will be forwarded to 

you. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

could you indicate if any of your senior staff have had any 

increases in wages in the last year, and if so, how much? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, it is my understanding that 

senior staff who are seated directly around me have had no 

increase in the time frame referred to by the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Okay. Mr. Minister, would you provide me 

with a list in amount of moneys that are being paid to your 

assistants? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Clarification, Mr. Chairman. Is the hon. 

member referring to the senior officials of the department? Yes? 

 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1329 

 

An Hon. Member: That’s right, and executive assistants. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Well, you have my own staff. I sent that 

one over. The salaries being paid to the senior administrators 

within the department, I’ll send over to you. I think we’ve 

probably got that with us. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to . . . before 

I turn into parks, I want to make a few remarks on your last 

statement there. And you indicated when you were 

campaigning, you campaigned on fiscal restraint and trying and 

get the deficit down. 

 

And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that it was your 

government who created this large deficit. And it was your 

government who gave the oil companies the billion and a half 

dollars. And it was also your government who started off with 

Manalta Coal at $30 million, and Weyerhaeuser at 250 million, 

and Peter Pocklington at 21 million. And you’re saying that the 

taxpayers of this province now have to pay for your mistakes. 

 

And I say to you that when you were campaigning that that’s 

not what you were saying on the doorstep. You were saying 

that, yes, we have a financial problem in this province; but you 

most certainly didn’t tell them what you were going to do when 

you got elected. 

 

I want to also indicate or ask you, Mr. Minister, when you 

moved the resource technicians program from Saskatoon to 

Prince Albert, is the tech. program now the same as it was in 

Kelsey? Are you still providing the same type of training to 

those technicians as you did in Kelsey? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Again, that question would probably be 

better directed towards the Minister of Education. But because 

of the nature of the course, obviously, Mr. Chairman, our 

department officials are quite intimately involved with it. We 

have concerns that it does, in fact, meet the needs of our 

students for our Saskatchewan circumstances. 

 

The program that is in place now in Prince Albert is an 

improved program, mainly because the instructors have been 

upgraded on more modern methods. And we’ve try to make 

sure they’re to the forefront of knowledge that exists in resource 

management. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 

now want to turn to provincial parks, Mr. Minister. And I 

wonder if you could indicate, in the last year, if there has been 

any new provincial parks opened? Also, has there been any new 

provincial parks planned? And I would like to have you 

comment as to where we stand on the grasslands park at this 

time. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I believe you 

asked me a threefold question. The new parks created, as you be 

aware - and you and I debated this in the House at one point 

when I brought in legislation to establish our new Parks Act for 

Saskatchewan - we did in fact create some new provincial 

parks. They are the 

Clearwater wilderness park, north-west in Saskatchewan - our 

first wilderness park; Candle Lake, Crooked Lake, Makwa, and 

Blackstrap. Those are the five new ones. 

 

We’ve been asked to consider provincial park designation, 

which first of all means declaring a parkland reserve. And then 

we have a period of five years during which we can study the 

area, hold public hearings, and decide on whether or not an area 

is worthy of designation as provincial park. 

 

And two of those areas that we’ve been asked to consider are 

the Athabasca sand dunes, and the Great Sand Hills on the west 

side of the province. And we have officials who are doing some 

ecological studies on those areas. Before anything goes ahead, 

however, we would be having public hearings and getting some 

feedback from the public. 

 

You also asked me if I would comment on the status of the 

grasslands park. As you’re aware, there’s some difficulties 

encountered between federal and provincial officials over 

ownership of a water-bed with the park. Traditionally, the 

province has maintained that water rights, water-beds, and 

rivers are the property of the province. The federal Department 

of Environment were insisting that before any park area could 

be designated, ownership of the water-beds would have to be 

transferred to that jurisdiction. That proved to be a stumbling 

block in our negotiation. 

 

The last few months there have been discussions between our 

Minister of the Environment and the federal Minister of the 

Environment, Tom McMillan, and their officials. Their officials 

have made some movement on the argument about who owns 

the water-bed and if, in fact, under their Act to satisfy their Act, 

the water rights would have to be transferred. And it looks like 

now there’s a little crack in the door and they’re saying, well, 

perhaps they didn’t have to have ownership. And that’s where 

it’s at right now; talks are continuing, and I’m fairly optimistic 

that this one can be resolved and we will, in fact, have a 

grasslands national park. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, then what you’re 

indicating to the House is that once the federal government and 

the provincial government can solve the water rights problem, 

that you will be proceeding with the grasslands park. Is that 

right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: The hon. member is correct. It is our 

intention to proceed with the grasslands national park as soon as 

any outstanding issues are resolved. This is something that I 

know that the government before us were interested in doing. 

There has been discussion going on for probably some 15 years 

on this. We’ve had some difficulties, obviously, in the past. 

We’ve got it to the point now where it is down to one stumbling 

block and we really think . . . we really think we’ve got a 

resolution for that last problem and that the grasslands will be a 

reality in the not too distant future. 

 

Could I just add one other thing. The federal Minister of the 

Environment is very anxious that, in his term of office right 

now, he completes what has been set out by he and his officials 

as the national plan for Canada in terms of 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1330 

 

parks. He’s just added South Moresby, he did Ellesmere Island, 

and now he would like to see grasslands added to the system. It 

may not completely complete the system, but it certainly fulfils 

his mandate for a master plan for national parks in Canada. So 

given his own personal enthusiasm and commitment to this 

project, I think we’re making progress. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. I 

suggest that the Hon. Mr. McMillan better hurry up and get his 

plan in place especially after the last three by-elections and the 

last polls. 

 

Mr. Minister, has there been any capital expenditure carried out 

this year, in the year under review, in any of the new provincial 

parks, specifically Clearwater valley and that area? Has there 

been any capital put into those parks, or have you just created 

the park and left them as they were - the five new ones that 

were created last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: If the hon. member will give me a second, 

rather than just speak in generalities, I’d like to look up some 

specifics. There has been capital put in over the last several 

years in the parks and, yes, over this last year. 

 

Clearwater wilderness park is going to be a different kind of a 

park. We’re not looking at any “Coney Island North” up there 

or infrastructure. We want to maintain it in its present natural 

state; that was the intent of the park. So the type of activities 

which can be permitted in that park are very limited. We’re 

looking at things like white-water canoeing, rafting, that type of 

activity, and to things that would normally require structures or 

buildings. Any beneficiary from that park we feel should be 

determined in the residents of La Loche. They’re close by and 

we feel that they can offer the accommodations; they can offer 

the meals. And any rentals or guiding could be run through the 

town of La Loche and shouldn’t be centred within the park.. 

 

So in terms of capital going into that park, we’re not 

contemplating any, other than maybe signs or something of that 

nature. But I’ll find you the list of capital for the other parks. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, I fully agree 

that the benefits . . . or any of the benefits that accrue from the 

Clearwater valley should go into the community of La Loche, 

as La Loche is a community that has very, very high 

unemployment, and it’s a serious situation up there. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’re going to provide me with the capital that 

you’ve put into the new parks. You indicate that there has been 

no capital at all put into the Clearwater valley. I wonder what 

you . . . Is there any plans to go in there and selectively cut the 

over-mature timber that we have in that valley, or does that 

have to remain as it is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: I can speak to over-mature timber, because 

this is a problem. We do - as the member well knows from his 

own constituency and his own background - we do have 

over-mature timber in various areas of the province. 

Two things: one, there is no commercial value to letting it fall 

down and die, to anybody, and I’m speaking about local 

residents. And two, it becomes a fire hazard and also subject to 

disease which, in turn, could wipe out the entire forest. So we 

would give serious consideration to permitting selective 

harvesting of over-mature timber. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would urge your 

department, in conjunction with Sask Forest Products, to 

immediately take a look at the over-mature timber and go in 

there and provide the capital for the community of La Loche so 

that they can take advantage of the jobs and harvest that 

over-mature timber. I would ask that if you’re going to harvest 

it, that it be sawed and planed and everything done up in that 

area, rather than taking the logs out and hauling them to a 

southern saw mill or sawing the lumber and taking them to a 

southern planer. I would ask that you consider that. 

 

I also want to make a comment on the Athabasca sand dunes. 

And I want to indicate they’re on the south shore or Lake 

Athabasca, and they are a very beautiful sight, especially from 

the air, when you fly over them. And I think that it would be 

beneficial to the province to make that a provincial park or a 

federal park, whichever could be worked out. 

 

But I do think that we have to be very careful with both the 

Clearwater valley and the Athabasca sand dunes. And I would 

ask that, number one, that you take a look and work in 

conjunction with your other ministers and go into La Loche and 

see if that over-mature timber could be taken out of there and 

provide much needed jobs for the community of La Loche. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: As the hon. member recalls, last year we 

had some meetings with . . . or earlier this year, with local 

residents in that area. And we are interested in finding them 

some supply of wood to give them some economic viability. 

And the very thinking that the member is suggesting appeals to 

me. I think it’s a distinct possibility. 

 

The other thing, when the member refers to the Athabasca sand 

dunes, I agree with him 100 per cent. There are other concerns 

that have to be satisfied and we have to look at, but it’s 

something I’m particularly interested in. I think it’s a life form, 

it’s an eco-system that exists there that is unique. It’s the 

highest sand dune north of South America some place on this 

continent, and it deserves protection and it deserves 

preservation for future generations. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister. And you will 

provide me with the capital expenditures to all the new parks 

that have been created. Is that right, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Yes, I have them in my hand now. I’ll pass 

them over to you. Perhaps I’ll just read them out for you: 

Blackstrap was 48,000; Clearwater 18,000 - I indicated 

Clearwater was an infrastructure; it was a plaque landfill and a 

tower cabin renovation - Crooked lake, 57,000; Candle Lake, 

102,000; Makwa is 3,000. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I also have the numbers that the hon. member 

asked for - salaries of the senior administration of the 

department, and I would pass that over to him now,  

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1331 

 

too. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder . . . I see 

there’s $18,000 has been spent on the Clearwater valley, on that 

wilderness park, and that is a plaque landfill and tower cabin 

renovations. Are you talking about the tower, the fire tower 

cabin? Is that the tower you are talking about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Yes, that’s right. And that’s what we will 

have to spend on it. 

 

Mr. Thompson: And that is being charged to your department 

rather than to fire suppression? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: That’s right, Mr. Chairman. We’re paying 

for it. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Okay. Mr. Minister, I now want to turn to the 

provincial golf courses. Could you indicate how many 

provincial golf courses we have in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: I’ve jotted them down very quickly. Duck 

Mountain, Moose Mountain, Greenwater, Cypress, 

Battlefords - five in total. 

 

Mr. Thompson: And of the five that the provincial government 

are operating, are there any plans to sell or lease any of those 

out to the private sector, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, in response to the last 

question: we have Moose Mountain and Cypress; we ceased 

operating the golf courses currently. We are considering 

proposals, or are considering tendering . . . Rephrase that: we 

have already tendered and deferred The Battlefords and 

Greenwater and Duck Mountain. 

 

Mr. Thompson: You’re indicating, Mr. Minister, that you have 

tendered those three provincial golf courses out for sale to the 

private sector? Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Not for sale, Mr. Chairman. They lease the 

golf course, and the lease fee as a percentage of their gross is 

reverted back to government. 

 

Mr. Thompson: But up to today there has been no golf courses 

leased out; they’re still under full operation of the provincial 

government? Two of them have been leased out? Could you 

then indicate to me, of the two golf courses that have been 

leased out, to whom they have been leased out, and the amount 

of moneys that they are paying in lease fees. 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, Cypress Hills Provincial 

Park golf course: lessee, Wilbur Desjardin. He put in capital 

$150,000; installation artificial greens, clubhouse upgrading, 

driving range. Details of the lease: 10-year lease, no renewal. 

Lease fees: 5 per cent of his gross revenue. Lessee purchases 

clubhouse and equipment. 

 

Moose Mountain: Lessee, Schafer and Liabel, Corporate name, 

Golf Kenosee Incorporated. Private capital, their contribution: 

$1 million. Added a new two-storey 

10,000-square-foot clubhouse. They completed the irrigation 

and the driving range. Lease agreement: 25-year lease term. 

Lease fee: 5 per cent gross revenue. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Minister, it’s only Cypress Hills and Duck 

Mountain that have been leased out. Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: No, I missed one. I’m sorry. Valley 

Centre, which is in Fort Qu’Appelle, was leased some time 

previously. Valley Centre, Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Would that be under the same lease 

agreement, and 5 per cent of gross revenues would be their 

contribution to the provincial government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is correct. 

The lessee is John Smith. The corporate name is Mission Ridge 

Development Incorporated. Put in private capital of $200,000, a 

new 3,000-square-foot clubhouse, a driving range, irrigation 

expansion. Lease agreement: 25 years. Lease fee: 5 per cent of 

gross revenue. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. It would 

seem to me that the three individuals who have leased the three 

provincial golf courses and who are paying 5 per cent of the 

gross revenue have got a pretty good deal. And I think that time 

will prove that right. 

 

I want to now turn to the provincial ski resorts, Mr. Minister. 

And I have a number of questions I want to ask under that. 

 

Before I do, I . . . Could you indicate . . . At all golf courses, 

there is provincial staff who are hired on temporary throughout 

the summer months. Could you indicate if they were transferred 

also over to the individuals who took over the three provincial 

golf courses? And did they hire, or did they have an agreement 

to hire, all the individuals that had been working previously as 

part-time employees in the summer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I’m advised, and as I recall 

now from my own notes in previous discussions, we absorbed 

all of the staff involved into other areas of Parks. 

 

Mr. Thompson: So you’re indicating that there was no 

individual who lost their job because of the transfer over to the 

private sector. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, any affected employees 

were offered alternative work within the department or 

severance pay. So nobody would have lost their jobs as a result 

of this initiative with the golf courses. If they left, it was 

voluntary, because everyone was offered alternative positions. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister. I now want to turn 

to the provincial ski resorts. And I know that there was some 

problems with . . . labour problems up in Blackstrap, and you 

may want to just comment whether that has been resolved or 

not when you get up. 

 

But first of all, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate 

how many ski slopes that the provincial government 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1332 

 

operate in Saskatchewan. And also, Mr. Minister, could you 

provide me with the information that you just had on the 

privatization of those three golf courses, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Did you want the details again of the three 

golf courses? 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Minister, provide me with the information 

of the individuals and the agreement that they have, the 5 per 

cent agreement, and the input. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, if it’s acceptable to the hon. 

member, the specific questions he asked relative to those three 

golf courses, we’ll just write it down and send it over to you. 

It’ll save you taking notes. Will that be enough? 

 

Mr. Thompson: My question was, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

could you indicate how many provincial ski slopes that your 

department operates and where they are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: There are currently three ski slopes, Mr. 

Chairman, which fall under the auspices of this department: 

Blackstrap, White Track, and Cypress. 

 

Mr. Thompson: And of the three that you indicated, how many 

of them have been turned over with agreements to the private 

sector? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: We have a lease agreement, Mr. Chairman, 

with Lloyd Hedemann. The corporate name is Headway 

Management Ltd., for operation of Blackstrap. He has a 

five-year lease of the entire area, including a ski chalet. Lease 

fees are 30,000 for the first year plus $2,500 for each 

subsequent year, to a maximum of 40,000. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Minister, of the three slopes that we have 

in the province, how many of them have chair-lifts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, Blackstrap is the only one 

with a chair-lift. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Could you provide the committee with a cost 

of that chair-life for Blackstrap, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 

chair-lift operation at Blackstrap was valued at one time around 

$600,000. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. You 

indicated that it was valued at $600,000. My question, Mr. 

Minister, what did it cost to install that chair-lift? Is that the 

exact cost to install that chair-lift? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: The $600,000, Mr. Chairman, was for the 

cost of purchase, the cost of moving, and the cost of 

installation. So that would be the total cost. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, are there any plans to privatize the other two 

remaining ski slopes in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, we have intentions to allow 

public participation with White Track. It has already gone to 

tender. 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

White Track is a slope in North Battleford. Is that right? Do you 

not have a provincial slope in North Battleford? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: No, Mr. Chairman. That’s Table 

Mountain, and that falls under the jurisdiction of a regional 

park. It wouldn’t fall under our jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Okay, so White Track is up for tender at the 

present time. Is it normal to issue tenders at this time of the 

lease to lease out a ski slope? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Yes, Mr. Chairman, we’ve been preparing 

tender documents and examining the situation for the past two 

or three months with a view to having it ready in time for 

someone to tender successfully, take over the operation, and be 

prepared late fall for, perhaps, an early winter so they can get 

started in November. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, you’re indicating that tenders have been closed now 

and could you indicate how many tenders that you have for 

White Track? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Tenders close August 17, so I wouldn’t 

know yet, hon. member, how many we’ll have. 

 

Mr. Thompson: They close August 17; and when will you be 

making your decision as to who will be awarded that contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: That decision would be made as soon as 

possible after the closing of tenders, Mr. Chairman, to allow the 

successful proponent as long as possible to prepare for the 

winter. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, my 

final question on the ski slopes is then: it is in your plan then to 

privatize the complete provincially owned ski slopes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: At this point, Mr. Chairman, we’ve had no 

discussion about Cypress at all. The other two, certainly we 

have. And as the hon. member’s aware, we’ve moved on those. 

Cypress is nothing; there’s no plan at the moment. I don’t 

preclude that happening, however. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I now want to turn 

to the provincial campsites that we have in this province. And, 

Mr. Minister, you have closed a number of those down last 

year. And you’ve now closed a number of them down this year. 

And you’ve also leased out a number of campsites. And what 

I’m going to be asking you and your officials is for some 

information as to the number of campsites that have been closed 

down, in what areas. And you may want to provide me with a 

list of the campsites and the areas that have been closed down. 

 

I’m also going to be asking you to get some information on the 

fact that you have leased out to the private community, a 

number of these campsites. And I will be asking for the details. 

 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1333 

 

I think, as I’ve indicated in the House before, Mr. Minister, that 

. . . Mr. Chairman, that the privatization and the closure of 

public campsites in Saskatchewan is a grave step backwards. I 

have many, many folks who have indicated to me during the 

last two years - and I speak of senior citizens groups, Mr. 

Chairman, who take bus trips throughout this province and, on 

an annual basis, use our provincial campsites. 

 

And I can think of areas in the Dore Lake area and in the Big 

River area where individuals have complained to me. There’s 

groups of Boy Scouts and Girl Guides. There’s many, many of 

our senior citizens who drive in this province and who use our 

campsites, now find that either they’re closed down or they’re 

privatized and they have to pay to use them. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, that this is a situation that should not 

be tolerated in a province like Saskatchewan. We continually 

promote tourism. We try to get as many tourists in from other 

parts of Canada and the United States, and we want to 

encourage them to come into this province. But what we’re 

doing by closing down campsites, historic campsites that have 

been in place, Mr. Chairman, for 30, 40 years, closed down or 

privatized . . . 

 

And individuals who all of a sudden . . . they’ve used these 

facilities for a number of years, come in there late at night and 

they find that they’re either closed or that they’re privatized and 

new regulations and new fees. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, 

that this should come to a stop. 

 

You continue to privatize. You’re privatizing the golf courses. 

You’re privatizing the ski slopes. You’re giving everything to 

the private enterprise. And mainly you’re giving it to out of 

province, to individual like Peter Pocklington from Edmonton, 

and Manalta Coal from Calgary. And this is continuing on. 

 

(1530) 

 

And I say to the Minister of Finance that this is serious. And 

that’s why the Conservative government is down in the polls. 

And that’s why the Conservative government, Mr. Chairman, is 

going to lose both the next federal election and the next 

provincial election in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: Because you’re continuing to give away, and 

give things to the private enterprise. And as soon as you give it 

away to the private enterprise, then all of a sudden we lose the 

jobs. 

 

The only thing they’re concerned about, Mr. Chairman, is the 

economics in running our campsites, our slopes, and our golf 

courses. They all go on one thought, and that is economic - not 

for the public at large. They’re not worried about that. 

 

An Hon. Member: Don’t forget the patronage, Fred. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Yes, you bet, the patronage. And that’s what’s 

got you into this trouble. And I just say, and I say once again to 

the private members who occupy the back benches of the 

Conservative Party: when you travel 

around this province and you go out to the sports days, I tell 

you, you must be getting an earful, because I know I’m sure 

getting it. 

 

And especially when we’re dealing with these campsites and 

they’re privatized. And individuals who have to go out to use 

those campsites, and especially late at night when they drive in 

for . . . Lots of them have driven for 2, 300 miles that day, and 

have always used that particular campsite. They drive in there. 

The sun has gone down. And they’re so sure that it’s there. And 

it’s gone. It’s either closed down or there’s a sign: privatized. 

Please come into the office. And this is what they have to do. 

 

And just about every time, Mr. Chairman, when they go there, 

they find that the fees have increased. And a lot of them there 

was no fees. It was a service that we provided to the senior 

citizens and the Boys Scouts and the Girl Guides of this 

province. We provided that. And we should continue to provide 

it, not take and turn it over to the private enterprise. 

 

An Hon. Member: Are you going to take them back, Fred? 

 

Mr. Thompson: Well, I’ll tell you, the Minister of Finance asks 

me if we’re going to take them back. And I say to the Minister 

of Finance, within the next year you won’t be sitting in that seat 

making the decisions; we will be over there. And you just mark 

my word - you must mark my work what’s happening to the 

Tory party in this province and the rest of Canada. 

 

An Hon. Member: Answer the question. Are you going to take 

them back, Fred? 

 

Mr. Thompson: I just answered the question. 

 

An Hon. Member: No, you didn’t; you avoided it. 

 

Mr. Thompson: We’ll be making the decisions. I now want to 

turn to the minister. Mr. Minister, the Minister of Finance who 

continually chatters from his seat, and I . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: Order, please. Order. Let’s get onto the topic. 

 

Mr. Thompson: I suggest that the former Liberal member is 

going to be taking a look at the Liberal Party again fairly 

closely now. I know he’d love to come and sit in our ranks, but 

we most certainly don’t want him over here. And I tell you, that 

former Liberal has got you into a lot of problems. You allowed 

him to become the Finance Minister, and now he has just 

contributed . . . you saw what Liberals do; they’re no different 

than Tories. 

 

So I say to the Minister of Finance: we’ll be making those 

decisions, and we’ll be making them within the next year. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate to this House how 

many public campsites you have closed down in the last two 

years, and how many public campsites you’ve planned to close 

down this year, and how many have been leased out to the 

private enterprise? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: A fairly wide-ranging conversation 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1334 

 

taking place again, Mr. Chairman, demands a fairly lengthy 

response. 

 

I wasn’t aware that Peter Pocklington had bid on any campsites 

or any camp grounds within the province. I’m not aware of any 

that have gone out of province, and I’ll make a list available to 

the member of the campsites which were tendered publicly as to 

who has them and who’s operating them. 

 

No camp grounds have been closed this year, and we have no 

plans to close any camp grounds. We certainly gave nothing 

away. Anybody who is operating a camp ground, or anybody 

who is operating anything else that was formerly operated by 

the government, pays us a fee for the privilege of doing so. So 

nothing has been given away . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

including the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. 

 

In terms of fees which were mentioned, yes, our fees went up 

this year. And our fees are comparable with those across the 

country, because we didn’t raise them in the last four years, and 

we don’t plan to raise them again, barring unforeseen 

circumstances, in the next four years, Mr. Chairman. Our fees 

are comparable with what is being charged in other parks and 

other jurisdictions of this country . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . 

 

I hear the former minister of Finance from the opposition over 

there talking about, does that make it right. Let me tell him that 

the camp grounds, the provincial parks in this province, operate 

around $7 million a year; revenues are 2. That’s a $5 million 

shortfall. I believe, and the members on this side of the House 

believe, that every time we have an opportunity to save money 

for the taxpayers of the province, where we can improve the 

services within the parks, where we can provide a service that 

perhaps did not exist before, whether it be a water-slide or 

mini-golf or parasailing or hang-gliding, or other things the 

public have been asking for. If we can do that at no expense to 

the taxpayers of this province, then we have an obligation to do 

it. And if his . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: And if his phone if is ringing off the wall 

with people complaining about privatization initiatives within 

the parks, mine certainly isn’t. And nor is my mail piling up on 

this subject, other than, of course, one or two SGEU 

(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) 

leadership-motivated, write-in campaigns, and they didn’t really 

amount to very much either, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I’d like to answer one specific the hon. member asked. He 

asked about the operation of camp grounds in the province this 

year - how many were leased, tendered, and so on. For 1987, 23 

camp grounds were offered for lease. Tenders were awarded 

and lessees are operating 17 of them. The department has 

opened the other six and is continuing to operate them. Eight 

provincial camp grounds were offered to local communities. Six 

communities accepted the offer. Two others did not accept the 

offer, and they are currently being tendered for lease. We are 

operating them in the meantime, during this year. And there 

were some specifics that I have on paper 

that I would be prepared to send to the hon. member to save 

him taking notes on all of them. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Minister, and will you provide 

me then with a list of the campsites and the names of the 

individuals who have gotten leases from your department to 

take over the 17 publicly-owned campsites. You provide me 

with that information. 

 

Also, Mr. Minister, I want to now turn to the campsite at Little 

Amyot Lake. And would you indicate who you have leased that 

to, and what type of an agreement that you have reached . . . 

your department has reached with that individual group at Little 

Amyot Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Now, Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that 

Little Amyot Lake camp ground has been leased to an operator 

who has an adjacent camp ground, and if you can give me a 

couple of minutes, we’ll dig up some details on the name for 

you, because I believe it’s under a corporate name. And the 

other information you requested, I’ve asked for photocopies to 

be made. I’ll pass that over to you. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I 

would like to indicate to you that the information that I have 

received from you - and I really fully don’t understand this - is 

that the department has leased the Little Amyot Camp Ground 

for a five-year term. I would like to know what the terms of that 

lease are to Mr. Lavoie, Mr. Germaine, and Mr. Nicole. I don’t 

really understand this. It’s a corporate group as you indicate, 

but to me it almost looks like the Conservative membership in 

the community of Duval. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, we’re trying to find the 

particular details on the Lavoie situation. My verbal understand 

back here is there is a Mrs. Lavoie who is an operator of an 

adjacent camp ground who took this thing over. There’s been a 

policy in the past that there’s an adjacent camp ground to a 

government camp ground, if you’re interested in operating it, 

they operate it. I have no idea whatsoever of Mrs. Lavoie’s 

political affiliation, if any. 

 

Mr. Thompson: Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister When you talk 

about the adjacent camp grounds at Little Amyot Lake, I 

suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that there’s no such a thing as an 

adjacent camp grounds. I also . . . I drive by that camp ground 

every time I go home, and coming back. And most certainly 

there’s no adjacent camp ground. if there is an adjacent camp 

ground, Mr. Minister, it would have been just constructed in the 

last few months. 

 

For your information, the Lavoie - you talked about Mrs. 

Lavoie; she is the president of the Conservative party up in 

Athabasca. And I think that’s something maybe you should . . . 

that you maybe should know. And I believe one of the other 

names may have been the official agent, I’m not sure. 

 

But could you indicate, Mr. Minister, under the agreement that 

they have for the five years, what type of a lease agreement they 

have, how many they are going to be paying the Government of 

Saskatchewan, in particular 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1335 

 

your department? And could you indicate if they are going to 

operate than on a 24-hour basis, or did you attach any 

regulations in the lease agreement that they have to maintain 

that? And are they able to charge individuals? 

 

As you know, Mr. Minister, that particular camp ground was 

there for the citizens of this province, and there was no charge 

to anyone. I wonder if you could indicate if there are any 

conditions within that lease agreement that would indicate 

whether they have to . . . or have to charge, or is it going to be a 

free service that they’re providing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I’m going to track down 

the details on this particular situation. I don’t have those ones in 

my head, and some of the officials are tracking down the 

paperwork right now. As soon as we have it, we would be 

pleased to make it available to the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Solomon: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to ask the 

minister some questions with respect to the provincial parks, 

some of the campsites and so on, along the lines of my 

colleague from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Minister, as you may or may not be aware, many people in 

this province view our parks as a natural resource that they have 

a right, and their families have a right, to visit and participate in 

and to take advantage of and to enjoy, since the 1930 federal 

Act which transferred the Crown lands to our province for safe 

keeping and for the purposes of enjoyment of our people. 

 

What we have seen in the last little while, Mr. Minister, with 

respect to privatization of parks, is a government neglecting the 

responsibility of that Act of 1930, and instead of ensuring that 

these properties, these natural areas that are defined as 

provincial parks and campsites and golf courses and so on, 

rather than seeing them being enjoyed by a wider, wider 

number of people within our province, we’re seeing this 

government being negligent in that responsibility, and in fact 

leasing that Crown land out - those properties - to private 

entrepreneurs, to deliver services which they will deliver on 

their own, on their own terms. 

 

(1545) 

 

And my questions, Mr. Minister, I’d like to commence with, 

relate specifically to some of the agreements that you’ve signed 

in the provincial parks. For example, I understand that the 

Kenosee Lake golf course - or the Moose Mountain Provincial 

Park golf course, whatever the name of it is - has been leased 

out. And I’d like to know what requirements and obligations of 

the lessees are with respect to maintaining and enhancing that 

property, and to ensuring that as many people as possible can 

participate in the golf course and its surroundings. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe I’ve already 

answered that question to the previous member who was 

questioning, and gave some details as to the lease and his 

obligations - the fact that he also has to put up a certain amount 

of capital for improvements to that park. There are some 

specific clauses within the agreement which he may be 

referring. I can dig them out 

and we’ll send them to him. 

 

Mr. Solomon: Okay. You’re saying, Mr. Minister, that you’ll 

send me a copy, or you sent the member from Athabasca a 

copy? 

 

An Hon. Member: I believe the member from Athabasca has 

some details on that. 

 

Mr. Solomon: Okay, you have forwarded that information to 

the member from Athabasca. I’ll have a look at it and get back 

to you on some of the questions. 

 

What I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, is whether the department, 

or any of your officials, or anyone you have contracted with, 

undertook an economic forecast or some kind of study with 

respect to the privatization of parks and its facilities. I’d like to 

know whether you have undertaken those studies to date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, if I may get some 

clarification from the hon. member. He’s talking about an 

economic forecast. Could you maybe clarify what you meant by 

that. Do you mean a project revenue/expenditure for parks, or 

. . . 

 

Mr. Solomon: What I’m asking for, Mr. Minister, is: I’d like to 

know what information you and your officials used to make 

your decision with regard to privatizing some of the campsites, 

privatizing some of the golf courses and other elements within 

our parks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve a better idea 

what the member was meaning now. I’d like to tell him that the 

campgrounds alone were losing $855,000 a year, as an 

example. We knew that. We know that Blackstrap ski hill just 

south of Saskatoon would lose anywhere from 150 to $200,000 

a year; the White Track ski hill operates with a deficit of about 

$100,000 a year. 

 

So on the one hand, Mr. Chairman, we have all of these losses 

in services that we are providing. And we said: is there a way 

that we can provide the same service or better at a reduced cost 

to the taxpayers? Or are we going to continue to operate, let’s 

say, the $7 million provincial park scenario - where the revenue 

is 2 and the outlay is 7 - with a $5 million shortfall borne by all 

of the taxpayers, or are there ways of narrowing those figures 

together? That’s on the one side. 

 

On the other side we said: is there a way that we can improve 

the facilities in the parks and put in facilities that perhaps we 

wouldn’t do because maybe we don’t want to justify a $2 

million water slide at Kenosee. The public like it. We know that 

from the volume of traffic that’s going through there. But in all 

conscience, as minister of this department, could I say I’m 

going to justify $2 million of expenditures in there. 

 

So I think the answer to the hon. member’s question is twofold. 

On the one hand we were looking to save money without giving 

up service; and secondly, we were looking to ways to improve 

services within parks. I think the golf course at Kenosee is a 

case in point. Had we continued to operate it as it is, we would 

not have made the improvements that have been made. The 

proponents 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1336 

 

have put a $1 million-10,000 square foot clubhouse. They’ve 

completed the irrigation down there at their expense and 

installed a driving range. We would not have been doing these 

things had we continued to operate it. 

 

Mr. Solomon: Well, Mr. Minister, you’re not giving me the 

information that I am looking for. What I’m looking for is not 

your definition of “losing,” and I’d sure like to have your clear 

definition on losing. You say this certain area has lost a fair 

amount of money. Does the minister believe that parks and 

recreation and other facilities that we, or you as a government 

hold in trust for the benefit of the citizens of this province, that 

they should be money making. Or how do you define “losing,” 

whether they are costing us a few dollars to operate so that the 

vast majority can use them at a reasonable cost, or do you 

believe in farming them out to private operators who will, 

therefore, because of increased costs, limit access to these 

facilities because of increased prices to those people that these 

lands and facilities were put together for their benefit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, I don’t 

think there can be any question about the commitment of this 

government to the provincial parks system. I’d remind the hon. 

member that last year it was this government, the members of 

the Progressive Conservative government sitting on this side of 

the House, who brought in a new Parks Act that virtually 

doubled the amount of park land in this province, and the party 

he represents had a number of years to do the same thing - 11 

years in one stretch alone - and they chose not to do that. 

 

So I don’t see how he can be somehow critical of us as being 

negligent and looking after the interests of the public of 

Saskatchewan by supplying them with adequate recreational 

opportunities. We’re doing that and more. 

 

And I’d be prepared to provide for that hon. member the 

number of new electrified campsites that we’ve put in since 

we’ve been in office; the amount of capital we’ve put into all of 

the parks since we’ve been in office. And together with all of 

the other initiatives, one of which, only one of which is public 

participation within the parks systems - whether it be to run a 

water slide, to run a golf course, to run a store - as long as the 

service is being provided, and in most cases an improved 

service, I may say, Mr. Chairman, at less cost to the taxpayers’ 

of Saskatchewan. That is fiscal responsibility, in my view, and 

it also plays an important part in our economic diversification 

program for the province. 

 

If you look at the numbers of tourists and the number of visitors 

to the parks, we are as busy as we have been in the past. There 

has been a trend in the last number of years for parks to be 

going down in attendance, partially - last year was a case in 

point - partially affected by Expo and fewer internal tourists 

within the province as they were going to Expo, and partly 

because of inclement weather, particularly one month of the 

year, and many weekends, attendance was down. That has been 

general across the country, and certainly is not unique to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Solomon: I was going to get to that question, but since 

you’re there already, Mr. Minister, since the 

increase in park fees have been forced upon the residents of this 

province, can you tell this Assembly what the difference in 

terms of revenues are from this year, your latest number, as 

compared to a similar period last year; and secondly, can you 

tell us whether the numbers of visitors to these parks have 

increased this year over last year as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, we 

anticipate increased revenue this year in the order of $2 million. 

The numbers we have at present, and naturally they’re not 

finalized, of people coming through the park system would lead 

us to believe that that target figure will be achieved. 

 

Mr. Solomon: You indicated that a $2 million increase is what 

you project to be, in terms of revenues to the treasury. Is that 

from the contracts that you signed with the private operators? 

Or is that the fees into the parks specifically, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, hon. member, not the 

consolidated fund, the commercial revolving fund of the 

department, and includes both to which you referred - fees and 

private. 

 

Mr. Solomon: So it’s a $2 million increase in revenues. I’d like 

to as the minister now: what does that mean in terms of a net 

loss or a net profit, as you were talking about earlier? You 

talked about, before the privatization of some of these facilities, 

there was losses, as you defined them. And I’d like to know 

now, since the privatization, how much dollars difference there 

is - (a); and (b), answer the second part of my other question. 

With the increase in the number of dollars coming in, are we 

seeing more people visit these parks, or are we seeing less over 

last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: To use the member’s phrase of 

profit/loss - and I’ll come back to that in a moment - we predict 

a net loss on the operation of $2.6 million for this year. In terms 

of the numbers, we won’t know that for some time as they’re 

not tabulated on a daily basis and forwarded to me; they’re 

tabulated on a monthly basis and forwarded to the department. 

So we don’t have those numbers right now. 

 

And, no, I don’t believe that we operate the parks system purely 

looking at the bottom line, and saying, what is the profit/loss 

situation. I think we’re going to be operating the parks in a 

manner that is fiscally responsible, providing the best possible 

level of service to the people of this province with the least 

possible burden on the taxpayers. That’s what we’re aiming for. 

 

And do I ever think the parks will break even? No, I really 

don’t believe they will. 

 

Mr. Solomon: The objective of the minister’s department, as I 

indicated earlier, is not to make a profit. And he’s illustrated 

that very clearly with the numbers he’s given to us today. I’d 

like to ask the minister now whether he can get from his 

officials those numbers. In terms of visitors to our parks, that 

are supplied to his officials on a monthly basis. And if so, could 

I have them today, or when? 

 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1337 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry to say to the hon. 

member, I won’t be able to get that information to you for some 

time. Officials are advising me that the way it is tabulated is not 

by head count, it’s by vehicle count into the park. And we 

usually don’t get it all tabulated until towards the end of the 

season, till the fall. So I wouldn’t have that information. 

 

What I do have is the last couple of years. The numbers are by 

park. I don’t know if that’s of any interest to you. It would 

certainly give you something to compare with when the final 

numbers are in. If you’d like something like that, we’d certainly 

make that available to you. We can also give you some idea of 

across the country comparisons of how it’s been going over the 

last couple years. 

 

Mr. Solomon: Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is it possible to 

provide . . . I’ll accept the information as soon as you can 

provide it to us. 

 

I would also like to obtain from you, Mr. Minister, so that we 

can see very clearly the impact of these increased fees, a 

number . . . what the number is in your department of annual 

passes sold this year as compared to the previous year or two; 

and also the average, what the daily fees are, or either a monthly 

basis or an annual basis, as quickly as you can provide them to 

us, with the latest documentation in comparison of, say, last 

year, for example. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry we’re not going 

to have the information for this year’s park numbers until the 

season’s over. I’m advised that we have two or three 

difficulties. The system itself is hand generated - it’s not 

computerized. It goes through several branches, including 

administration, for tabulation. I’m sorry, I just can’t give you 

that number. 

 

I know what you’d like to see, and I share your concern. I’d like 

to see the same thing. With the increased fees are we, in fact, 

going to experience a drop in the numbers attending the parks? I 

should point out that about 65 per cent of the people using the 

parks are Saskatchewanians. So it’s internally generated. As 

soon as I have that information I’ll get it to you. I can undertake 

to send it to you, but it won’t be till fall. I’m sorry, but we’ll all 

be interested in the comparisons. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Solomon: Thank you, Mr. Minister. Hopefully, we’ll be 

done estimates of your department by October or November, so 

you’ll have an opportunity to give them to us. But we’re not 

quite sure - maybe January. 

 

You indicated, Mr. Minister, that according to your officials’ 

calculations that there will be a loss somewhere in the vicinity 

of $2.6 million. What I’d like to ask you now is: with the 

forecast that you did, which you used, hopefully - we’re 

assuming this because no business or government should do this 

without proper forecast - with the forecast that you used, could 

you let us know what the comparative figure would have been if 

you didn’t privatize these operations. 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Last year, I believe I indicated earlier, Mr. 

Chairman, the losses were about $5 million. This year with 

changes about 2.6. 

 

Mr. Solomon: Was the difference in the figures attributable to 

one or two major programs or program changes or events, and 

if so, what were they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, the numbers I’m looking at 

come out . . . with increased revenue accruing to us will be 

approximately 2 million. And we will be decreasing 

expenditures 1.5 million. But we have to deduct from the 

increase in revenue some capital outlay and some expenses that 

we’re putting back in. 

 

Mr. Solomon: So you’re saying that because of the decline . . . 

Or I should say, the reason for the decline and the loss is not . . . 

cannot be attributed (a) to more efficient government or more 

efficient running of the parks system; but perhaps, (b) to the 

fact there are fewer employees being employed; and (c) that 

there is less capital expenditure in the parks that has been 

undertaken in previous. Would that be close to being correct, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: What I think is a combination of fact is, 

one, we are being more efficient in what we’re doing. Certainly 

we’re more efficient because our expenditures are down. Some 

of the expenditures are things that are being taken up and losses 

that are absorbed by the private sector. They have also put in 

some 6, oh, closer to $7 million worth of capital expenditures 

into our parks that we don’t have to do. 

 

Mr. Lyons: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d just like to take up 

some of the comments, and I notice with some interest some of 

the comments of the Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture 

in this regard. And the last comment in particular is somewhat 

puzzling. He said that the private sector was going to take up 

some of the losses and this accounted for the increase in 

efficiency for the government. Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, 

where it is and in what particular parks, and what particular 

enterprises are going to take up those losses and in which way 

those losses are proportioned, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: I’d advise the hon. member I already sent 

some information over in that regard. For instance, we were 

losing $855,000 in camp grounds alone. There are some other 

factors that I’d already mentioned earlier to a couple of the 

other members. 

 

Mr. Lyons: Well that wasn’t my question, Mr. Minister. You 

made a statement here just not more than two minutes ago, that 

private sector operators who are going to be operating the camp 

grounds and parks would be taking up the losses. I wonder, 

would you hand across the list of those operators of camp 

grounds and parks and the lessees of the park system and the 

extent of the losses that your department projects that each of 

these operators will incur? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: A somewhat convoluted economic 

statement I just heard from the member. They’re not absorbing 

our losses. What we’re doing is 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1338 

 

saying we are cutting ours because we are not going to operate 

some of the things that have been losing up to $855,000 a year. 

Someone else can run it, and if they can run it more efficiently 

and make a dollar at it, good luck to them. 

 

And that includes the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park which is 

going to lose $250,000 this year of taxpayers’ money. If 

somebody else can operate it and run it and break even, good 

luck to them. If they can make money, so much the better. 

 

I would remind the member of the NDP, as they should well 

remember from their years in office: gentlemen, it doesn’t take 

brains to lose money. 

 

Mr. Lyons: Well, Mr. Minister, you can ask the member for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden; you could ask the member from Estevan, 

who once said that you could drive this province into a 

mud-hole and still make a profit at it - you didn’t need any 

brains. I’m sure the members . . . When the Minister of Parks 

says that, he’s certainly passing along the wisdom from those 

who sit on the other side. 

 

Because the point is, Mr. Chairman, that the minister and this 

his government has not proved to anybody that they can operate 

anything efficiently, and does not answer . . . in fact is begging 

the question that was originally putting to them. You said, sir, 

that the private sector was going to take up the losses. You said 

that your government was more efficient because you were 

going to pass the losses along to the private sector. In order for 

you to make those kinds of statements you must have done 

some kind of economic analysis, some cost-benefit analysis, as 

to how that was going to occur. 

 

The question is, Mr. Minister: have you done a cost-benefit 

analysis for each of the camp grounds and parks that you have 

leased out or sold to the private sector? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I didn’t say we’re passing 

losses to anybody. I said we’re cutting our losses and letting 

someone else run the operation. If they can do it better, more 

efficient than government can do it - and heavens knows, there 

seems to be lots of instances where it can be done more 

efficiently when the government isn’t involved - then good luck 

to them. Let them do it. 

 

We know, park by park; we know, camp ground by camp 

ground, what we would be losing if we operated it. All we’re 

saying is if we don’t operate it we’re not incurring a loss on it. 

If someone else operates it, good luck to them. I wish them 

well. I hope they make money doing it. 

 

Mr. Lyons: Mr. Minister, you’re begging the question. I asked 

you a direct question. Have you or your department carried out 

a cost-benefit analysis in terms of privatizing each of the camp 

grounds and parks? If so, is it for each of the camp grounds and 

parks so privatized; or in fact have you done one overall study; 

or precisely what kind of studies did your department do to 

making the decision that you’ve made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: I believe, Mr. Chairman, we have 

done a cost-benefit analysis because we have examined every 

facet of public expenditure that takes place within this 

department. We don’t say it’s the most parsimonious facet of 

public expenditure by any means, but we’re trying to make it 

one of the more responsible facets of public expenditure. 

 

Mr. Lyons: Mr. Minister, will you table that cost-benefit 

analysis that you’ve done in regards to your decision to 

privatize the parks and camp grounds? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: No, Mr. Chairman, I won’t be tabling that 

particular piece of information for the hon. member. He can add 

it up as is provided. 

 

Mr. Lyons: Well, Mr. Minister, can you provide me the title for 

that document you’re referring to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, there is no formalized title 

on a study that would be nice and simple for the members to sit 

down and examine. What we have is a cost-benefit analysis, to 

use his term, for all of the things we operate as a department. 

That’s what we have. 

 

Mr. Lyons: So, Mr. Minister, I’m to presume then, from your 

statement, that you have not done a cost-benefit analysis or any 

other type of study which would project that, in fact, it is more 

efficient and it is more cost-effective to privatize parks. Is that 

what you’re saying when you say that there is no such 

document? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose we could 

go around in circles on this for ever. I’ve pointed out already: 

we know what we would lose on operating each camp ground; 

we know what we lose on operating accommodations in various 

other facilities within parks or, indeed, ski hills or golf courses 

or anything else; we know what they lose; we know what 

they’re costing the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Ideologically, the member opposite feels that the government 

should control and run and own everything. I don’t happen to 

feel that way. We will own the parks, yes. There’s no park for 

sale - ever - completely excluded by the Parks Act that that 

could ever happen. Yes, we’re prepared to lease various 

operations within the parks to members of the public, provided 

they can run it efficiently, provided they make improvements to 

it. 

 

Mr. Lyons: Mr. Chairman, here we have the kind of example 

of government efficiency, so-called, practised by the 

government of the Conservatives opposite. 

 

The minister stands here, one minute saying that they’ve done a 

cost-benefit analysis of the parks; the next minute admits that 

no such cost-benefit analysis exists in documented form, and 

tries to convince people in Saskatchewan that he’s made a 

decision to privatize the parks on the basis of efficiency and 

cost-effectiveness when he hasn’t done any work to prove it; 

when he, in fact, himself stands here in this House and says that 

his department or himself does not have the documentation and 

the figures to back it up. Because their . . . 

 

The point is, Mr. Chairman, that the minister is admitting to this 

House now, contrary to what he just said five 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1339 

 

minutes ago, that they didn’t do a cost-benefit analysis for each 

of the camp grounds and for the leasing of the park, and that he 

doesn’t have anything in black and white which will prove that 

it’s more effective in the short term, medium term, or long term 

to privatize the parks which belong to the people of this 

Saskatchewan, and to privatize the camp grounds utilized by the 

people of this province and tourists; that he doesn’t have that 

kind of cost-benefit analysis. 

 

Now which side does he take in this, Mr. Chairman? Do you 

have, Mr. Minister, do you have a cost-benefit analysis of each 

of the camp grounds that you are selling off? And do you have a 

cost-benefit analysis that made you make the decision to lease 

out operations in the provincial parks? Did you, or any of your 

department, or did any consulting firm, or did anybody provide 

you with that kind of information? Or do you do . . . did you do 

exactly what your Minister of Finance do - pull figures out of 

the top of your head and say that this is reality, when in fact you 

didn’t do your homework? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, the hon. member’s playing 

fast and loose with words here. And I didn’t say we’d privatize 

parks. And I already indicated to him, and I know he has 

difficulty understanding it, coming from where he does as an 

ideological stance, and as a loose cannon within his own party 

and out of control. I know that he would get up and rant and 

rave on this particular subject; uninhibited by fact, 

unencumbered by knowledge. So I’m glad he got into the 

debate. I have already explained to him: we have studied project 

by project, cost by cost, where we lose money, where we can 

stop losing money, where we can allow someone from the 

private sector to operate a facility. And if they can operate it, 

break even, or make money, good luck to them. 

 

Mr. Lyons: Well, Mr. Chairman, may I just say that this is one 

loose cannon that seems to have struck a broadside in terms of 

the kind of operations of the department of the minister, when 

in fact - when in fact the minister one minute stands here and 

makes a statement that he has done some work in this area, and 

then . . . and five minutes later has to admit before the House 

that he didn’t do the work, and that they didn’t do the 

homework on that basis. 

 

And we want to talk ideology; we want to talk ideology, Mr. 

Chairman. Here we have a minister . . . here we have a minister 

following in the footsteps of, following in the footsteps of the 

political hero, Margaret Thatcher, out to sell off - as the 

minister, as the member from Athabasca has proved in his line 

of questioning - out to sell off the resources of the 

Saskatchewan people, and he’s out to sell it off under the basis 

of privatization without having done the economic homework 

which would justify that. And that’s a statement that he himself 

has made. That is a statement that he himself has made. 

 

Earlier on, Mr. Chairman, the minister made a statement that 

rates in the provincial parks and camp grounds in Saskatchewan 

were comparable to those of anywhere else in Canada. I wonder 

if the minister would be prepared to tell us the rate charged to 

senior citizens here in Saskatchewan versus the rates charged to 

senior 

citizens in Manitoba. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: The rates on what? 

 

Mr. Lyons: Would you tell us, Mr. Minister, the rates of - the 

rates of camp grounds? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: We’ll have to look for that information and 

bring it back to you. Be happy to do so. 

 

Mr. Solomon: Thanks, Mr. Chairman. The minister has 

indicated that the department has undertaken some study of 

some nature, whether it’s a cost-benefit analysis, or whether it’s 

a cash flow projection, or whether it’s a study by another name. 

Could the minister at least tell us who was contracted, or who 

was asked to undertake the study on your behalf? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I can say that was done 

in-house. It was done by staff of the department. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to ask the 

minister, then, since he’s studied all these so very closely, as to 

how many greens fees payers there were at The Battlefords Park 

provincial golf course last year; and how many memberships 

were sold at The Battlefords Provincial Park golf course last 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I don’t have that 

information right at hand, but we can find it and undertake to 

send it to the member. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Well, why don’t you have your studies here? If 

you’ve studied all these things so intricately, why don’t you 

have that information here? We don't believe that you’ve 

studied anything. We believe you’ve sat down with some 

people and drawn up plans on the back of a cigarette package 

and divvied up the pie to your Tory friends. That’s what you’ve 

done. You haven’t done any cost-benefit analysis. If you had 

that cost-benefit analysis done . . . you said you had the 

information for every camp ground, and every golf course, and 

every facility, but where are they? 

 

You got here with you this afternoon: one, two, three, four, five, 

six, seven, eight, nine, ten officials from the department, and 

you can’t tell us this intricate information that we ask that you 

say you’ve studied so much in detail? You can’t tell us how 

many greens fee payers there were at The Battlefords Provincial 

Park golf course last year. Is that what you’re saying, you can’t 

tell us that today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess we can pull 

some of that information together that the heated member is 

looking for. We’d have to upgrade the number of accountants in 

the department if we’re going to have to do all of the things he 

suggests. 

 

And if I may say, Mr. Chairman, I do take exception - and I’ve 

noticed it happened once or twice before in estimates - I do take 

exception when members opposite do criticize individual, loyal 

public servants who also worked for the previous government 

of this province. 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1340 

 

Mr. Anguish: We want to say that no one is criticizing your 

public employees. All I’m trying to point out . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: Order. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly don’t want 

to have you misconstrue what’s being said from this side of the 

House. No one’s criticizing your employees. What we’re saying 

is that you said you had all this information. You got ten people 

from the department here, and you can’t provide a simple piece 

of information that you just told us you have studied very 

intricately. If you’ve got the information so intricately, and 

you’ve studied all these plans for privatization of the parks, get 

somebody on the telephone. Your assistants are in the gallery. 

And get that information before we adjourn for supper here this 

evening. You’ve got 40 minutes to do that. Get the information 

here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: Maybe a little broader question, so we can get to 

see how much information that you’ve brought with us . . . or 

with you to the estimates. Tell us how much money the 

provincial golf course at The Battlefords’ provincial park lost 

last year. Did it lose money? Or did it make a profit on the golf 

course? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: We’d be pleased to look up the 

information relative to The Battlefords’ provincial golf course 

and get it over a ten-year period, or longer if you prefer, and 

we’ll send that information over to you. 

 

Mr. Anguish: We don’t want you to send the information. Just 

get the information here today. Get your assistant who’s sitting 

up there in the gallery to get on the phone, or else go to your 

office and look through these intricate studies that you’ve done 

for cost-benefit analysis, and get the information here. 

Otherwise, get out of estimates, get out of estimates . . . and 

why are you screwing your head like that over there? What does 

that mean? Is that a secret sign to your staff up in the gallery? 

You don’t have the information, so why don’t you clear out and 

get out of estimates until you can answer the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: You don’t have the information. You don’t have 

the information. Just so we stick on something you’d be 

familiar with, the closest provincial park to your own home 

constituency. We’ll stick with The Battlefords Provincial Park 

golf course for a while. Could you tell us: last year, who had the 

contract to lease golf carts out in The Battlefords Provincial 

Park and what the agreement was between the provincial 

government and whoever leased the golf carts at the golf 

course? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, hon. member, last year it 

was held by Valley West Sales Ltd., and they gave 25 per cent 

of total gross revenue to the department, for the information of 

the hon. member who isn’t aware apparently that in debate heat 

is inversely proportional to knowledge. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Well thank you very much for your wisdom. I 

don’t want you to instil any of your wisdom in me because we 

expect to put a good government into place in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we don’t need your off-lip criticism on this 

side of the House. 

 

Could you tell us then, at 25 per cent of gross revenue, how 

much did Valley West Yamaha pay to the provincial 

government last year on the lease of golf carts in The 

Battlefords Provincial Park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, we don’t have the dollar 

figure in this document, but we could fine it, probably before 5 

o’clock. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Well you’re certainly going to have to provide a 

lot of information before 5 o’clock because you don’t seem to 

have much. 

 

Could one of your officials or you, Mr. Minister, remember 

whether or not the figure that Valley West Yamaha provided 

last year was over $10,000, or was it under $10,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: We’ll find that figure for you and give it to 

you. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Mr. Minister, in terms of leasing out golf carts at 

other provincial parks around the province, and I would first ask 

you: is in fact the golf cart rentals at the one, two, three, four, 

five, six provincial park golf courses that you mention - are they 

all . . . all the rentals leased out to private operators? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Yes, Mr. Chairman. I can tell the hon. 

member that all six are leased privately. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Could you tell us at this point in time, Mr. 

Minister, if the share on the agreement for leasing golf carts at 

all those provincial park golf-courses is not, in fact, 25 per cent 

of gross revenue to the provincial government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: No, Mr. Chairman, it is tendered, and the 

proponents put in whatever bid they want to put in. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Well could you tell us, then, the fact by each of 

those provincial golf-courses. You seem to have the one for last 

year at The Battleford’s Provincial Park. Could you also tell us 

for the other golf-courses, the other five golf-courses, what is 

the share that comes from the golf cart rentals to the provincial 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that we don’t 

have every individual lease with us. But we’ll certainly 

undertake to bring in all the individual leases and give the 

details to the member on all of the other ones. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Would you give us . . . Did you just say to us that 

you would give us the details on all the golf cart rentals in the 

province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . On the six. Well I 

appreciate that you would have that here for us before 5 o’clock 

today as well. It’s certainly information that’s pertinent to these 

estimates. 

 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1341 

 

How long is the lease for golf cart rentals made? Is it one year 

at each of the provincial golf-courses with an option for 

renewal, or is it one a one-year lease? Is it tendered, in fact, 

every year at each of the provincial park golf-courses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that leases 

granted at different golf courses vary because, in some 

instances, golf courses themselves have been leased. So the 

rental is different. Normally it would be leased every year, in 

other cases. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Well, if I could be more specific, Mr. Minister. 

We’ll go through them one by one. 

 

Could you tell me, in terms of The Battlefords provincial park 

golf course, how long Valley West Yamaha had the contract to 

lease golf carts - the rental golf carts? And was that a long-term 

lease, or did they have to bid on the contract each year? Could 

you give me the particulars of Valley West Yamaha’s tenure as 

having the golf cart rental concession? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that in the past, 

when the department itself was operating the golf course and 

took responsibility for that, they would, at that time, give a 

five-year lease on the rental operation. When the decision was 

made to explore the possibility of leasing the entire golf course 

operation as the five-year leases expired, thereafter we entered 

only one-year leases, tendering each year. 

 

Mr. Anguish: So then I would have to assume, by what you’ve 

told me, that Valley West Yamaha were successful in their bid 

in 1981, starting effective the 1981 golf season, and they had 

the rental carts at The Battlefords park provincial golf course 

for a period of five years which expired at the end of the 1986 

golf season. Is that correct? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Yes. 

 

Mr. Anguish: And further, that you have told me that their 

contract was to pay 25 per cent of gross rental revenues to the 

provincial government. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: You said Valley View’s bid was 25 per 

cent this past tender, the immediate past tender? 

 

Mr. Anguish: My question, Mr. Minister, is that during the 

term that Valley West Yamaha had the contract to rent golf 

carts at The Battlefords provincial golf course, from 1981 until 

1986 at the end of the golfing season, did they pay 25 per cent 

of gross rentals to the provincial government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Yes, I’m advised that in that five-year 

period the bid was 25 per cent for the five years. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Do you yet, Mr. Minister, know how much then 

in the 1986 golfing season was paid by Valley West Yamaha to 

the provincial government on the basis of 25 per cent of gross 

rental revenue? 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Sorry, Mr. Chairman. We don’t have that 

in a dollar figure yet, but we’re going to have it for you. 

 

Mr. Anguish: I thank you very much. Now, Mr. Minister, these 

contracts . . . have at any time access to the public . . . the public 

has access to these contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, these things are tendered 

publicly. They come in and then they’re open tenders. 

 

Mr. Anguish: So the tender is put in . . . I would assume then 

there’s a contract signed between the successful bidder and the 

province of Saskatchewan or your department. Is the contract 

that’s signed open information to the public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, hon. member, on the 

bidding process they come in, opened publicly; everybody 

present knows exactly what the bids were. When a contract is 

drawn up between the operations division of the department and 

the successful proponent, they sign the contract. The contract 

has not normally been published any place or made available to 

the public. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Who would have access to knowledge of those 

contracts that are actually signed between the province of 

Saskatchewan and the successful bidders on a tender such as 

rental of golf carts at golf courses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, in answer: I imagine 

anybody who is present when the tenders are opened knows 

exactly what the bids were and who the successful bidder is. 

 

And I’ll answer the other question you asked me. Last year, 

remitted to the department by the company who had the golf 

carts was $8,878. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Well, what was the actual date then . . . Let’s 

stick with . . . I want to go on to these other golf courses, but 

we’ll stick with The Battlefords Provincial Park golf course for 

a while. 

 

What was the date that the contract with Valley West Yamaha 

expired, and what was the date when the tenders were called for 

for a new contract to rent golf carts at The Battlefords 

provincial golf course? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Now Mr. Chairman, the least agreement 

for the provision of motorized golf carts at Battlefords 

Provincial Park and Moose Mountain and Duck Mountain 

expired October 31, 1986. March 4 to April 6 the department 

tendered publicly for the provision of motorized golf carts at 

Battlefords and Duck Mountain provincial parks. Lessee at 

Moose Mountain Provincial Park made its own provision for 

the ‘87 operations. April 16, ‘87, tenders awarded to The 

Battlefords, Upshot Enterprises Ltd.; at Duck Mountain, Allow 

Me Enterprises, the winner. 

 

Mr. Anguish: So on April 16, then, Upshot Enterprises were 

the successful bidders. Then was there a contract 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1342 

 

drawn up, Mr. Minister, between Upshot Enterprises and the 

province of Saskatchewan? That’s what I want to get at the 

contract. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Yes, subsequent to that the contract was 

drawn up. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Mr. Minister, are you going to . . . If I 

understood you correctly, you’re going to table those contracts 

in this legislature so that we have access to those contracts. Is 

that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: No, Mr. Chairman, not the contracts, 

which are not public knowledge. The tenders. 

 

Mr. Anguish: The contracts aren’t public knowledge. Now 

could you tell me, Mr. Minister, would a cabinet minister have 

access to that information? The public doesn’t. But those 

contracts . . . Would a member of the Executive Council not 

have information or access to information about the contracts 

drawn up between the province of Saskatchewan and a private 

entrepreneur? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I never saw the contracts, 

and I don’t sign them. Nor have I asked to see them. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Mr. Minister, would a member of the Executive 

Council of the province of Saskatchewan have access to such 

contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: I’m advised, Mr. Chairman, I have access 

to contracts if I want to see them. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Well, it seems very strange to me, Mr. Minister, 

the whole process by which you let some of these contracts out. 

Could you tell me who the principals are of Upshot Enterprises, 

the successful bidders on the golf carts at The Battlefords 

Provincial Park? Could you tell me who the principals are, 

please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: I’ll certainly say who the principals are. 

But first I’d like to say that the process hasn’t changed one iota 

since the party opposite had formed government previously. So 

there’s nothing untoward in this whatsoever. 

 

Now, let me tell you who the principals are: Upshot Enterprises 

Ltd., Myles Morin and Regan Hamilton. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Well, my goodness! Well, I would take it this is 

the same Myles Morin that was a member of the Executive 

Council in the province of Saskatchewan, former minister of 

Supply and Services. And you told me in this House under 

question period, Mr. Minister, that the reason that that bid was 

successful for the rental carts at The Battlefords provincial park 

was because Upshot Enterprises bid 27.5 per cent. It’s 

interesting it would be two and one-half per cent higher - just 

higher - and to guarantee just a little bit more than what the 

revenue that was came in last year. It was a $10,000 guarantee. 

Is that the only basis on which you awarded Upshot Enterprises 

the contract for rental carts in The Battlefords Provincial Park? 

The 27.5 per cent and the $10,000 guarantee - are those the only 

reasons? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, not only was it a superior 

bid in terms of economics, but the details were better as 

well - newer equipment, and the maintenance schedule that 

Upshot offered was daily. The other proponent offered it 

weekly. All in all, it was a superior bid. The department advised 

to go with the best bid. We did. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Mr. Minister, who does the servicing of the carts 

that Upshot Enterprises currently has at The Battlefords park 

provincial golf course? Is it park employees that do the 

servicing, or is it someone from Upshot Enterprises that does 

the servicing? Could you tell us that please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, Upshot is responsible for 

the maintenance. They can hire whomever they please. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, if an employee of 

the park does the servicing on the golf carts at The Battlefords 

Provincial Park golf course? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I don’t know who does it. 

Upshot’s responsible for it. Certainly I can direct officials to 

contact Upshot and find out who’s doing their maintenance on 

their golf carts. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Mr. Minister, I would appreciate if you would 

tell us that information because my information is, it’s a park 

employee. And if it’s a park employee that’s doing the servicing 

on a private entrepreneur’s golf carts at the golf course, I would 

hope that they’re paying the province of Saskatchewan 

something for that service. 

 

The other thing that I’d like to go back on, on this particular 

contract, Mr. Minister, is the fact that when Valley West 

Yamaha - if you could listen to this because it might go over 

your head - Valley West Yamaha tendered in their contract that 

they would provide 30 new golf carts to The Battlefords 

Provincial Park. 

 

Now it’s a great difference in terms of providing used golf carts 

which require more maintenance, which I believe your park 

employee is doing, or if you’re tendering on new golf carts and 

the golf carts at Valley West Yamaha tendered on were new 

golf carts. Can you tell us if the bid that came in from Upshot 

Enterprises was for new golf carts at The Battlefords Provincial 

Park golf course? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I have the 

number you asked for earlier on golfers. I’ll give them to you 

after I answer your question on the tender document. Fair 

enough . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’ll never read the 

writing on this one. 

 

An Hon. Member: Read it into the record, then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Okay. This is the Upshot Enterprises’ 

tender document. it says: 

 

25 new four-wheel, four-cycle gas powered golf carts, as 

well as a complete line of parts to service the 

vehicles - minor and major repairs. 

 

In addition, provide 26 golf carts to ensure that a 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1343 

 

full fleet of 25 will always be in operation while servicing 

is being performed, subject to availability and time for 

implementation either Melex, Club car, or Yamaha brand 

names; a full fleet of 25 for the term of May 1, ‘87, 

October 31, ‘87. 

 

You asked for that information? And did you ask for the 

comparison? 

 

An Hon. Member: Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: 

 

Service shop, trailer to transport cars, if major work 

needed; 15 new 1986 Yamaha four-stroke cars; 10 new 

‘87 four-strokes or good used two-stroke Yamaha; 

300-gallon fuel tank on stand; 15 new Yamaha four-stroke 

cars, plus 10 1987 four-stroke cars or good used 

two-stroke (Yamaha) . . . 

 

Service technicians to perform servicing weekly on cars. 

 

Mr. Anguish: You’re reading from the bid that was placed by 

Upshot Enterprises. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? You indicate, 

yes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The second one was Valley 

West Yamaha. They indicated then, from what you read, that 

they would provide a fleet of new Yamahas, is that correct? 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, could you send those documents across 

here? Would you table those documents so we can have a look 

at those bids that came in on the tender? You said that they’re 

public information. I’d appreciate that you send a copy across to 

us on this side of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, these are my briefing notes 

with my scrawls and notes on them. These are not a public 

document. 

 

Mr. Anguish: You’ve referred to them. You should table those 

documents here. I would like to see the tender documents - the 

bids that were placed from Valley West Yamaha and Upshot 

Enterprises. Will you, in fact, provide us with those bids? 

 

You said they’re public information. They’re open in public. 

Will you provide us with a copy of the bids that came in from 

those two companies that bid on the golf cart rentals at The 

Battlefords Provincial Park. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: We will provide all of the information 

that’s in the bids to the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Mr. Minister, what I asked you is if you would 

give us a copy of the original bids that came in from Valley 

West Yamaha and Upshot Enterprises for the rental of carts at 

The Battlefords park provincial gold course. 

 

(1645) 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I think I’ve given all of that 

information already. I gave it in question period. I gave it again 

today, and it’s completely accurate. 

 

Mr. Anguish: You have not given the information. You said 

the documents were public documents. Why do you refuse . . . 

What have you got to cover up that you won’t even place, in 

this House, the bid documents that came from Valley West 

Yamaha and Upshot Enterprises? What are you trying to cover 

up on that you won’t give us those public documents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I have absolutely nothing to 

cover up. I have given the details of the two bids. Really, one 

bid was totally superior to the other; that’s the one that was 

awarded the contract. 

 

Mr. Anguish: You’ve given us, Mr. Minister, your version. I 

think that you owe this province and the people on this side of 

the House those documents so we can make our own 

assessment as to whether or not there was fairness in the 

tendering process at The Battlefords park provincial golf 

course. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, all of the information given 

has been completely accurate. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Not complete, prove it. Lay the documents 

before us in this House. I would like to - I just have a couple of 

other brief questions here. Could you tell us the share to the 

provincial government from golf cart rentals at the Duck 

Mountain golf course? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, the Duck Mountain 

provincial park motorized golf cart operation, we expect to 

realize $9,600. 

 

Mr. Anguish: What I asked you, Mr. Minister, was: on the 

contract that you have with the person who has the concession 

to rent golf carts, what’s the percentage that that operator pays 

the Government of Saskatchewan? Is it 27.5 per cent? Or is it 

25 per cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, we don’t have the 

percentage on that particular briefing note, but we’ll find it and 

give it to the member. 

 

Mr. Anguish: What did you bring with you? Well, bring it with 

you when you get all the information on all the concessions that 

are rented out in the provincial park golf courses? And I’d 

suggest to you that next time you come back here, unless you 

pull estimates for your department this evening at 7 o’clock, 

come back with some information. Come back with some 

information. You don’t want to give us any of the information 

that we’re asking, or if you do want to give it to us, you 

certainly aren’t prepared for it. 

 

We have a responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan to 

make sure that tendering practices in this province are fair and 

without favouritism. We want to make that determination. Why 

would we want to take your word for it? Table the documents. 

Will you table the bids that came in on tenders for provincial 

park government concessions over the past year? Will you table 

those in this legislature? 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1344 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, all of the information that 

has been given is completely accurate. I won’t be tendering to 

that member the documents to which he’s referring. 

 

Mr. Anguish: The Government of Saskatchewan has every . . . 

The people of the province of Saskatchewan have every to right 

to the access to that information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: Every right to it! What are you trying to cover 

up? 

 

Public documents, you said earlier that you would table those in 

this legislature, and if you check the record that comes up from 

Hansard, you said you’d table them. Now you say you won’t 

table them. What do you have to cover up that you will not give 

that information to this Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I, and the members over 

here, have absolutely nothing to cover up. 

 

And all of the details contained in those documents, which the 

hon. member has said, public documents. If he was so 

concerned, he could have been present at the opening of the 

bids, as were many other people. When they were public 

documents, he could have seen them with his own two eyes. 

And then he wouldn’t have to rise in here and do this lead-up, 

with these scurrilous allegations to which he will ultimately get, 

and with all the innuendo. 

 

And all I’m going to say to him is, when he wants to cast 

aspersions on the character of a former member of this House 

who was awarded a contract, all fair, square, and above-board; 

when he want to make allegations; when he wants to do it, I 

invite him to do it outside of the Chamber, not in here where he 

enjoys immunity from prosecution for the type of allegations he 

will make on the floor of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: I don’t know whether “snivelling rat” is 

unparliamentary or not, but there are no aspersions made. You 

table the documents in this House. We’ll the make the 

assessment of them. And if there are statements to be made 

outside of this Assembly, we’ll make them. But show us the 

documents. I wasn’t at all of the opening of bids. How could 

you reasonably expect any member of this Assembly to travel 

around from bid to bid and watch the opening of the bids? 

 

They’re public documents, the public has the right to know, and 

you table those documents in this House. How can you not 

release those to the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 

Release those documents. 

 

If there is information in there, we’ll do our assessment of them, 

and then there will be allegations made outside this House if 

they’re warranted. But you have to give the information, you’ve 

got to be accountable, and you’re not accountable! 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, we’ve heard the member 

from Battlefords rant and rave at some length in here. And he 

says that he wasn’t capable physically to get around the 

province and visit every tender opening. 

 

I thought he was a member for Battlefords. I thought he had a 

vested interested in what was happening in Battlefords park. 

And he knew the bids were being opened. He knew the date 

they’d be open, but he wasn’t . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: Order, please. Order, please. The minister is 

trying to answer the question. Would you please accommodate 

him. The minister has the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Thank you. Now, Mr. Chairman, it strikes 

me that the MLA for The Battlefords, if there’s something 

worrying him, if there’s something worrying him about this bid 

or this tender, it went public. And it was available to anybody to 

go in and look and examine and see what was being done. 

 

Mr. Chairman: Order, please. Could we have order, please. I 

would ask the House’s indulgence to let the minister complete 

answering his question, which he has not done so far. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Mr. Chairman, I move, seconded by the hon. 

member from Regina Rosemont: 

 

That the minister table copies of all original tender bids 

with respect to the awarding of contracts in provincial park 

golf courses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: The member from The Battlefords has moved 

a motion. Order, please. Order, please. The member from The 

Battlefords has moved the motion: 

 

That the minister table copies of all original tender bids 

with respect to the awarding of contracts in provincial park 

golf courses. 

 

And I find that this motion is out of order based on the fact that 

it is a substantive motion, and they are not allowed. 

 

And I can refer you then to the Rules and Procedures, page 64. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Mr. Chairman, the intent of the motion is to seek 

information; that’s information that’s absolutely accessible, or 

should be accessible, to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan through this Assembly. The minister sits there in 

his seat and refuses, in fact, to release information to this 

Assembly that’s public information. 

 

We don’t want to make any accusations towards anyone. What 

we want to know is . . . We want to have the information that 

we’re supposed to have in this Assembly so we can make the 

assessment as to whether or not there is any hanky-panky going 

on in some of the government practices on that side of the 

House. We may have our suspicions but we certainly would not 

make any allegations until we see the bids and the contracts, 

  



 

July 23, 1987 

1345 

 

preferably, that are to be tabled in this Assembly. 

 

But I do find it very strange, Mr. Minister, that a member of the 

Executive Council could have all the information concerning 

those contracts, and when that member is no longer a member 

of the Executive Council, then they can penny-ante themselves 

into a bid situation where they can get a contract. That seems 

very strange. If you don’t have anything to hide, Mr. Minister, 

why don’t you bring into this Assembly those documents and 

table them here before us so we can examine them? 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I would therefore move, seconded by the 

hon. member from Regina Rosemont: 

 

That the minister’s salary be reduced to $1 until he, in fact, 

gives us the information that we require, that we have 

access to, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: And I find that that motion is also out of order, 

based on the fact that we are now dealing with item 1 which is 

the executive administration. The motion deals with item 

number 33, which deals with a statutory ruling. So, therefore, I 

rule that motion out of order as well. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


