













































July 15, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 15, 1987 

 

 

1179 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 

the Assembly, on behalf of the member for Regina Centre, a 

group of 50 English as a Second Language students seated in 

your gallery — the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

These 50 students are from the Regina Plains Community 

College, and it will be my pleasure to be meeting with them right 

after question period in the members’ dining lounge for 

refreshments. 

 

Accompanying the 50 students is Liz Slater, Yvonne 

Lewchyshyn, Kim Heffernan, and Lesley Taylor Hughes. Please 

join me in welcoming these students from the Regina Plains 

Community College. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all 

members of the legislature, one of the members of the RCMP 

concert band. This member happens to be my sister-in-law. Her 

name is Kerry Anne Kutz. 

 

She, in the tradition of Saskatchewan, became the first woman in 

Canada to join the RCMP band. She comes from Saskatoon. We 

enjoyed your concert at lunch hour, and I would ask all members 

to join me in welcoming her here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Meeting Regarding Investors’ Savings 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Madam Minister, 

last evening in Regina there was a very important meeting of 

some six to seven hundred people who had invested with the 

firms First Investors Corporation and Associated Investors of 

Canada Ltd., and you did not see fit to attend this meeting. 

 

Hundreds of Saskatchewan people have their life savings tied up 

in these two investment firms. These firms only operated in this 

province because they were licensed to do so by your 

government, and it’s simply not good enough for the government 

to pat these investors on the hand and tell them, “Buyer beware.” 

You have a responsibility to these people, and my question is: 

what concrete action, if any, is your government taking to ensure 

that these people’s saving will be protected? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the question 

from the member, I was not at the meeting last night. We were 

requested to send representatives from the department, and that 

representative was there. 

 

With regards of what action the government is taking, upon 

notification from the Government of Alberta, cancelling the 

licences, we did the same here. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that a 

manager from Coopers & Lybrand has been put in place. The 

Court of Queen’s Bench in Alberta is expecting a report from the 

manager some time in mid-August, the 21st of August, I believe, 

and it is at that point investors will know where they stand. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, I think that you are the person 

who’s supposed to represent your department more than anyone 

else. And my concern still is that the steps you’ll be taking to 

ensure the Principal Trust stands good in the investments made in 

its two spin-off companies. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I didn’t get a question out of the 

member’s preamble. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 

Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Madam Minister, 

your department has licensed, under The Investment Contracts 

Act, the First Investors Corporation and Associated Investors of 

Canada. And your government and you, Madam Minister, have 

issued a licence to these two firms when you knew, or ought to 

have known, that in 1985 the Alberta Securities Commission 

refused a prospectus from these companies. Did you also know, 

Madam Minister, that the Ontario government has refused, and 

did refuse, to grant an operating licence to Principal Trust? And if 

this is so, doesn’t your government pay any attention to what’s 

happening in Alberta and Ontario? Or is your department simply 

there to collect money, to collect licence fees, regardless of 

whether citizens’ savings are put at risk? 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the Leader 

of the Opposition the other day, these two firms were operating as 

extra-provincial institutions operating in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The primary responsibility for regulation and 

auditing of firms of this type lies . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. The 

minister is attempting to answer the question . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . having difficulty. Order, order. Order. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The primary responsibility for auditing 

firms like this are with the incorporating jurisdiction in this case, 

which is Alberta. As an extra-provincial institution, they must file 

annual reports with the department. Those annual reports are 

audited by external auditors and people in the ministry in Alberta. 

 

As licensing an extra-provincial institution, we rely, Mr.  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1180 

 

Speaker, upon the audited reports that are filed with the 

department every year before we issue a licence. And yes, I am 

aware, Mr. Speaker, of what went on in Ontario. However, 

Ontario must recently brought in a new Act and is no longer 

co-operating with the other provinces, as has been done in the 

past, of issuing licences to extra-provincial institutions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, the primary responsibility to the people of Alberta is 

shared by the Alberta government. The primary responsibility to 

the people of Saskatchewan rests with you, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — What I want to know, Madam Minister, 

is this: are you prepared in the future, as apparently you have in 

the past, to abdicate your responsibilities to the provincial 

governments, whatever they may be, or are you going to take a 

stand on behalf of Saskatchewan investors in the future and in the 

past? And are you going to help these investors from Associated 

and First, who you have let down by your negligence? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, there has been no 

negligence on the part of myself or my department. These two 

firms have been working in Saskatchewan since 1954 and 1952 

respectively, as extra-provincial institutions in Saskatchewan. We 

will, Mr. Speaker, rely upon . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The minister is once more 

having difficulty answering the question, and I’m sure all 

members are anxious to hear the answer. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will 

continue, Mr. Speaker, to rely on information provided to the 

department by departments in other provinces. I may say, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are just three firms, or were only three firms, 

registered under The Investment Contracts Act here in the 

province, and two of them are the firms in question today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Madam Minister. 

Madam Minister, are you telling me that in your judgement you 

have discharged your responsibilities adequately, when there was 

clear evidence on the public record in Alberta that these 

companies were shaky, particularly First Investors; when there 

was clear evidence that over . . . about half of its assets were 

mortgages, and over 60 per cent of those mortgages were in 

arrears more than 90 days, and you had, or ought to have had, that 

information. Are you saying you have discharged your 

responsibilities properly by having that company have a renewed 

licence in 1987 and in 1986, and giving no information whatever 

to the public so that they might have some additional information 

as to the risks that they were encountering in dealing with the 

companies which you were supposed to be regulating? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — At the time that the licence was renewed, 

I believe in January, the audited reports that were filed with the 

corporations branch gave no indicated of the financial stability of 

the two firms in question. And no, I am not abdicating my 

responsibility. I will continue to run the department the way it has 

been run in the past. We will continue to monitor the situation. 

 

But I might say to the hon. member, he knows full well what 

procedures take place when a manager is appointed by the courts. 

And yes, we are concerned about the moneys held by these two 

companies on behalf of the investors. But neither this government 

nor the investors will know the status of their investments until 

the winding down plan is filed in Alberta Queen’s Court Bench in 

August. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a new question, a new 

question to the Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs. 

Madam Minister, you administer the government’s Trust and 

Loan Companies Act and, as you will know, that Act provides 

that the Superintendent of Insurance, who regulates these 

companies, may, where a licence is already granted, by notice to 

the licensee, make that licence subject to any terms, conditions or 

restrictions which he considers necessary. 

 

Now my question to you, Madam Minister, is this: I’m operating 

on the assumption that Principal Trust is registered in 

Saskatchewan, and if this be so, will you instruct the 

Superintendent of Insurance to make Principal Trust’s licence to 

operate in this province subject to the condition that that firm 

make good the losses to Saskatchewan citizens which have come 

about by the switching by Principal’s employee of funds from 

Principal to First Investors and Associated? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t answer that question 

because the allegations of the Leader of the Opposition has not 

been established. And that allegation will have to be, 

unfortunately, established in a court of law. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As the 

minister will know, that allegation will not be established by any 

trustee in bankruptcy, Coopers & Lybrand. It may be established 

by a court of law or may be established by a thorough 

investigation. 

 

And my question there fore to you is this: is your government 

prepared to undertake an investigation to see whether the 

allegations made time after time by dozens of citizens last night 

in Regina, similar to similar allegations in Edmonton — are you 

prepared to undertake an investigation to show whether or not 

these facts took place and, if so, to act on the basis of the results 

of that investigation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, no action will be taken until 

the manager’s report is filed with the Alberta Queen’s Bench 

Court some time in August. 

 

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1181 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask a new question to 

the minister in charge of the Superintendent of Insurance office. 

The minister will know that I refer to Pioneer Trust, and I refer to 

the trustee in bankruptcy there, and I refer tot he supposed reports 

which were coming in weeks and months which, so far as I’m 

aware, have not yet been made available to this House some time 

later — even now, a year and a half later. 

 

My question to you is this: do you intend to staff any action for 

months and months as your colleague, the member for 

Kindersley, did; or do you intend to act now on behalf of 

Saskatchewan citizens, investors, firstly, to get a proper 

investigation, and secondly, to get full restitution for 

Saskatchewan citizens who’ve been bilked? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, until the manager’s report 

is completed and filed with the courts, this government will 

continue to monitor the situation. But until the manager receives 

his report, and the shareholders and investors have the 

opportunity to vote on the plan, there is little that we can do at 

this point in time. It will be at that point in time, Mr. Speaker, t 

hat the investors will know what their investments are worth. 

 

Network to Report on Operations of Trust Companies 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Minister, at last 

night’s meeting at which I attended, a woman who used to work 

in your department claimed that she and three other employees 

had in 1983 prepared a study and briefed you on that study — a 

study on the advisability of forming an interprovincial network to 

keep tabs on investments and trust companies that might be 

somewhat shaky or at risk, so that each provincial jurisdiction 

could be informed of same. 

 

Your department, however, never implemented the program. And 

as a result, these investors claim you and the PC government are 

negligent. In light of this recent fiasco, and in keeping in mind the 

problems of Pioneer Trust, could you explain to this Assembly 

why you felt such a network was such a bad idea? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I do not recall meeting 

with, I believe it’s a lady by the name of Margaret Morrissette, 

some years ago. 

 

I can indicate to the member that the regulation of financial 

institutions and the harmonization of regulation across the 

country, and the sharing of information between jurisdictions, has 

been a topic that has been discussed at many federal-provincial 

conferences that I have attended over the past years. It is a 

concern, and we are moving to harmonization of regulations of 

financial institutions. We are looking at what is going on in 

Ontario, and I think you will see changes across Canada in that 

whole area. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite shocked that the 

minister does not recall the meeting at which three or four key 

staff people from the department advised  

her on how to minimize problems in the financial area with 

respect to investors’ money. 

 

You indicated earlier in the question period, Madam Minister, 

that you rely on other governments’ advice. To date the advice 

has not been adequate. When is this network going to be set up? 

And, secondly; why, Madam Minister, were these three people, 

plus the lady that was at the “do” last night, why were they 

terminated since 1983 and no longer work with your department? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — This is lubricious, Mr. Speaker. The one 

person . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order! Order, please. Order. Order. 

Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The member talks about terminations. 

The one person that he is referring to worked in the department 

until late 1984 or early ‘85, got pregnant, took maternity leave, 

and never returned to the department. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — It’s interesting to know, Minister, that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order! Order, please. Order. Order. 

Order, please. Order. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — It’s interesting to know . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I haven’t sat down and it’s already 

starting. Let’s have some order, please. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — This woman claimed . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me. Is it a supplementary or a new 

question? 

 

An Hon. Member: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Okay, please indicate that. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

interested to note that the minister has a good memory about an 

individual who’s no longer ink the department, but does not have 

a very good memory with respect to advice provided by that . . . 

(inaudible) . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — This woman claimed that she and the other 

three staff people who brought the networking idea to you have 

since been terminated. Tell me, were they terminated for having a 

good idea, or were they fired for daring to doubt a financial 

institution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t take at face value 

what the member is alleging, because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that three people have not been fired from the Department of 

Consumer Affairs since I have taken on the ministry. There was 

. . . 

 

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1182 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Allow the 

minister to answer the question. Whether you agree with it or not 

is another matter. If you agree, perhaps you can ask the question 

. . . disagree you can ask your question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, three people have 

not been fired from the department as long as I had been minister. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The woman 

in question has since gone on to a position with the Saskatchewan 

branch of the Consumers’ Association of Canada. That 

association had approached your government asking for funding 

to set up similar network to that which was proposed to you in 

1983, which you have conveniently forgotten about. Not only 

didn’t they get it, Madam Minister, they also found their funding 

cut. Why is your government so opposed to having the affairs of 

trust companies and financial investment companies scrutinized? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No. Mr. Speaker, the member is alleging 

that we have cut funding to the Consumers’ Association of 

Canada, Saskatchewan branch. That is not true. They got an 

$8,000 grant last year; they got a $10,000 grant this year — that’s 

the kind of faith we have in those type of people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Commissions Paid to Salespersons 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — My question is to the Minister of Justice, and it 

also arises from last night’s meeting. There were allegations 

made last night, Mr. Minister, concerning the sales tactics of 

some of the representatives of Principal Trust in their activities. 

For instance, the meeting was told that salesmen for Principal 

Trust could receive a double commission if they could convince 

clients to invest their money in either First Investors or 

Associated Investors. 

 

There was also an allegation, remembering the Pioneer Trust 

affair, some of the investors asked if the investment was covered 

by the depositor’s insurance. And the meeting was told that while 

some were told it was, and some were told that it wasn’t, the 

cover age was better in this case because the . . . it was covered 

the assets of the principle group of companies. And that, of 

course, is something that Principal has not as yet agreed to, to this 

point. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: do you intend to 

instruct your department to investigate these allegations to 

determine if legal proceedings should be taken and with the 

possibility of legal liability in mind? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 

member’s question, if you could give me the further details, I 

would have no problem at all in referring to the Department of 

Justice. The Department of Justice can appropriately, then, 

investigate into seeing if there is in fact some . . . see if something 

is in fact being done that  

is illegal and contrary to the law. And if it is in fact such, then 

certainly criminal action would be taken. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker,. Mr. Minister, 

two members of our caucus were at this meeting last night, and 

they have reported these matters to me. I’m also informed that an 

employee of the department of the consumer and corporate affairs 

was at the meeting and no doubt would be available to give you a 

full report on the allegations that were made and put you in touch 

with the people who were making those allegations. 

 

But my question is: if those allegations are brought to your 

notice, will you start acting on them and not wait as will the other 

minister for a report from the manager? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is alleging 

that there was criminal activity involved. The hon. member is a 

lawyer, a member of the Law Society of Saskatchewan in good 

standing. 

 

I ask the question: if you are genuinely concerned as a citizen, if 

you are genuinely concerned as a citizen about criminal activity. I 

would suggest that the hon. member refer that to the Department 

of Justice at the earliest possible time and not wait to use that type 

of questioning in the question period, where surely that is not the 

proper place to deal with allegations of criminality, if that’s in 

fact what you’re making. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

knows that the meeting last night was a public meeting which 

was widely reported this morning in the press, and where we 

know that there were government representatives in attendance. 

And if I had thought for a moment that this matter had not 

already been brought to your attention, I would have come to you 

myself this morning. 

 

But my question still remains, Mr. Minister: are you, as is the 

Minister for Consumer Affairs, going to wait for the report of 

some manager in the future, or will you act on the information 

that has or will be brought to your attention to investigate the 

matter now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 

Saskatoon, a lawyer of good standing, if he — and a genuine 

member, in my view — if he makes an allegation that there is in 

fact criminal activity here, I take that allegation very seriously. 

 

I will have discussions with officials in the Department of Justice 

following question period. If there is criminal activity involved, 

as alleged, then certainly it is the function of the Department of 

Justice to pursue that, and pursue it with vigour. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I point out to the minister that the 

allegations were made at a public meeting last night by people 

who had invested in this company. And I pass those allegations 

on to the minister. 

 

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1183 

 

Let me ask a supplementary question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. It’s difficult to hear the member’s supplementary 

question. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also informed, 

Minister, that the investors were talking last night about the 

possibility of taking legal action. 

 

Now in light of the fact that your government licensed these firms 

to carry on business in the province of Saskatchewan, and in the 

light of the information that was around the department while 

many of these sales were taking place, what assistance is your 

department prepared to offer to these people who are going to be 

trying to recover their money through recourse to the courts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I think the hon. member, again as a 

practising lawyer, Mr. Speaker, would respect the legal process. 

And if the people from the newspaper reports of last night’s 

meeting indicate that in fact it would be the intention, at least of 

some, if not a larger group — and it would be difficult to 

determine that; that’s for them to decide — if they are going to 

pursue a class action, that they’re going to pursue that particular 

action in the courts and in the courts of law, then I think that 

they’re capable of doing that. And it would seem to me that the 

system allows them to, in fact, do that. 

 

Are you suggesting that we somehow (a) provide the lawyer to 

them, or are you suggesting somehow (b) that we pay all the legal 

costs, or . . . I’m not sure what the hon. member’s suggestion is. It 

seems to me that the matter can come before the court. And if the 

matter does in fact come before the court, then the court should 

sit and determine upon that. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Environment and Public Safety 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, when  

your estimates were last before the House, I raised the question of 

obtaining a list of consultants that were employed by the 

department over the year that has closed, and you said you would 

provide that list of consultants with detailed information. At that 

point, I didn’t ask you when, and I ask you now: do you have the 

list, or when will you provide the list? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I am advised that my staff have not been 

able to prepare that list yet. We’ll have it soon, but we haven’t got 

it today. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, do you expect you will have 

the list by the end of the week? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I am advised that possibly by Friday or 

Monday; I couldn’t give you a guarantee. There isn’t much time 

left when we get out here each day. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can appreciate that 

it takes some time to surface the material with regard to the 

consultants the department’s employed. It’s just that I would like 

to have a look at the list of consultants, and the projects on which 

they were working, if possible, before the estimates come to their 

conclusion — this particular set of estimates. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have here in my hand a department space 

allocation list which I take it has been provided by you, dated 

July 14 ‘87. Mr. Minister, could you tell me whether the Derrick 

Plaza is a government building or a private building? And that’s 

in Estevan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I advised the member last day when we were 

here that the knowledge of whether or not they are private or 

public buildings is not provided to us as a Department. The rental 

contracts are held by the property management corporation. So 

I’m sorry but I don’t have that information. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, you’ll understand that I 

don’t know the geography of Estevan very well. When you go to 

Estevan to visit the Department of the Environment, what address 

do you go to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the staff don’t have the 

address here. They do have them, but they didn’t put them on this 

form, and they didn’t bring them across with them today. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, in due course, could you 

supply the address of the Derrick Plaza in Estevan, the graphic 

arts building in Humboldt, Saskatchewan Place in Regina, 

Palliser Square in Regina, Watrous . . .oh no, I don’t need that 

one. Okay, those are the ones, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m surprised that the information wasn’t 

here at the time I sent it across to you. I’ll supply the address for 

each of the locations that are on the form that I sent across to you. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 

to go back and talk about aluminium cans for a while. And I want 

to tell you that I don’t have with me, but I think you know the 

particular cans that we’re talking  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1184 

 

about. I’m looking at Hansard for July 9, and am referring to that 

in framing my questions. Can you tell me when that case came on 

in Estevan, in what year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would reply to the hon. member that the 

charge on this case was laid in April, on April 4 of 1986, and the 

trial I haven’t got the date of. It was in the fall of ‘86, and I 

believe likely in August, but I don’t have that date here. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — And while we’re talking about that, can you tell 

me the technical basis on which the charge was dismissed, and 

secondly, the name of the accused in that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The firm that the charge was laid against 

was Kyle’s Food Fair in Estevan, and it was thrown out of court 

on strictly a legal issue. I’m not enough of a lawyer that I want to 

try to define that to you. I guess as a lawyer you would have 

ready access to the decision that was rendered, but it wasn’t on 

whether or not cans were legal. It was on another legal 

terminology, and I’m not sure of it. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thanks, Mr. Minister. There are, of course, 

many technical grounds on which a charge can be dismissed, as I 

recall. But as I understand your answer, it had nothing to do with 

the question of whether, on the merits, an offence had been 

committed under the Act. In other words, there was no evidence 

called and no decision made on the charge itself, but rather, as I 

understand you, the charge was dismissed for a technical legal 

reason. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that’s what my officials advise me was 

the circumstance. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now you also told us that these cans are to be 

found in many, many stores in Saskatchewan. I think your words 

are: there are hundreds of stores now selling cans in differing, 

varying quantities. What happened, Mr. Minister, after this 

charge was dismissed that dissuaded you from following through 

on the legal enforcement of the provisions of the legislation 

respecting the use of cans? 

 

In particular, I could ask: was that a decision that you made as the 

minister or was that a decision made by the Minister of Justice, 

let’s say, with respect to the prosecution of these cases? I would 

like to know how come there was no other cases following the 

one in Estevan, in light of obvious continuing violations of the 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that a variety of things occurred. 

To begin with, when this case was thrown out of court on a 

technicality, other store owners who had been watching, with 

interest, the case as it went forward to court, and suppliers from 

our neighbouring provinces, saw an opportunity. When the case 

was thrown out of court, then they saw an opportunity to move in 

and to really saturate much of the market with canned soft drinks. 

 

My department looked at the situation as it unfolded in the early 

fall — prior to the time that I was minister, but  

there was nevertheless a minister there — and they felt that 

because of the circumstances and the numbers involved, the 

numbers of business involved, it would be almost impossible to 

prosecute them all. And to prosecute just one would not seem fair 

in that setting. 

 

So they’ve attempted to find other solutions. And I mentioned to 

you before, the ongoing process that we have had, and we’re 

looking at introducing amended legislation to try and take care of 

the issue. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I can appreciate the problem with which the 

department was faced and with which you were faced when you 

became the minister of the department. But at the same time, I 

have the gravest sort of difficulty with your answer and with the 

position that your department has taken, for the very simple 

reason that the law in question was legislation passed by this 

Assembly, and which sets out in no uncertain terms what is the 

law of this province. And under the law of this province, as I read 

it, those aluminium cans are illegal. 

 

What you have allowed, Mr. Minister, and what your department 

has allowed, in following the course of conduct that you have, is 

to let the suppliers who have flooded the market negate your law. 

They have created a situation in which your department has 

thrown up its hands and says, we can’t cope with all these 

violations of the law; therefore, we better change the law or we 

better consider changing the law or, therefore, we simply won’t 

enforce the law. 

 

It’s as though everyone that has a car in Saskatchewan went out 

on the road and started to drive at 150 kilometres an hour. You 

would agree, Mr. Minister, you would be the first to agree, I 

think, that that just simply wouldn’t be allowed. It wouldn’t mean 

that the police would stop enforcing the speed limit in this 

province. In other words, a massive violation of the law is, in my 

submission, no excuse for you to stop enforcing it. Now, I’d like 

to have your comments on that, Mr. Minister. 

 

And while you’re on your feet, I realize this is a difficult area, but 

I would like you to give some indication to the Assembly as to 

how you’re going to cope with it. I think you’d agree that a 

minister of the Crown has no right to simply say, well, I’m going 

to stop enforcing a valid law passed by this legislation. And the 

Deputy Premier agrees with me completely, Mr. Minister, and I 

trust you will too. I’d like to know what happens next. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I realize what the member is saying, and in 

some ways I agree with the member, that we should charge them 

all. And I would also suggest tot he member that, as a lawyer, he 

knows that if you have a case that you are concerned about 

individually, you could come forward and say: Mr. Minister, we 

want you to lay a charge. And if that were the case, I would. I 

haven’t had that happening. 

 

I’m very concerned about it. But the idea of actually taking large 

numbers of small retailers to court for selling canned soft drinks, I 

think is not reasonable at this point in history. In the same store, 

they’re likely selling cans of  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1185 

 

juices, and that has been permitted over a long period of time. 

 

So, you know, our law sometimes is not a reasonable law. I think 

it was reasonable at the time it came in and, because it was left in 

place without amendment over a long period of time, has become 

very difficult to enforce. That’s why I’m suggesting to you that I 

believe the proper solution in this circumstance is likely a change 

of the law, rather than the trial or the laying of charges against 

many people. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I realize, Mr. Minister, the problem involved 

when there are a large number of violators, and I’m not standing 

here urging that you run out and charge everybody, because I 

don’t think that should be necessary. I respectfully suggest to 

you, though, that you ought not to have simply quit with the 

technical acquittal in Estevan, but ought to have followed through 

with another prosecution, or group of prosecutions, which would 

have this matter determined. 

 

And while I’m on this point, I want to ask you this question — 

whether your legislation reaches only the vendor, or whether it 

also reaches the supplier or the wholesaler who supplies the 

vendor. Because quite obviously, in the circumstances that 

you’ve outlined to me, the culprit here is the vendor. The culprit 

here is soft drink supplier, apparently from Manitoba, and 

perhaps also from Alberta, who took advantage of this technical 

dismissal of the case in Estevan to flood the market in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And one thing that occurs to me immediately is that you, as 

minister, might have picked up your telephone and summoned 

the suppliers in here and told them that that was just in breach of 

the law of Saskatchewan and, under the existing law, you weren’t 

prepared to stand for it. Now it may be that that won’t be the law 

a year from now. That’s, of course, a decision that you’ve told us 

you’re working on now, and I accept that. But in the meantime 

these suppliers are just making a mockery of you and making a 

mockery of this Assembly by doing something which is plainly 

and clearly illegal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the Saskatchewan 

legislation covers only the vendor and will not extend to the 

supplier. The other side of it is that the supplier is out of province, 

and arraignments must be made by the person in Saskatchewan 

who is buying the product to transport the goods in 

Saskatchewan. So because our legislation covers only the vendor, 

it makes it difficult to go to the wholesaler and to lay any charge. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I must say, Minister, I don’t know what my 

position is on the question of aluminium cans, you know. I’m not 

here arguing that you ought not to change the law or that you 

ought to. I mean, I just haven’t considered that yet. But what is of 

concern to me is that there is a law passed by this Assembly for 

which you’re responsible as far as enforcement is concerned. And 

it’s obviously being flouted, and you feel unable to do anything 

about it. 

 

Now I want to ask you if you have asked for the opinion of the 

Department of Justice as to what remedies might be  

available in this situation as regards either the suppliers or the 

large vendors or someone who could be brought before the courts 

of this province and a prosecution run, in order to determine that 

the law is, in fact, enforceable and that anyone handling these 

cans is doing so at their peril. 

 

In other words, Minister, I’m back where my first question . . . or 

my third question started from, and that is that I respectfully 

suggest that it’s just not available to you to sit back and allow this 

law to be flouted. Your responsibilities, in my respectful opinion, 

just don’t give you that alternative. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I advised the hon. member earlier that you, 

as a lawyer, have the authority to bring forward a case if you feel 

that somebody should be charged. And I don’t tell you that just to 

make excuses for what my department and I have done in this 

particular circumstance. But at the time that I became minister 

and the issue came to my desk, the numbers of businesses 

involved seemed to me to be unreasonable to begin to lay 

charges. Now I’m not a lawyer. I may have made the wrong 

decision, and I don’t make any excuses for that. 

 

At the time that the Kyle’s Food Fair trial went in and the case 

was thrown out, Justice asked us at that time if we would like to 

go for a new trial. And my department advised me that they 

didn’t ask Justice to go for a new trial. There had been 

considerable time elapsed, circumstances were changing very 

rapidly, and the indication at that time was that perhaps an 

amended form of legislation would be a better route to go, and 

that’s the route we have gone. 

 

Now if the member feels that’s wrong, if you would like to write 

to me and say, lay a charge against this store, or that I recommend 

that you lay a charge, I would like to take your advice. Because it 

is a difficult issue, not one that I’ve been comfortable with, I can 

assure you. And sometimes advice from others brings in a 

different point of view, and it may be beneficial to me and to the 

department. 

 

I can tell you that with each complaint that we’ve had, that a 

certain store is handling canned soft drinks, a letter has gone to 

that store outlining to them that they were indeed breaking 

Saskatchewan law; that the handling of canned soft drinks was 

illegal in Saskatchewan. So they are fully aware that the issue is 

not proper. They’re doing it knowing that they are breaking 

Saskatchewan law. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I am not going to ask you to prosecute any 

particular vendor, Mr. Minister, and the reason why is, of course, 

that is no part of my responsibility to ensure the enforcement of 

that Act. And I point out that, of course, it is yours. 

 

I’ll be content if we can leave this point with this assurance on y 

our part, Minister, if you would tell me that you or your officials 

will raise this matter with the Department of Justice, with a view 

to determining what action is available in order to ensure the 

integrity — the integrity — of the legislation of this Assembly. 

 

Because I repeat again, with respect, it is . . . In my view it is not 

an option for you simply to not enforce it because  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1186 

 

it’s being so broadly violated. It is an option of you to bring 

legislation before this House to amend it, but it’s not an option for 

you to simply say, I’m not going to enforce it. 

 

And if you would simply give me that undertaking, that you or 

your officials will raise the question of the enforcement of that 

legislation with the Department of Justice, I’d be content to leave 

the point for today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ll advise the hon. member that we will 

make a contact with the Department of Justice and see what 

recommendations they may have in this circumstance. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Minister. I want to come back 

briefly to the technical safety services branch and ask a few more 

questions with respect to that branch. 

 

And I was gesturing to your responsible official who I am 

familiar with, Minister, from days when I was his deputy 

minister. But he’s in his place now, and so I want to talk about 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — In the good old days. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — In the good old days, yes. I want to talk about 

elevator inspections. I regard inspections with particular gravity, 

Mr. Minister, because when an elevator fails it can have the most 

disastrous kind of consequences, particularly to people who are in 

the elevator at the time that it fails. And it is a very serious kind 

of question, and I’d like to start my question in this area by 

determining whether there are any staff cuts that have been 

planned, or which have already taken place in this fiscal year, in 

this particular area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, there are no staff cuts that have taken 

place or that are planned for that area. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Can you tell me how many inspectors are 

engaged in elevator inspections in the branch? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there are two. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now can you also advise me as to the currency 

of the work of the elevator inspectors. What I mean by currency 

is: are they operating on current basis, or is there a significant 

backlog? And if there is a backlog, what . . . how serious is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry I took a little while to get the 

figures, but I wanted to be accurate. I’m advised that there are 

1,842 elevators licensed, and in the past year we inspected 1,578. 

The staff indicate that they inspect them all on about a 16-month 

basis. So although it may appear that there’s a backlog of the 

difference between those two figures, it’s basically that they 

aren’t looked at as a 12-month . . . but, rather, more like a 

16-month inspection. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I am looking at the report of the Department of 

Labour for 1985-86, where the numbers were about the ones that 

you’ve given. There were 1,779 elevators at that time, and you’ve 

indicated there are 50  

or 60 more than that now. Of these ‘85-86 figures, almost 1,100 

of them were passenger elevators. And the remarks I made before 

. . . that it sort of . . . 

 

It boggles my mind that two inspectors could inspect that many 

elevators in a 12- or 16-month period. It seems to be a great deal 

of work to expect from two inspectors. That would work out to 

something like . . . well, five elevators a day, or some such 

number all across Saskatchewan. And I’m boggled by the 

statistic, although I know that, over the years, it has remained at 

about that level. 

 

This leads me to this question, Minister, and that is the 

commitment of your department under your stewardship with 

respect to the enforcement of the elevator inspection program 

which, as I indicated earlier, is one of the most important from a 

public safety point of view. I mean, in all of the major cities of 

this province, every day people get into elevators with the perfect 

assurance that nothing’s going to go wrong. And you’re the only 

person around to ensure that nothing will go wrong. And I would 

like your assurance that this is going to continue to be a priority 

and is not scheduled for the Minister of Finance’s knife. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, I think if you look at two inspectors, 

approximately 250 working days in a year, you take that figure of 

1,572 and it starts to break out at just a touch over three elevators 

per day. Realizing that elevators are in urban centres, you don’t 

have to go rural Saskatchewan very much. It’s the major centres 

that have buildings that require elevators. So there’s some fair 

concentration in certain areas. 

 

I can assure you that I don’t want my name on the licence on an 

elevator unless it’s been inspected properly. But they advise me 

they do inspect properly. And I think the safety record has been 

good over the years. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I’d like to now move to the fire commissioners 

unit, Mr. Minister, and ask you whether there have already in this 

fiscal year been cuts in this unit, or whether any are scheduled for 

this fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that in that division three have 

retired, and we will be replacing one out of the three, which will 

leave a net of 15 inspectors in that division. We had 17; there will 

be 15. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Which positions are those? Which position are 

the two which will not be filled again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — There will be one inspector in Regina and 

one in Yorkton that won’t be replaced. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Tell me, am I correct that these fire inspectors 

also inspect schools? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that they inspect schools in rural 

areas and in small urban centres, but in the cities they do their 

own inspection, the school system does. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, would you mind telling me if there 

is any plans at all in your department to privatize the inspection as 

far as fires are concerned in rural Saskatchewan or in small 

towns? 

 

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1187 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — At this time there is no plans to privatize the 

fire inspection branch. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — That includes also inspections as far as hotels are 

concerned in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — That includes the fire inspectors’ branch, 

like all of the inspections that they do, and they do inspect the 

rural hotels. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — My understanding is that recently . . . It came to 

my attention that a hotel owner was told by a fire inspector that as 

of next year that he could expect his inspection done by the fire 

inspector, but that he would no longer be with the government, 

but that it would be with a private firm. Obviously you’re telling 

me that that fire inspector then was wrong in the information that 

he has given to that hotel owner. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Evidently the rumour mill was working, but 

it wasn’t true. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — It has never been discussed, or no plans now or in 

the foreseeable future to turn over inspection of schools or hotels 

or other building in rural Saskatchewan. You have no plans now 

or in the near future to turn that over to private inspectors who 

will not be in the employ of the government. That’s what you’re 

telling me? Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I advised the member that there’s no 

intention at this time. We haven’t discussed it. There may be a 

discussion in the future, but who knows what the future brings. I 

tell you that at this time there are certainly no discussions, and no 

plans under way. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, the fire commissioner’s unit has a 

number of important programs, and it includes inspections, which 

is a term that you’ve used, but it also includes the approval of 

plans and specifications. And it includes investigations, as well as 

various education programs, and the fire prevention week, and 

fire-fighters’ training, and that sort of thing. The question I have, 

Minister, is whether there are any program cuts planned for any 

of those divisions within this branch. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there are no planned 

program cuts in those areas. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Yes, my questions again are on the issue of acid 

rain in our area. And my questions will be formulated, first, on 

the observations of the people in that area; and secondly, on the 

Canada West Foundation research. 

 

Most of the people in my area of course have been very 

concerned with the effects of environment. And I have respected 

the observational skills of the people, especially in regards to 

issues that affected their livelihood. I can recall many times in the 

past that researchers, biology researchers, would come in and do 

studies in the North without considering the daily practice of the 

people who fished in the area. 

 

In many cases, as I listened to the stories, the government had a 

tendency to look narrowly only upon the research  

reports that were tabled in front of them, and did not consider the 

observational research evidence by the people from the area. 

 

(1515) 

 

When I examined your statements made on July 9, on page 1087 

of Hansard, you mentioned that: 

 

There has been no indication of any problem with acid rain in 

your area — no problem with it, across the North. 

 

You also mention later on: 

 

We have done some . . . research on our own testing. The 

Saskatchewan Research Council has done about four different 

studies, and each one of the studies come up with the same 

answer: that we at this time do not have a problem with acid 

rain in that area. So I think it’s encouraging to me, at least, that 

the mine has been there for 30 years and you’re water is still in 

good condition. 

 

I had mentioned at the outset that I was a bit concerned about not 

only about the mine, but about the acid rain emissions from the 

tar sands. I’m trying to find out, you know, from . . . And also 

you mentioned that there are 25 locations where you do acid rain 

monitoring in the North. 

 

My question to you is: in your consideration and, you know, with 

your research staff there, are these 25 locations providing 

conclusive evidence on the effects of acid rain on the fish in that 

area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would just like to advise the hon. member 

that yes, we feel the 25 monitoring sites are doing an adequate 

job. Along with the monitoring of those sites though, I indicated 

to you that we do take lake samples. Those lake samples are 

analysed, and they are also showing that you’re not having an 

acid rain effect on your lakes. So yes, we feel quite satisfied with 

the work that we’re doing. 

 

I indicated to you that as the tar sands project comes on stream — 

and it will likely get larger as the days go by; it won’t just be at its 

present size — that we will be monitoring very carefully the areas 

immediately adjacent to that tar sands operation to be sure that 

our lakes and our trees are protected from serious acid rain in the 

district. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — For many years, Mr. Minister, we have been told 

that the research reports and the research evidence were adequate. 

The question that I asked was a little bit more concise: are the 

studies conclusive, are they conclusive in a sense that the acid 

rain does not affect the trout, as some other research evidence 

tends to point to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Your question took a considerable amount of 

time to bring across, and for you to say it was concise, I think, is 

going a little far. It was far from concise. But I think my answer is 

fairly clear that we’re not, in our monitoring in the area that you 

live in and across the North, finding any evidence of acid rain at 

this time. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Then, Mr. Minister, I would like to read to  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1188 

 

you a technical research report by the Canada West Foundation, 

which was put out in 1982, and it’s entitled Nature’s Lifeline: 

Prairie and Northern Waters. I would like to read to you some 

statements, you know, that they do make about the river systems, 

particularly where I was interested in, and that was in northern 

Saskatchewan. I looked at the Saskatchewan River basin which 

affects, for example, Cumberland House, Prince Albert area, and 

this is a conclusion of that research technical report. It says on 

page 188 of the report: 

 

Smelter emissions at Flin Flon have been the subject of 

extensive study, due to concern about the effects of metals 

and sulphur emissions on local vegetation, water, fish, and 

wildlife. In part, due to concern about pollution of local 

waters and, in part, due to increasing concern in 

Saskatchewan about violations of air quality standards, and 

the threat of acid rain, licensing of emissions from Flin Flon 

is under review. 

 

And that was in . . . it was in 1982. Later on in the document, in 

regards to the Churchill River basin, which of course it’s La 

Ronge, Sandy Bay area, the report had this to say: 

 

Acid rain is unquestionably . . . 

 

This is on page 222. 

 

Acid rain is unquestionably the major quality concern for 

the future. It has been suggested that industrial emissions in 

both Alberta and Manitoba could increase tot he extent 

where fish populations in northern Saskatchewan lakes 

would be endangered. 

 

And there it mentions something very specific about the fishing. 

And the next, on page 244: 

 

In summary, the uses of water in the Churchill River basin 

vary substantially from its head waters to its lower reaches. 

In Alberta, oil sands development could require transfer of 

water from other basins, and water quality could become a 

serious concern. In Saskatchewan, the threat to the Canadian 

Shield waters by atmospheric emissions in Alberta and 

Saskatchewan is a major issue. 

 

As I looked into the other area that I’m worried about in the 

North, in the Athabasca River basin, which gets into the 

Clearwater River, into La Loche area, and also towards the 

Athabasca Lake region, the report says on page 264 and 265: 

 

The shield region in northern Saskatchewan is more 

extensive in area and is usually downwind of the oil sands 

sources. Work by the Saskatchewan Research Council, the 

University of Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan 

Department of Fish and Wildlife has concluded that 

emissions from the Alberta sources, based on predicted 

increases in oil sands plants, and no change in the rate of 

emissions, could result in fish mortality in lakes in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

This report, Mr. Minister, states much of the same fears that the 

people have had in our area and have observed. So not only is 

there evidence from the observational skills of people, there is 

evidence that leads to the conclusion that acid rain in northern 

Saskatchewan is and will be a major concern, you know, in the 

future. 

 

I’m a little bit worried about your research capabilities. Initially 

you mentioned that you had only done research for four years. 

Yet you seem to make very conclusive statements about the fact 

that there is no problem. I would ask you: does your present 

research capabilities include proper longitudinal studies on the 

effect of acid rain and fishing in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member is reading from a report. 

And the first area you read about was Flin Flon. Flin Flon 

happens to be in Manitoba, but I know it’s very close to our 

borders. 

 

In the Flin Flon area, as you are well aware, there was some 

problem with emissions from the chimney from the mining 

operation there. They have since put in a much higher chimney 

and have, I believe, even if you walk around the site, you’ll start 

to see that where it had once been black, it’s starting to turn 

green. So they are making some improvement. And I am advised 

that the Manitoba government has recently made decisions to 

control the emissions from chimneys and from plants in 

Manitoba. 

 

The Churchill River basin, you express from that report that 

there’s a concern that the tar sands project may have an influence, 

and the same with the Athabasca Basin. That’s exactly what I 

mentioned to the member earlier, that as that plant gears up, we 

will be monitoring closer and closer to be sure that we’re not 

being impacted on Saskatchewan’s side of the border. At this 

time, from the tests that we have taken of the lakes, from the 

ongoing monitoring systems that we have in place, there is no 

indication of acid rain in those areas. 

 

You ask me about longitudinal studies. We’ve only been studying 

four years. We’ve been monitoring in that area for a long period 

of time, and we will continue to monitor. So we should have that 

ongoing look that is very much required. I know the member is 

concerned. The report that you read from is not a conclusive 

report. It expresses concern. That’s all it does. It doesn’t have any 

data in it that would indicate that there is a problem. And I’m 

advising the member that from the tests, from the sampling, from 

the monitoring that we’re doing in Saskatchewan at this time, 

there’s no indication that you have a problem with acid rain. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I asked the question whether or not you would be 

doing more proper longitudinal studies in regards to the effect of 

acid rain on fish. My own problem in terms of research is this: 

that you can do very specific type research and monitor for the 

next 100 years and not find anything unless you are there to look 

specifically at its effect on certain living organisms in northern 

Saskatchewan. And most particularly what I’m interested in was 

on the fishing and the fishing industry there. So I’m asking you, 

is your department looking at more comprehensive and 

longitudinal studies in this area? 

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1189 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that, because of the readings 

that we’re getting at this time, when we bring in the air samples, 

the rain samples, the snow samples, and the samples of water 

from the lakes, that there’s no indication that there is need for 

additional study now. 

 

If it becomes evident that there is a change, when we’re 

monitoring, and if we start to detect change, then there may be 

need. But at this time there is no need that we can see. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — What then, Mr. Minister, would be the reason 

why certain fish like, you know, according to other research 

reports which affect trout the most — acid rain affects trout the 

most — why would trout disappear in around that area? You 

know, in Mirond Lake and Namew Lake and so on. What would 

be the reason for a disappearance of these trout? Could your 

research people in the Environment — do they have any idea why 

that’s happening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that a question of that type would 

more properly be asked of the Minister of Parks and renewable 

resources, and particularly the fisheries division of that branch, 

who monitor the fish, the population of fish, and any problems 

that fish would be facing. So I believe your question would be 

more properly asked there. It’s not that my staff would have 

answers for. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

in looking at your estimates, there appear to have been some 

internal structural changes in your department as opposed to 

previous years. In particular I refer to your communications 

branch. I’m concerned that the communications branch be able to 

continue to function effectively, given its important role in 

making sure that information gets out to the public. You know, I 

refer to important aspects of communication activity such as 

advertising the pesticide container disposal program, informing 

the public about your spill control program, and promoting the 

anti-litter program. 

 

I’m curious to know . . . is the category that you have under 

program services, administration and communication, does that 

reflect simply a budget keeping entry, or does that reflect the fact 

that your communications branch has now been amalgamated 

with your administration branch? 

 

I note that in the last annual report we have, that communications 

seem to operate as a separate branch. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the communications branch 

is amalgamated with the administration branch, and the only 

savings would be there’s no director of communication in place. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — When will that branch be able to continue 

to function effectively? Will it be able to carry out with the kinds 

of functions that it carried out and say . . .again I refer to the last 

annual report that I have, which is for 1985-86. Will it continue to 

have the same objectives  

as, say, outlined in that particular annual report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that, yes, it will. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I understand well, and 

appreciate the need for the first two objectives that are indicated 

in that annual report. The first objective is to have the department 

continually apprised of people’s concerns about Saskatchewan’s 

environment and about shortcomings they perceive in the 

province’s effort to protect and enhance that environment. It’s my 

view that that’s a sound objective. It’s important for your 

department and all your officials and, indeed, for you as a 

minister to be apprised of what the public perceives to be 

problems with respect to our environment. And it’s important for 

you to be informed so that you might move with alacrity and 

speed and dispatch when that’s required. 

 

I understand, as well, the need for the second objective, which is 

to increase the Saskatchewan public’s early awareness of the 

policies and programs whereby the department is attempting to 

address important environmental issues. It’s my view that that, 

too, is a legitimate objective. It’s vital to make sure that people 

are informed about important environmental matters, whether it’s 

to do with pesticides or whether it’s to do with litter. Whatever 

the reasons, I think it’s a legitimate objective for government, and 

especially in your area, to inform people about important matters. 

 

But I have some serious and real reservations about the third 

objective. And that third objective, if I can quote, says . . . or that 

third objective is: 

 

To place before the people of Saskatchewan evidence that their 

government is sensitive to environmental issues and prepared to 

deal promptly and effectively with them. 

 

Now as I read that, as compared to the other two that I think are 

sound and legitimate objectives for a government department, 

that third objective is nothing but a political objective. 

 

That objective is . . . to show that their government is sensitive to 

environmental matters, provides your department with a mandate 

to be nothing but a crass, political instrument. What that objective 

does is to say that your department is to blow the government’s 

horn — not with PC Party dollars, but with departmental dollars; 

in fact, with taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

And I say that that’s wrong, and that’s unacceptable to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. You can’t take taxpayers’ dollars and 

use that money for political purposes, as suggested by that 

political .l . . or by that objective. I think what the people of 

Saskatchewan want is solid, concrete action by your department, 

not advertising telling them that your department, not advertising 

telling them that your department or the government is doing 

good work, and especially not when they’re paying for that 

advertising. 

 

And it’s my view, and I would think that it’s the view of the 

taxpayers, that if you really do a job well, there is no need to 

advertise. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, whether you will  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1190 

 

give some consideration to eliminating that particular objective. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the hon. member is reading 

something into that objective that I certainly don’t read into it. 

 

For a government to be concerned about environment, I think, is 

very important. But for the people to realize that the government 

is concerned about it is also important. If the government does 

not take an interest in the environment, then we don’t put any 

money in the budget, and we don’t put people in place to do the 

work. 

 

I believe that this government has been concerned, and some of 

the programs that are operating indicate that. I believe that you’re 

reading something into that statement that is not there. 

 

When you speak of government, you’re not advertising for a 

political party or for individuals. I think it’s an ongoing 

government who is responsible — this government, the former 

government, whatever government’s in power, is responsible and 

concerned. 

 

I’m going to send the member a couple of pamphlets that are just 

two of the kind of things that we mean when we speak of that, 

and the kind of information that we send out to the public and 

make available to the public. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, again I certainly understand 

a need to let the Saskatchewan public and people know about 

important environmental matters. But I would submit to you that 

it’s entirely something different for you to take taxpayers’ dollars 

to tell them that, as a government, we’re very sensitive. 

 

I think people want to see good works. It think people want to see 

action in areas such as water quality, soil conservation. They 

want to see a government that’s proactive in areas such as 

hazardous chemicals as opposed to being reactive. And my sense 

is that if you do those kinds of things, there is no need to blow 

your own horn. And again, I would submit to you that this 

objective is not in keeping with the legitimate government 

exercise in using taxpayers’ dollars. And again, I would ask you: 

is there a consideration to at least looking at that objective to see 

whether it’s a legitimate one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — And I can assure the hon. member that 

indeed we’ve looked at that objective. I think it’s a very real 

objective, one that I’m proud of, and one that I’m going to 

continue to see that the people are aware of — it’s that this 

government is concerned and that we want a clean environment 

for our people to live in. And we’re going to continue to work to 

that objective. 

 

And I make no apologies to you or to anyone else for the 

government spending money to tell the people what we’re doing 

in the environment, what areas we’re dealing with, areas where 

we can be of assistance to them, and areas where we can indeed 

improve the environment with co-operation. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I don’t have any qualms, Mr. Minister, 

about you utilizing public dollars to inform  

people about important environmental matters. You sent over a 

couple of brochures. One is about drinking water chlorination. 

And I have no quarrels with your department sending out 

information such as that to inform the public about water 

chlorination; about why such a community chlorinate; does 

chlorine affect the quality of our water — and to put that kind of 

information before the public. Neither do I disagree with 

informing the public about things such as the pesticide container 

disposal program, how the program works, about collection sites, 

and the like. 

 

My concern is that that particular objective, or at least that these 

kinds of brochures and that kind of information is readily 

accommodated under your second objective, which is to increase 

the Saskatchewan public’s early awareness of policies and 

programs. But that third objective is something radically 

different. It’s not an objective that we found in 1982 or 1981, but 

it’s an objective that’s very clearly before us now. 

 

And I’m surprised, Mr. Minister, that you would be so callous as 

to publicly state such an objective. And again, I would submit 

that this type of information has nothing to do with that objective. 

That objective is nothing short of a political objective. You say, 

to place before the people of Saskatchewan evidence that your 

government is sensitive. Not that your government is doing 

things, but that your government is sensitive — that what you’re 

doing is you’re blowing your own horn. And, Mr. Minister, I 

would ask you: do you think that it’s a legitimate public exercise 

for you to take taxpayers’ dollars to blow your own horn? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that if the hon. member didn’t find 

an objective in the annual report prior to 1982 that said the 

government was telling the people of Saskatchewan that they 

were indeed sensitive to environmental issues, perhaps the 

government wasn’t sensitive. But this government is sensitive. 

 

And I make no apologies for telling the people what facts are. 

And the fact is that we’re sensitive to environmental issues. We 

want to work with the people to maintain our environment. I see 

nothing wrong at all with us stating that in our annual report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — What you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is that 

it’s legitimate for you — legitimate to take taxpayers’ dollars to 

create a smoke-screen, to let the people of Saskatchewan know 

about all the wonderful things you’re doing, even if there’s an 

absence of the wonderful things that you might be doing. And 

again I would ask you: do you feel that that’s an appropriate use 

of taxpayers’ dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, I’ve answered the question a number 

of times. Maybe I’ll send you a few more pamphlets to show you 

some of the wonderful things we’re doing, and there are a lot of 

them. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — First, you indicated that . . . .you indicated 

that yes, your department, notwithstanding some internal 

structural changes, would in fact continue  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1191 

 

to espouse three objectives as they are enunciated in the 1985-86 

annual report. And those three objectives I read into the record 

earlier. 

 

And I now ask you, Mr. Minister, given that those are the three 

departments for the communications branch — or unit, whatever 

it’s called now — can you tell the House what percentage of 

proposed communications dollars, expenditures, will go for each 

of those three objectives, roughly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t separate out those three items. 

Those three items are listed as a statement of objectives of the 

Department of Environment, and the funding for them is in the 

budget, as you see, and they’re not separated out. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, do you perceive there to be 

a difference between informing people about important 

environmental matters that may affect them, such as chlorination, 

or knowledge about spill report centres and where to report spills 

— because it’s in their interest to know those kinds of things, and 

that’s hardly a question of political debate — do you not 

distinguish between informing people in that way and telling 

people that we’re sensitive to all environmental matters and, as a 

government, we’re doing a good job for you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t see a difference in the two at all. As a 

government, you make decisions that affect every program that 

operates within the government. And as it relates to the 

Department of Environment, all the programs that I’ve sent 

across to you are indications of the areas that we deal with on an 

annual and daily basis to protect the environment and to inform 

the people. 

 

No. I don’t see a difference in the two. The member is trying to 

make an issue out of something that I don’t consider to be an 

issue at all. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, a few days ago in this 

House we got into a line of questioning and answering about the 

use of chemicals around the home. Are you saying now that . . . 

And you indicated that your department would not be doing 

anything because you said, well, it’s a federal responsibility, or 

it’s a Department of Health responsibility.; it’s anyone’s 

responsibility but your responsibility. 

 

Are you saying that it would be legitimate, nevertheless, to tell 

Saskatchewan people, or to use taxpayers’ dollars to tell them, 

well, we are doing wonderful things, and all those, you know . . . 

to tell them that yes, we are concerned, we’re doing things about 

chemicals around the home and so on, even though your 

department is not doing anything. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the hon. member can bring forth any 

advertisements or any evidence that we have done anything like 

that, I would be very surprised. That isn’t what we do. What we 

do is the type of things that I’ve sent across to you that show the 

interest that our department has, and the programs that we’ve put 

in place to meet the needs that they have within our environment. 

 

You won’t find in any of the advertisements that we’re sending 

out, news releases or anything else, anything that will be 

attributed as political advertising by the Department of 

Environment. If you have something, I’d be glad if you would lay 

it on the Table. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, then I again ask you: if 

you’re not doing that kind of thing, and you don’t plan to do that 

kind of thing, then what is the need for that particular objective? 

The things that you’ve been talking about your department doing 

— is doing — in terms of providing information, whether it’s 

pesticide containers, drinking water chlorination, spill report 

centres, and the like — and I thank you for that information — 

why do you need that particular objective? It seems to me that 

you can readily accommodate those kinds of activities and 

dispersal of that kind of information under the second objective. 

Why do you need that particular political objective? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member may say it’s a political 

objective. I don’t agree with the hon. member. It’s not written as 

a political objective. If that’s the way you read it, that’s fine, but 

that was not the intent. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, objectives to me are goals 

that you want to achieve, or it’s a purpose that you strive towards. 

And it seems to me that out of objectives flow activities, things 

that you do. And I now ask you: can you very briefly delineate 

the various activities of your department, or in terms of the 

communication unit, and as they fall within each of those three 

objectives? 

 

Can you just briefly distinguish, in terms of the things that you 

do, which of your activities fall under that first objective, to have 

your department continually apprised of people’s concerns; the 

second objective, to increase Saskatchewan’s early awareness 

policies programs? And what activities do you propose to 

undertake or do you have planned for this year under the third 

objective, to place before the people of Saskatchewan evidence 

that their government is sensitive to environmental issues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would just advise the hon. member that 

each program that we have in place will likely fall under all three 

of those objectives. So there is no breakdown. Those objectives 

go across each of the program that we have in place. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, it’s getting to be a fruitless 

exercise to elicit any information form you on that particular line 

of questioning. I would simply end my remarks by encouraging 

you to take a good, sound look at that objective. I think you will 

find that that particular objective, so badly stated, so callously 

stated, is not an objective that is shared by very many other 

government departments. You will find that most government 

departments do not purport to have any such objective. 

 

Certainly they have objectives about obtaining information from 

the public about what the public’s concerns are. Certainly they 

have objectives about informing the public about things that are 

important to the public. But very few, if any, I would suggest, 

have objectives about telling the people about what a  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1192 

 

wonderful job it is that we do. And that might be done in the 

absence of not doing any wonderful jobs. 

 

There are some real questions that have been raised in this House 

about what kind of job you do in terms of water quality, what 

kinds of jobs you do in terms of acid rain, what kinds of job you 

do in terms of soil conservation. 

 

There’s a real question whether your department is a proactive 

department — that is, it looks for ways in which to improve the 

environment of Saskatchewan — as opposed to being a reactive 

department, which simply sits back, monitors any public outcry 

and, on the basis of that, if you deem it to be a loud enough public 

outcry, then moves into action like a slow, lumbering animal. 

 

And I would suggest to you that you take a serious look at that 

third objective and whether it’s really necessary, whether in fact it 

is not a political objective, and whether that’s the kind of 

objective that a department of the government, which is paid for 

by taxpayers’ dollars, can continue to espouse as an objective 

which encompass a number of activities by your departmental 

officials. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that if you want to beat your own 

horn about what a wonderful job the government is doing, that 

that kind of activity is better paid for by the Progressive 

Conservative Party than the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, I believe I addressed that before, and I 

advised the hon. member that you won’t see anywhere in ads 

from the Department of Environment anything that says the 

Progressive Conservative government . . . 

 

But over the long term, every Department of Environment, 

whether under your government or under this government, has 

told the people what it’s doing, have recommended areas where 

they were going to improve, and I don’t see anything wrong with 

it. That’s all that this really attributes to, is that type of action. It 

won’t be going out and saying that the Progressive Conservative 

government did this. That’s not the intent at all. I think the 

member knows that. He’s trying to raise an issue that I don’t 

believe is a real issue in this House. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, if that’s not your intent, 

why not get rid of the objective? Because you don’t need it. You 

have sufficient latitude, under the first two objectives of your 

department, for the communications unit to accomplish the kinds 

of things that you say you want to accomplish. You have no need 

of that third objective. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We apparently have a difference of opinion 

here. It’s printed in the annual report. It’s very hard to just say I’ll 

get rid of it. So it’s going to have to stay. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, the question that I have for you today relates to 

statements made by the Deputy Premier yesterday, and 

statements found on page 1153 of Hansard in response to  

a question from the hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

regarding the question of turbine purchases by Sask Power and 

the letting of concertina contracts, and also the efficacy of 

Saskatchewan Power in dealing with pollution control measures 

in the province. The Deputy Premier said the following: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the $72 million turbines for the Shand project are 

in no way speculatory in nature. In fact the emission levels that 

Sask Power has been able to achieve in all of its projects, 

including Estevan, Coronach, and the environmental standards 

have always met or exceeded U.S. and Canadian standards. 

And that same level of confidence exists today. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m asking you: was the minister correct in saying 

. . . the Deputy Premier correct in saying that the power plants 

that we have in operation in the province exceed or meet all U.S. 

and Canadian standards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — This is a fairly broad area and very difficult 

to approach. you know, it’s a technical area, as the member 

knows. I’m advised that the ambient air quality is met. Now 

that’s at the ground level. The ambient air quality is met. But the 

stack emissions — we don’t have a quality emissions level to 

meet. We haven’t set a standard At that level. And so therefore 

we don’t have really any figures or facts at our immediate 

disposal to give you a proper answer. 

 

As far as the proposed Shand plant, when it comes into operation, 

it is indicated that it will have the kind of emissions control that 

would meet the American standards. So there are a number of 

things. I’m not sure that I’m answering your questions entirely. 

But if the member has a more direct question I’d appreciate it if 

you would clarify a little and we’ll try and get it. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m trying to clarify it as 

much as possible here. 

 

The Minister, the Deputy Premier, yesterday said that the 

coal-fire generating plants that are in operation in Saskatchewan 

at Boundary dam, and at Poplar River, and so forth, meet or 

exceed U.S. and Canadian standards. Those are, I believe, his 

exact words — “have always met or exceeded U.S. and Canadian 

standards.” 

 

There are certain standards that you are aware of and the air 

pollution control branch of the department are aware of, set by 

the Americans, the Environmental Protection Agency, and also 

set by the federal ministry of the environment. I think it’s a fairly 

straightforward question: is what the Deputy Premier’s saying 

true? Have in fact those emissions always met and exceeded U.S. 

and Canadian standards? Or, in fact, is that not correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the ambient air quality 

emissions have been met. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have a letter here signed by 

. . . it’s from Saskatchewan Power Corporation, the minister in 

charge, and was sent to me on February 5  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1193 

 

of this year. And it’s a . . . if I may take a few moments of your 

time, I want to read the letter. It says: 

 

Dear Mr. Lyons: In response to your request of December 

18, 1986, I am attaching copies of two papers entitled 

“Sulphur Dioxide Removal Coal-Fired Power Stations,” 

and “Large Scale Testings on Low Sulphur Dioxide 

Nitrogen Dioxide Nitrogen Dioxide Burner Behaviour 

Using Limestone and or Calcium Hydroxide” which will 

provide you with a reasonably up-to-date summary of 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation activities relating to the 

use of sorbent injection as an alternative to sulphur dioxide 

scrubbers. 

 

And it goes on and on for a little bit telling about the costs of the 

estimates of installing the scrubbers. In the paper that the Deputy 

Premier sent me, there’s a few interesting comments regarding 

this very question. The title of the paper is the “Sulphur Dioxide 

Removal of Coal-Fired Power Stations”. 

 

I turn to the second page of that paper and on the bottom we find 

the statement of the paper, and again, it’s done by Sask Power 

and the minister in charge of Sask Power, but it relates directly to 

the environment in terms of the emission standards. On this paper 

we see: 

 

When one considers how much sulphur dioxide would have 

to be removed to meet the federal emission guidelines the 

following hypothetical numbers are of interest. Poplar River 

emission 800 ppm; Shand area estimated emission 400 ppm 

(and again that’s an estimate); federal guidelines 320 ppm. 

 

Here we have a paper from Sask Power dealing with emissions 

which are monitored by your department, which clearly outlines 

that there are guide-lines in place and standards in place — 

Canadian standards in place. 

 

Neither Shand nor Estevan nor, I suspect, Poplar River or 

Boundary or any of them, meet these emissions. And yet we have 

the same minister who sent me this paper saying that in fact they 

didn’t meet these Canadian standards, standing up in the House 

saying, well, they’ve always met or exceeded the Canadian 

standards. 

 

Which way is it, Mr. Minister? Is Sask Power right in saying that 

the coal-fired generating stations do not meet the emission 

standards? Or is your department right in saying that you are 

meeting the emission standards? It seems to me that we can’t 

have it both ways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we meet the ambient 

standards, as I mentioned to you earlier. For the emissions at the 

chimney level, we don’t have a standard in Saskatchewan. There 

is a Canadian standard. I’m advised that these plants would not 

meet the Canadian standard. So the Deputy Premier, when he 

spoke yesterday, I believe was referring to the ambient, and we 

would meet that. If he was referring to the ambient, and we would 

meet that. If he was referring to the other, we would not meet it. 

But I believe that he was referring to the ambient standards 

yesterday. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, judging from your answer I  

take it that you haven’t checked with the minister in regarding to 

the meaning of what he did mean. The fact of the matter is that 

the particular . . . the stuff that causes the acid rain that comes out 

of the smoke-stacks does not meet Canadian standards. 

 

I also suggest, sir, that in light of what information I have from 

the Environmental Protection Agency in the United States that it 

doesn’t meet the standards set forward by the American 

Environmental Protection Agency. That in fact the state of 

Montana has raised on several instances the whole question of 

production of acid rain. And senior politicians from Manitoba 

have raised with the Saskatchewan government the whole 

question of the production of acid rain here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I find it strange, I find it strange that the minister would in 

fact stand in his place and say the . . . the Deputy Premier will say 

that they’ve always met or exceeded these standards. I think by 

your own admission that, in fact, that the minister is in error on 

this matter and that he probably should admit so to the House. 

 

I want to turn . . . and relating to this whole question, to the 

question of the clean air Act in your proposed clean air Act. Are 

you proposing, sir, that in the Act that you are to introduce in the 

House, that in fact the emission standards for coal-fired 

generating plants in Saskatchewan will have to meet recognized 

Canadian and U.S. standards in their particular emission, both 

ambient air quality standards as well as the emission standards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member has talked on two or three 

issues in his last question. I believe that when we read Hansard 

and when my staff read Hansard today, that the interpretation 

they had was that we were dealing with likely the ambient air 

levels, emission level, and that’s the one . . . like it isn’t clear 

when you read what was said in the Hansard which would have 

been referred to. That’s why I told you, if it’s the ambient air 

level, we do meet, but stack emissions we would not meet. And 

in Saskatchewan we don’t basically have a stack emission level. 

 

The new clean air Act when it comes in, is enabling legislation 

but it would not specifically mention power stations in the Act. 

That would be done through regulation. And at this point the 

regulations are not drafted. So I couldn’t give you a definitive 

answer. They would likely impact, but we haven’t drafted them 

as yet. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well I wonder, sir, if I could ask you the . . . I 

wonder if I could ask you whether or not in drafting the 

regulation it’s your intentions or the . . . or are you getting advice 

from the air pollution branch of the department to draw those 

regulations in conformity with existing U.S. and Canadian 

standards, particularly the federal standards for a particulate 

emission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the decision is not finalized 

at this point. It’s something that we’ll certainly keep in mind. But 

the decision of whether that’s the route to go and what the costs 

may be to the power corporation, some of these things, we 

haven’t looked at in enough detail really to make a firm decision. 

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1194 

 

The clean air Act will come into force but then we will have to 

negotiate with industries who hadn’t been under the Act before. 

You know, anybody that was in place prior to 1976 isn’t licensed 

under the existing Act. Under the new Act they will be required 

to come in under it. But they will have to be given some 

opportunity for a time of five years or whatever to bring their 

plants into compliance with the Act. 

 

So there will be a lot of work to be done. And we will be talking 

with Sask Power and with all industries within the province to try 

and bring them under. But that type of regulation is not at this 

time drafted and I couldn’t give the member a definitive answer 

today. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think I can judge from 

your answer that you intend to introduce some kind of 

“grandfather” so-called legislation that would allow those 

industries to meet certain standards. But it’s interesting when you 

mention that in fact that you haven’t had the negotiations with 

Sask Power or haven’t completed the negotiations with Sask 

Power. 

 

When Sask Power put forward its environmental impact 

statement in regards to Shand and the expected particulate 

emissions and the smoke-stack emissions at Shand, was there any 

consultation with the Department of the Environment as to what 

the requirements would be or will be in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised, as it relates to the proposed 

Shand plant, there have been discussions between our department 

and Sask Power Corporation. And our department has given them 

indications of the levels that they would like them to meet at the 

time that the new plant would come on stream. Whether or not 

that is in place, I couldn’t tell you. That environmental impact 

study is being reviewed, and I’m not even sure that this particular 

area would be covered in that. But if it is, I’m not aware of it yet. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess that . . . That’s 

interesting that you’d say that emissions from the Shand power 

plant — sulphur dioxide emissions which cause acid rain — 

wouldn’t be included in the environmental impact study 

statement. Is that what you said? I mean, is that the intent of your 

statement? Because I find it totally incredulous that it wouldn’t 

be. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I want to advise the member that there are 

some figures in the design proposals in the environmental impact 

assessment. But my staff advise me that they haven’t, up to this 

point, compared those with the requirements proposed for the 

new legislation. So whether they meet or not, I couldn’t even give 

you that answer at this time. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have presented an 

environmental impact statement dealing with the Shand power 

plant. The major environmental impact which comes from 

coal-fire generating power plants, everybody knows, is the 

amount of sulphur and nitrogen emissions, particularly sulphur 

emissions, in regards to the whole  

question of acid rain. And that the first things that would appear 

to me that your department would look at are not necessarily the 

design parameters, but in fact what the target figures for 

emissions from the power plant would be. 

 

You said earlier on today in this questioning, that the department 

has given figures or has suggested figures or put forward figures 

from your department, from, and I assume it’s from the air 

pollution branch, to Sask Power. Are the figures that they put 

forward, are those figures in conformity with federal guide-lines? 

Or are they, in fact, higher than federal guide-lines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the figures that were 

discussed with the air quality branch and Sask Power were the 

Canadian standards — the federal standards. Now my staff advise 

me that they haven’t reached that stage of their review of the 

environmental impact study, yet. It’s a massive document. It 

takes some time. You don’t just browse through one of these; you 

work through it. And they aren’t at the stage yet where they have 

really reviewed what Sask Power is proposing in that area and 

what was requested through the air quality division. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, was the statement given to you in 

the department, in November of 1986? Is that the date that you 

received the document? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we had an initial document 

in December of ‘86, that that was reviewed, and many of the 

areas that we wanted additional information on were sent back to 

the power corporation, and they are doing the work that was 

required. The initial document is there, but we haven’t received 

the information that will bring it up to date with the requests that 

have been made by the department. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, was one of the requests made by the 

department having to do with, in fact, the kind of pollution 

standards and emissions that would be coming from the stacks at 

Shand, or the proposed levels of sulphur dioxides emissions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised by the department staff that 

there were a lack of clarity in the initial document as to what 

could be achieved. It wasn’t spelled out. So they’ve sent it back. 

They’re asking for that kind of clarity, and it still isn’t back to us. 

They’re waiting for that information, and I believe it’s important 

information to them. 

 

So they can’t really tell you, at this point, whether or not the plant 

would meet the requirements or it wouldn’t until that additional 

information is made available to them. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, about five minutes ago, or three 

minutes ago, you just said that the department hadn’t gone 

through the document, worked through the document, to deal 

with the questions of emission standards. 

 

Now you’re telling me that, in fact, they had, as long ago as back 

in December, gone through the documents, found out that Sask 

Power’s estimates of the emission standards were unclear, 

imprecise, and that they weren’t  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1195 

 

going to meet the standards, and that the department sent it back. 

Excuse me. You didn’t say that they weren’t going to meet the 

standards; you said that they were unclear, imprecise, and not 

clear enough for your department. 

 

I find it harder and harder to get, sir, what I consider a straight 

answer, in terms of questions of chronology and when things 

occurred and how they occurred and why things are occurring, 

when it comes to the whole question of the Shand power plant. 

and I’m not getting straight answers, I’ll put it that way. I don’t 

believe we’re getting straight answers in this. 

 

And I think we’re not getting straight answers in this for the 

reasons that the Deputy Premier outlined yesterday in his answers 

to the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. I want to quote those 

to you, Mr. Minister, because it brings into question, it brings into 

question your very independence as the Minister of Environment 

and your credibility in terms of giving answers here as that 

minister — your independence in terms of protecting the 

environment and putting what you, yourself, said was a high 

priority, and that is the long-term protection of the environment in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you, how can you sit here, or stand here, 

and reconcile the kinds of statements made by the Deputy 

Premier in regards to your role as minister and, in fact, the 

perception of your independence? I just want to read this to you, 

sir, to remind you what the Deputy Premier said about you 

yesterday. And it’s on page 1153 and 1154 of Hansard. The 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale asked a supplementary 

question to the Deputy Minister. Now I want to read it. It says: 

 

Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary to the Deputy Premier. 

Let me ask the Deputy Premier this question: what happens, 

Mr. Deputy Premier, if, at the end of the environmental hearing 

process, the Minister of the Environment and the Department 

of the Environment t says that the project at Shand does not go 

ahead because it does not meet the environmental standards? 

What do you do with the $72 million worth of equipment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . 

 

And I’m quoting from Hansard, I’m not using, Mr. Chairman, 

the member’s name; I’m quoting from Hansard. It says: 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the event, in the very outside possibility that 

the very hypothetical situation might occur, I suppose the 

first option as the member says, is to get rid of the minister. 

And that’s fair. 

 

“To get rid of the minister. And that’s fair.” That, Mr. Minister, is 

how the Deputy Premier of this promise views your role — views 

your role. And if you remember, Mr. Minister, at the start of these 

estimates, one of the wild allegations, as you called it — one of 

the wild allegations, as you called it — that I supposedly made, 

was that in fact  

your department was being used as a political tool by the gang of 

five that runs the government here. 

 

I think that we have got here, Mr. Minister . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s only four. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — The gang of four. Yes, it’s only four now. 

 

I believe, Mr. Minister, that out of the words of the Deputy 

Premier himself, that that so-called wild allegation is backed up, 

that he says here in this House that he will fire you — that he will 

fire you if, in fact, the environmental impact statement and the 

assessment process done by your department is not favourable to 

the Shand project. 

 

I believe, sir, that what you’re saying in terms of the department 

and the department officials who are fighting for clean air . . .And 

I will grant them that. The department officials are, in fact, and I 

know they are fighting for clean air standards for Saskatchewan. 

And it’s all a credit to them because they’re a hard working group 

of people who are working under very adverse circumstances, not 

the least of which is the threats by the Deputy Premier to toe the 

line to make sure that this project goes ahead, that, in fact, that 

they’re trying to do this kind of work. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister, to you is this: the Deputy Premier has 

said the $72 million is committed for the turbines, and that 

Saskatchewan has made that kind of committed . . . committed 

that kind of money to the Marubeni-Hitachi corporation. 

 

He says — and this is the Deputy Premier — on the one hand he 

says to the Assembly, well, we’ve always met and exceeded 

Canadian and U.S. standards, and by his own admission, by his 

own letters, in writing, produces a document which says to the 

contrary. You have said here on this estimates that there is a 

problem vis-a-vis your department and Sask Power in terms of 

setting particulate emission standards for the Shand power plant. 

 

And I would suggest, sir, that one of the reasons why that has 

been so is that the limestone injection tests which have been 

carried out in other power stations have not, in fact, been carried 

out according to the regulations or the original script as laid 

down. 

 

But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, how can you stand here? 

Where is your credibility on environmental matters, when the 

Deputy Premier of this province says to you: you toe the line on 

Shand, or you’re down the road? Tell us that — where your 

credibility is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member has made a nice speech. I’m 

not particularly concerned or worried that I’m down the road, if 

that’s the case. But I can tell you this: that when we go through 

the environmental impact assessment process, that project is 

going to have to meet the environmental requirements set down 

by my department. If it doesn’t, it won’t get clearance from me. If 

I go down the road as the minister, that’s another matter. But my 

job will be done. And if that means that I lose the job of 

environment minister, so be it. But I can tell you it won’t hurt my 

integrity. My integrity is there, and I have a job to do, and I’ll do 

that job. 

 

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1196 

 

But I think the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has also got a 

job to do. They have to provide power for the province. And there 

is a time schedule when we’re going to need that additional 

power. So if they don’t build the Shand plant in its current 

location, they may go ahead and build something different. They 

will still need generators, so I have no problem with the decision 

by the Deputy Premier that there was need to order the generators 

at this time. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate your sincerity in 

the matter. I happen to personally — and I want to say this 

publicly — I happen to personally believe that your department is 

doing the very best it can to protect the environment, but that it’s 

working under extremely difficult and adverse conditions — 

adverse conditions exemplified in these estimates by the 

continuing cut-back in personnel, and the continuing cut-back in 

funding for your department. 

 

And I think it’s deliberate. I think it’s deliberate on the part of 

your government to, in fact, limit the role of your department, 

precisely because of the political objectives outlined by the 

Deputy Premier. You know, he may have been only half kidding 

when he said that. But I don’t think so. I don’t think so. I think 

that he was serious, and that was just the Deputy Premier’s 

cynical way and cynical manner, which he is constantly sort of 

exhibiting in this House, of saying, so what, so what! Because it’s 

a political decision, and it’s a political decision, and that’s what 

we’ve been trying to bring to your attention, that, in fact, that 

decisions made by yourselves have been based on political 

decisions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

(1630) 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, it’s fun to make light of 

the situation. I don’[t think the people of Saskatchewan think it’s 

very funny when they see 600 or $720 million of their money put 

into the Premier’s constituency as a political plum for the Estevan 

constituency when, in fact, we see hundreds of dental technicians 

being put out on the road; when we see, in fact, cut-backs to 

education; when we see senior citizens who are being denied 

adequate health care by that government. I don’t think it’s funny, 

the fact that they want to make it a political decision including 

politicizing the Department of the Environment and politicizing 

your role and publicly threatening your job that if you don’t go 

along with those political decisions. 

 

I don’t think it’s one darn bit funny, quite frankly, Mr. Minister. 

And I hope that you don’t think it’s funny. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — But Mr. Minister, you haven’t answered the 

question which I posed, which was this: the Deputy Premier has 

said that they have committed $72 million of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers’ money for the purchase of turbines for a project which 

is not even definite. According to your own words, that the 

possibility certainly exists that the project will be turned down 

and that you will stake your credibility on the project, and you 

will stake, in fact, your integrity on this project. 

 

Let’s ask it this way, Mr. Minister, do you think it’s a prudent 

financial move for people to commit resources to projects before 

environmental impact statements have been assessed by your 

department and approved by your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t believe that it’s a problem if the Sask 

Power wants to order generators. That’s their choice. But they 

didn’t come to me and say, look, we’re going to order generators; 

you have to approve the project. By no means. I’m going to make 

the decision on the basis of the environmental impact assessment 

through the regular process. If the plant goes ahead, it will go 

ahead because the environmental impact assessment and the 

corrective measures that my department proposes are met. If that 

doesn’t happen, we won’t license. And that’s very simple. 

 

But I believe that Sask power will continue to work very 

carefully and closely with the department, and it has shown that 

through the work that is done over the past short while. 

 

I believe that they’ll meet the requirements and we will likely be 

able to give approval. But that process is not near complete yet. 

We’re going to work through it. There’s going to be the 30-day 

public period, as I told you before. And when all of these things 

are finished, then we’ll make the decision of whether or not we 

can license the Shand plant — and only then. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — The question I asked you was this: as a general 

rule, as a guide-line for actions undertaken by yourself, as 

Minister of the Environment, would you advise people who are 

going to spend money to develop things in this province, to first 

of all — before they commit any funds to that project — to obtain 

an environmental assessment from your department and 

ministerial approval from your department. As a general rule, do 

you think that’s good advice to the people of Saskatchewan/ 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — That would be very foolish advice. To begin 

with, no one can come to the point of doing an environmental 

impact study on a project without spending money. They have to 

spend money. They have to have a lot of the design work 

complete before they can even bring forward enough evidence to 

indicate what they’re doing and what impact it’s going to have on 

the environment. 

 

So they must spend money. And it’s not within my parameters as 

a Minister of Environment, to tell any proponent that they can or 

cannot spend. That’s their choice. If they spend the money 

unwisely they may loose it. But that’s not my responsibility. My 

responsibility is to see that the environmental side of it is met, 

and that we will continue to do. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, just in response to that 

particular assertion. Why was it in the case of Paul Meagher and 

Boris Mamchur that you, in fact, had the department contact 

them, or had contacts between the proponents of the Redberry 

Lake development and your department — prior to any money 

being spent on the development or any vast funds of money being 

spend on the development — and advised them not to go ahead 

with this development until a ministerial approval had  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1197 

 

been met? Is there, as we have said before and will continue to 

say, one standard for the Mamchur-Meaghers of the world, and 

another standard for the Government of Saskatchewan, and 

another standard for the people like Dave Longpré? 

 

Is that what you’re tying to say, that there are no general 

guide-lines, that there are no general guide-lines for developing 

developments here in Saskatchewan; that in fact it’s pot luck, and 

it all depends who you are and where, in fact, you’re going to 

develop the project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Absolutely no. I’m not saying that. I haven’t 

said it and I don’t intend to say it. 

 

What I did say to Meagher and Mamchur was that they must do 

an environmental impact study before the development can 

proceed. I’m saying the same to the Shand plant. They must do an 

environmental impact study before the development can proceed. 

 

Now in both cases I would expect considerable engineering work 

was done. Many drafts of what they proposed to do at Redberry 

Lake have been put in place. But they didn’t do the 

environmental impact study. They must do that study if they want 

to go ahead with the project. That’s an absolute requirement 

under the Act. 

 

The same applied to Shand. They must do an environmental 

study, and they have. And in areas where we felt that they needed 

to do more work on that environmental impact study, we sent it 

back and said you must do more work. 

 

But if either one of them want to buy products that they may put 

on site in the future, that’s their choice. I don’t tell them whether 

they can go and buy lumber, or whether they can buy steel, or 

what they can buy. That’s their choice. But I do tell them that 

they must do the study and until the study is approved, they 

cannot be licensed to proceed with the project. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I agree with you that, in fact, 

that proponents of a development should be told that they have 

got to do the environmental impact study, and I assume have it 

done and approved before they go ahead with any development, 

because that was your position that you’ve outlined. 

 

In November of 1986 . . . pardon me, December of 1986, you told 

us that in fact the environmental impact statement from Sask 

Power was received by your department. When were the turbines 

ordered? When, in fact, was the development work proceeded by 

your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I didn’t order any turbines in this department 

— haven’t spent a nickel. So what Sask Power does, if they want 

to buy turbines and have them in the backyard, that’s their 

business. I did not make that decision. But until we give 

clearance, there can be no installation and no construction on the 

Shand site. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been 

listening to this aspect of the debate with some interest. And I 

want to put it to the hon. minister, whether or not he  

would agree with me that there is a large difference between a 

situation which involves the government and you as Minister of 

the Environment on the one hand, and a private project on the 

other hand — as one circumstance in contrast to the situation that 

the member from Rosemont is raising, and that is the 

circumstance where you are in effect, by this circumstance of the 

$72 million purchase, caught in a position of almost conflict of 

interest. 

 

Here you are, sitting as a member of the cabinet, charged with the 

responsibility of protecting the environment and the appropriate 

legislation, and at the same time sitting as a member of the 

cabinet that passes the order in council, agreeing to expend $72 

million. Now isn’t that in a different order and a different 

magnitude and a different situation than in any other 

circumstance involving a private developer? Would not the 

minister at least go that far and agree with this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member continually raises the $72 

million order that was placed by Sask Power — Sask Power. And 

I believe the minister responsible gave you an answer to your 

question yesterday. The lead time required to put in place that 

kind of a generator, you just don’t go and order it today and get it 

tomorrow. It takes considerable time. So an order has been 

placed. 

 

I don’t see that I am placed in a conflict of interest at all. I have a 

responsibility to administer the legislation that covers the 

department and the environmental assessment process. We will 

continue to follow that, follow it to the letter, and if after we go 

through we can give approval to the Shand project, that will be 

done. But if for some reason we cannot give approval, that will 

also be done. So I am not in a conflict of interest. 

 

The government has many things that it must do in order to meet 

deadlines. And this is one that the Deputy Premier felt he must 

follow, and has done. I see nothing wrong with it. That’s a 

process that has been in place for many, many years. The power 

corporation is a fairly large corporation that makes many 

decisions through a board of directors, and that was one of the 

decisions that that board made. 

 

So no, I don’t see it as a conflict of interest for me, and I’ll 

continue to do the job as the Minister of environment. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I ask the minister to consider 

carefully his last words in this regard. He would have the House 

believe, he would have me believe, that somehow the $72 million 

worth of purchasing of the turbines was an act of the Deputy 

Premier and the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, to which you, sir, and other members of the 

Executive Council had no say. 

 

He knows that to be not the case. He knows that as a member of 

the Executive Council, when an order in council is passed, it is 

passed by the members of the Executive Council, of which he is a 

member. He knows that when Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

comes forward with an expenditure of $72 million, it now has a 

large fiscal stake, economic stake. Let’s forget about all the other 

pollution and environmental concerns in  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1198 

 

making sure that that project is in fact completed. 

 

The result is that it puts you, sir, if I may submit, into the position 

of a conflict of interest. You have the unfortunate and sad 

position of wearing two hats, which in effect put you in a 

contradictory place. The one hat is Minister of the Environment, 

and in the other hat as minister of the Executive Council 

defending the $72 million expenditure. You try to defend it on the 

very thin explanation that you still have your theoretical powers 

to turn down the project. Theoretically, that’s correct. 

 

But the perception is all wrong. The perception and the optics is 

all wrong. If you are to tell the people of Saskatchewan and 

outside that your process of environmental hearing is in effect 

independent, that you’re going to act in the best interests of the 

environment, in the best interests of your mandate, you must be 

free of any perceptions that you also have — a hidden agenda or 

a hidden economic concern — of which the Deputy Premier has 

saddled around your neck and the department’s neck in the $72 

million purchase. 

 

I realize that there are sometimes competing aims that hit a 

cabinet table. Everybody understands that. But surely, would not 

the minister agree with me that the appropriate way that this 

matter should have been handled is for the environmental impact 

process to have gone through its normal course? If it had cleared, 

as the Deputy Premier wishes, and as you think and say that it 

must clear, thereafter make the $72 million purchase. Wouldn’t 

that have been the proper way to go? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s very difficult to say what’s proper in this 

circumstance. I believe that there are responsibilities that a 

cabinet has. One of those responsibilities is to see that the power 

needs of our province are met. That decision is the decision that 

was taken by the power corporation board of directors, that in 

order to be able to be on stream with the power in the time frame 

required, that they could not wait, otherwise they couldn’t have 

the generators and deliver the power in time. So they made that 

decision, and I believe that it was a decision that was essential. 

 

It would be nice, I suppose, if we could always sit back and wait, 

and it would be nice if as a cabinet minister you only had one 

narrow area to look at. It would be much simpler. But that isn’t 

the way the system works. But at no time have I been told by the 

Deputy Premier, by the Premier, or by anyone else that this 

decision affects the way the I must deal with the environmental 

impact study for the Shand project. They all know that the study 

is there and that it must go through that process. If at the end of 

the process it doesn’t meet the requirements, then it won’t get the 

go-ahead. And I tell you that quite sincerely. It will not get the 

go-ahead if there’s a problem. 

 

(1645) 

 

But I believe that problem can be worked through and a 

reasonable decision made. Our job as a department is to protect 

the environment, but not to destroy the economy of the province 

in the process; to try and work co-operatively with the province. 

And I believe the department has done a good job over the years 

and we  

have the same staff in place basically that were there when you 

were in government. And they’ve done a good job and I think are 

continuing to do that kind of a job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make two points, if I 

can, with respect to the minister’s last comments. First of all, I 

don’t know if this is quite appropriate to your estimates, but since 

you have raised it, I feel obligated to make a response very 

briefly. 

 

I say, with the greatest of respect to the Minister of Environment, 

that he is dead wrong if he’s asking me to accept the notion that 

somehow Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s timetable for the 

purchase of these turbines did not take into account the 

requirement of going through the environmental impact 

assessment hearing process before the purchase was actually 

made. I just don’t believe that. 

 

I believe of a project of this magnitude and the importance, in any 

corporate structure, there is a detailed schedule and time line for 

financing, for the purchasing of equipment, for getting all of the 

regulatory requirements completed, making sure all the 

provisions of the laws are complied with — all of that is done in a 

corporation way. They know, Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

knows, what the law is, and they know that they must adhere to 

the law, and they must have surely taken that into account in the 

planning. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Minister, for you to suggest — if I may say so 

with the greatest of respect — or imply, that somehow there 

might have been a circumstance or a set of situations which 

obligated the Deputy Premier and the power corporation board to 

move ahead and gamble with $72 million of the taxpayers’ 

money. It think, belies the corporate fact in the way that it works 

in the real world. So I don’t accept that as an operation. But we’ll 

raise that when we come up to Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

in Crown corporation and other appropriate estimates. I don’t 

belabour that. 

 

But the second point which I do wish to make speaks to your 

department and to you particularly, sir. I don’t mean to be 

patronizing of you, and I say that all of us, I think, in this side of 

the House,,,, believe that you do as good a job as Minister of 

Environment as the rest of the members of the Executive Council 

would permit you to do. 

 

But I say to you, as a second point, also with as much seriousness 

as I can muster, that what this has done is it has impaired the 

credibility of you and the department because the impression that 

is left is either one of two. Either there is a mishmash of 

objectives . . . This government does not have its priorities 

straight — Saskatchewan Power Corporation willy-nilly 

purchases and then says, we’ll take a Russian roulette chance. 

Either it’s a mishmash of objectives, the kind of way that you’ve 

described it. Either we ship back the $72 million worth of 

equipment, or I resign. 

 

Those are the choices, that kind of Russian roulette choice, which 

is the way it has been described in response to my learned friend 

from Rosemont, your  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1199 

 

responses were. Either that kind of an impression or, what I think 

is even more serious, an impression that even if all of the 

environmental impact process is diligently followed, even if it is, 

including public hearings, and Shand is totally in compliance 

with the law, the perception is left that, because of the $72 million 

obligation, financial obligation, around the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, and therefore around your necks, and therefore 

around our necks, the perception that that really was the operative 

fact. 

 

You have left yourself, I say with the greatest respect, exposed to 

the perception that justice is not being done. And I’m not here to 

preach, but I firmly believe in the maxim that not only must 

justice be done, but what’s as important is that it must seem to be 

done. It must appear to be being done. 

 

And it is not being appeared to be done here, because your 

colleague, the Deputy Premier, has acted on impulse, or if not on 

impulse, has acted in total disregard of what the regulatory and 

statutory requirements are, thereby jeopardizing your credibility 

and your department’s credibility. And I, for one, object to that 

kind of an approach that could be taken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, and say to 

the Deputy Premier, that either way this is a very shoddy 

situation. It’s either handled, mismanaged badly in the power 

corporation scheme of things — as I say, we’ll view that 

otherwise — or in the alternative, if it hasn’t been shoddily 

managed, the result is one which has struck a body-blow to your 

credibility and the department’s credibility. 

 

I don’t know how you can get out of this situation now. I don’t 

know how you can do it. I think you’re almost obligated to the 

full course of public hearings, even if they aren’t warranted with 

respect to Shand. You’re probably obligated to extra diligent 

pursuit of all the environmental standards, even if they aren’t 

warranted. You’re probably going to have to bend over 

backwards to show that you aren’t tied by that $72 million 

purchase. 

 

But the whole, sad, sorry, net result of this episode is, 

unfortunately, that the credibility of this province’s determination 

to stand for clean air and clean water and clean environment has 

been struck a body-blow by your colleagues around the cabinet 

table. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, the hon. member has made quite a 

speech, and he’s noted for some of those. 

 

I want to advise the hon. member that the information I have just 

received indicates that when Coronach was built, at the time that 

you were government, that the turbines were ordered before the 

environmental impact assessment was even filed. 

 

So the member is sort of shooting from the hip today, without all 

the facts in his pocket, and I think you maybe should go back and 

check your records and see what you  

did to the Minister of Environment at that time. Perhaps you did 

exactly the same thing to the Minister of the Environment then 

that you’re saying the government today is doing. 

 

I don’t believe that the ordering of these turbines is going to have 

an effect on the way my department’s decision will be made. This 

staff have worked through environmental impact studies before. 

They are a very careful group of people, and they’ve worked 

through continuously and have done a good job. So if it was all 

right when you were government, I suppose it’s still all right. 

Perhaps you should consider that. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I consider it; I consider it so 

long as it says for me to say to you; takes for me to say to you, 

that if that took place . . . I don’t know if it did or didn’t. I don’t 

admit it; I don’t deny it. Frankly, I don’t care. I don’t care. I tell 

you that in 1987 — in 1987 — you and your government ought 

to be building on previous governments and improving on that. 

 

You can come back to 1982. You can live in the past. You can 

relish all that you want in those operations. But I tell you, Mr. 

Minister, and I tell the Deputy Premier in charge of 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, that what has happened here 

has been something which I think has destroyed — not destroyed, 

but has greatly affected your credibility as Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

You haven’t got either the ability or the strength or the courage to 

stand up in 1987, to tell that minister, and that power corporation, 

we are going to go through the entire process. Either that, or 

you’re content to sort of, presumably, accept these kinds of 

assurances that somehow Marubeni will take the $72 million of 

turbines back and put it on a shelf, or do whatever else is 

required. Or we’re going to go back to 1982 or 1980 or 1979. 

 

You can go back as far as you want. I’m living in 1987. I’m not 

living in the year 2001. I’m not living in the year 1981. Your 

children and grandchildren aren’t. And I tell you that the sooner 

your government begins to look forward, not back, the moment 

your government starts dealing with today’s problems, not back, 

the better off we’ll all be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I can well imagine that the hon. member 

doesn’t want to look back to 1981 and see that when he was 

Deputy Premier the power corporation did the same thing that it’s 

done now, is to address the fact that you cannot buy generators 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the hon. member would like to 

ask a question, why doesn’t he get on his feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I will. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, the opportunity is there, but maybe let 

me answer this one. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s on shaky ground. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not on shaky ground at all. And I advise 

the hon. member that the power corporation, when it was building 

Coronach, saw the same issue that  

  



 

July 15, 1987 

1200 

 

it’s seeing today, is that in order to bring those generators on 

stream, at the time that it must, in order to meet the needs of the 

people of Saskatchewan for power supply, they had to order them 

early. It’s a long-term contract that takes many, many months to 

fill. You realize at that time, in order to meet the needs of the 

people, that you must allow the power corporation to place the 

order. 

 

That’s exactly what the power corporation has done now, is to 

place the order. We haven’t any generators in the backyard yet. 

It’s going to take a long time before we have those generators. 

The power corporation will not have spent the dollars until long 

after this environmental impact assessment is complete. It will 

take many, many months for them . . . 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 


