













































October 26, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 26, 1987 

 

 

3531 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, before the 

legislature broke at 5, I was asking you why you felt it necessary 

to give the corporations such an unfettered discretion to terminate 

an employee. 

 

Mr. Minister, any time, any place, a discretion as unfettered as 

what is contained in this legislation should offend people. At this 

time, given the history of the brief but very turbulent history of 

labour-management problems in SaskTel, it’s particularly 

offensive. 

 

Mr. Minister, the existing section 10 states: 

 

An employee who: 

 

(a) in the opinion of the corporation is not physically or 

otherwise qualified for the requirements of his 

employment: 

 

(b) has attained . . . (55 years of age); and 

 

(c) has served at least ten continuously; 

 

may be retired at the option of the corporation . . . 

 

The section which you draft, that, Mr. Minister, while it retains a 

discretion in the corporation, does provide a subjective criteria for 

the exercise of the corporation’s discretion. Your section simply 

provides an unfettered discretion. Didn’t like the . . . if you didn’t 

like the politics of the person, if you didn’t like the fact that they 

were engaged in union activities, this section would be broad 

enough to retire them. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister. I ask you again why you didn’t stick with 

the subjective criteria, but still I think perfectly adequate discretion 

in the former section — why you felt it necessary to give yourself 

an unfettered discretion to terminate employees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I believe that the hon. member is putting 

a rather unfair and improper interpretation on the legislation. I 

would ask him, as a lawyer, to take a little closer look at the 

amendments because one can very strongly argue that there is less 

discretion under the amendments than there is under the existing 

legislation. 

 

And let’s take a look at what existing section 10 says. It says that: 

 

An employee who: 

 

(a) in the opinion of the corporation is not physically or 

otherwise qualified for the requirements of his 

employment; 

 

Now nothing would be more broad than to say, “or otherwise”. 

Now that’s as broad a term as you can get. The amendments that 

we are presenting, in fact, it can be interpreted as being much 

more restrictive because it eliminates the allegations that the hon. 

member says about politics when, where it is in the opinion of the 

corporation: 

 

. . . that the employee is not able to meet the requirements of 

(his) employment . . .  

 

And that means that the individual is not able to do the job, 

whereas the “or otherwise” which is in the existing legislation is, 

as I say, much more broad. 

 

Secondly, there is an opinion that to limit it physically may be 

calling out physical handicapped as being a reason for dismissal, 

and that is of itself questionable. 

 

I think in fairness those that are to look at the legislation and put a 

fair interpretation upon it, the real question and the big change is 

the age. Under the previous legislation: 

 

(a) in the opinion of the corporation (if the employee) is not 

physically or otherwise qualified for the requirements of 

his employment; 

 

(b) has attained the age of fifty-five years; 

 

(c) and has served at least 10 years continuously; 

 

The big change is that that age 55 has been deleted and it’s now 

based on, one, is the employee not able to meet the requirements 

of his employment; and secondly, has the employee served at least 

15 years continuously with the corporation. 

 

So I suggest to the hon. member that the phraseology and 

descriptions in the old section 10 can be interpreted much, much 

more broadly than the narrow restrictions in section 10 subsection 

(1) of the proposed Bill. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s just not accurate. 

The word “qualified” does provide an objective criteria; 

“requirements” do not. The phrase “otherwise qualified” provides 

an objective criteria by which people may be measured. A 

statement that an employee is not able to meet the requirements of 

his employment, presumably that’s defined by the employer. The 

only meaning that could be given to the word “requirements” is 

those requirements set out by the employer. You thus have a 

situation where there is no objective criteria. 

 

Mr. Minister, if that was your objective, why didn’t you just repeal 

section (b) and substitute 15 for 10 in subsection (c) and leave it 

alone? Why did you have to give yourself a broad discretion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I go back to the physically disabled part; 

that’s a prohibited ground of discrimination. I’m surprised that you 

would want this still in the legislation. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I ask as well, why the minimum 

allowance set out in section 16 subsection (3) 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3532 

 

 

was repealed? Why did you feel it desirable to take out that 

minimum allowance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The reason for that is to bring it in line with 

section 8 of the Sask Power legislation so it’s the same. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Why was it felt desirable to bring it in line 

with section 8 of the Sask Power Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The only argument we have for that is 

consistency with the Sask Power legislation. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Why is consistency with the Sask Power 

legislation thought to be desirable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I think it fair to say that, given the 

environment, that there is a fair degree of understanding between 

the employees of both corporations as to what’s going on with the 

other corporation. 

 

I mean . . . Let me tell this to the hon. member. We would have 

been quite satisfied to change section 10 and eliminate subclause 

(b), and changed (c) to (b) but with 15 years, except for the 

concern that we have with regard to the reference to the physical 

handicap, and the rest is frankly not particularly important, I 

gather, and that consistency is the sole argument for the change — 

the latter change. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, how many people were actually 

retired in the last year under your program? How many people 

from SaskTel were actually retired? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ll have to get the information precisely, 

but I’m advised that probably a dozen — somewhere in that range. 

We’ll have to get you the information. Keep in mind that there 

were two early retirement programs, so a lot of people took 

advantage of those. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not going to keep this 

here all evening. Suffice it to say that I think this offends one of 

the fundamental principles of drafting legislation, and that is 

legislation should not give to the public service or, in this case, 

employees of SaskTel, any broader discretion than is necessary. 

 

I think it’s a fundamental and important rule in drafting legislation 

that governments should not give themselves any broader 

discretion than they need to administer the programs. And so far 

as possible, the rights of public, in this case the employees, ought 

to be preserved and enshrined in legislation so far as is possible. 

By giving the corporation an unfettered discretion, you have either 

given the management a very significant weapon in their ongoing 

quarrel with the employees of the corporation or you’ve 

unnecessarily offended them. 

 

If you never intended to use it and it was a bit of bad drafting, then 

you’ve offended them unnecessarily and frightened them 

unnecessarily. If you do intend to use it, Mr. Minister, then it’s a 

truly frightening exercise of regulatory and bureaucratic power. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1915) 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Bill No. 42 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the Enactment 

of The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill be now read a third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title.  

 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to repeal The Public Utilities Review 

Commission Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill be now read a third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

(1930) 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 22 

 

Muller Meiklejohn 

Duncan Martin 

McLeod Toth 

Andrew McLaren 

Berntson Hopfner 

Lane Petersen 

Smith Swenson 

Maxwell Baker 

Schmidt Gleim 

Hodgins Neudorf 

Klein Kopelchuk 

 

Nays — 17 

 

Shillington Goulet 

Koskie Hagel 

Tchorzewski Lyons 

Thompson Calvert 

Upshall Lautermilch 

Simard Smart 

Solomon Koenker 

Atkinson Goodale 

Anguish  

 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3533 

 

 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Public Utilities Review Commission Repeal Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

(1959) 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 25 

 

Muller Meiklejohn 

Duncan Martin 

McLeod Toth 

Andrew McLaren 

Berntson Hopfner 

Lane Petersen 

Taylor Swenson 

Smith Baker 

Muirhead Gleim 

Maxwell Neudorf 

Schmidt Kopelchuk 

Hodgins Saxinger 

Klein  

 

Nays — 17 

 

Shillington Goulet 

Koskie Hagel 

Tchorzewski Lyons 

Thompson Calvert 

Upshall Lautermilch 

Simard Smart 

Solomon Koenker 

 

 

Atkinson Goodale 

Anguish  

 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

(2003) 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 23 

 

Muller Meiklejohn 

McLeod Martin 

Andrew Toth 

Berntson McLaren 

Lane Petersen 

Taylor Swenson 

Smith Baker 

Muirhead Gleim 

Maxwell Neudorf 

Schmidt Kopelchuk 

Hodgins Saxinger 

Klein  

 

Nays — 18 

 

Shillington Goulet 

Koskie Hagel 

Tchorzewski Lyons 

Thompson Calvert 

Upshall Lautermilch 

Simard Smart 

Solomon Van Mulligen 

Atkinson Koenker 

Anguish Goodale 

 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

 Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Management 

Accountants Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments 

now be read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move the Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3534 

 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

(2010) 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 25 

 

Muller Meiklejohn 

Duncan Martin 

McLeod Toth 

Andrew McLaren 

Berntson Hopfner 

Lane Petersen 

Taylor Swenson 

Smith Baker 

Muirhead Gleim 

Maxwell Neudorf 

Schmidt Kopelchuk 

Hodgins Saxinger 

Klein  

 

Nays — 18 

 

Shillington Goulet 

Koskie Hagel 

Tchorzewski Lyons 

Thompson Calvert 

Upshall Lautermilch 

Simard Smart 

Solomon Van Mulligen 

Atkinson Koenker 

Anguish Goodale 

 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 28 — An Act to 

provide for the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain 

Documents (No. 2) be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I already have made my 

comments on this Bill. We’re prepared to let it go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Swan that Bill No. 32 — An Act 

respecting the Emission of Air Contaminants be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 

comments in regard to this Act. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that one could characterize the Act as an 

improvement over existing legislation, but I’d like to make several 

comments on some of the perceived weaknesses in the new 

legislation, and hopefully these comments will be taken in the 

spirit that they’re given by the Minister of the Environment in 

regards to strengthening the provisions so that the quality of the air 

in Saskatchewan can be protected by the Act. 

 

The first comment I’d like to make is what, I believe, is a section 

of the Act which weakens the intent — weakens the present Act 

and weakens the intent of this Act in regards to the definitions of 

air pollution. The present Act refers to concentration of 

contaminants in quantities that may cause discomfort to, or 

endanger the health, safety, and welfare of Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

(2015) 

 

The present Act, or the Act proposed, Mr. Speaker, weakens that 

provision — weakens that provision to provide a qualitatively 

higher threshold before the provisions of this Act come into effect. 

And it reads that where: 

 

. . . quantities that are or are likely to: 

 

(a) be injurious to the health, safety, and comfort . . . 

 

And I think that’s quite plain and quite evident in the Act that that 

threshold has been raised and is with this new Act; and does not, 

and I believe, will not, provide the kind of protection in terms of 

the emissions and quality of air for this province that the people of 

this province have come to expect. 

 

I think there’s some problems, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the Act 

in so far as the penalties for the contravention of the provisions of 

the Act are put forward. First of all, there’s a clause which permits 

offenders and people who break the standards of The Clean Air 

Act . . . The penalties of prosecutions to this Act won’t be able to 

apply for a period of after two years. And I think that that, in fact, 

is a period which is much too short a time to allow polluters to 

escape. 

 

The fines that will be levied on polluters which are convicted 

under this Act, while they are increased from the present Act, are 

still not necessarily a deterrent to the breaking of the provisions of 

this Act. The fines are $1,000 for individuals and $50,000 for 

corporations, with $100 on the basis of a continuation of the act 

for individuals and $5,000 for corporations. 

 

And there was one thing missing which is, that if there is an 

outward breach of the Act and a continuing breach of the Act and, 

in fact, a disregard for the legislation, there is no higher penalty to 

be applied. For example, there’s no jail term as there now is being 

proposed under the Environmental Protection Act which is before 

the Canadian parliament for breaches of the clean air 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3535 

 

 

standards. This Act doesn’t provide for those kind of penalties. 

And perhaps the Minister of the Environment would consider 

looking at some of the penalty provisions. 

 

Any other comments I’d like to make, Mr. Speaker, I’ll make in 

regards to the committee and under question by the minister. I’ve 

got no further comments at this time, so if you wish to proceed to 

committee, that’s fine by me. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 51 — An Act to 

Provide for the Imposition of Taxes on and the Collection of 

Taxes from Certain Purchases of Certain Fuels and to Provide 

for Rebates of Taxes to Certain Purchasers be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. speaker. I commenced my 

remarks in response to the second reading of this Bill on Friday. I 

wanted to just sum up my remarks and have some of my 

colleagues add to it. 

 

I want to remind or at least inform members of this Assembly and 

people in the province that what I have been told, and from the 

experience that many people have relayed to me with respect to 

the fuel tax, is that it is, very simply put, Mr. Speaker, a ludicrous 

tax; it’s an unfair tax; it’s a question of accountability. 

 

The Conservative government opposite have made promises to the 

effect that the province of Saskatchewan will never see a gas tax 

as long as they’re in power, reimposed. And of course what we’ve 

seen here, Mr. Speaker, is not just the reimposition of the gas tax, 

but an increase of the gas tax from 6 cents a litre to 7 cents a litre, 

which is equal to from 28 cents a gallon to 32 cents a gallon of 

each gallon of fuel purchased in this province. 

 

If it wasn’t such a harmful tax, Mr. Speaker, it would be 

laughable. People are laughing at the way the tax has been 

implemented. They’re laughing at the way that the government 

has created a massive bureaucratic red tape operation — 641,000 

licensed vehicle operators in this province, if they purchase 

gasoline once a week during the course of a year, they will 

generate about 34 million gas receipts, Mr. Speaker. And what that 

means is a massive amount of bureaucratic red tape. 

 

The government and this Conservative Party has gone on record in 

previous election campaigns as criticizing government for their 

massive attempts at creating red tape. The Conservative 

government opposite and the party opposite said if they got 

elected to government they would do away with red tape. What 

they have done, Mr. Speaker, has created an amount of red tape 

that is second to none on the entire continent. They have now 

included 641,000 licensed vehicle operators in their red tape 

operation. 

 

The other point I want to raise with respect to this Bill is the 

timing. The budget was introduced on June 17. At that time the 

budget that was read by the Minister of Finance informed people 

of this province that the fuel tax would be levied, the 7 cents a litre 

tax. 

 

Since that time, the Conservatives — especially in the last couple 

of weeks — the Premier in particular, have talked about the 

opposition wasting the time of the people of the province by 

prolonging this session. Well. Mr. Speaker, on June 17 the 

announcement of this tax was made in the budget. The Bill was 

not introduced until October 7, which was day 92 — about 70 

sitting days later. And the second reading of this Bill was not 

undertaken by the government until Friday last, three days ago. 

And that’s a 70 sitting day period, a total of four months. 

 

So the hypocritical government and the hypocritical Premier get 

up and talk about the opposition wasting time, when the 

government refuses to introduce Bills which they’ve announced 

they’re going to introduce four months earlier. This is another 

credibility gap that we have with this government. They have no 

credibility. They say one thing out of one side of their mouth and 

they do the opposite when it comes down to action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province recognize that 

what the Conservative government says, what the Premier says, he 

doesn’t mean. Or if he suggests that something is going to be 

done, they know it’ll never be delivered; or if he says that the 

taxes are going to be decreased, people know and expect massive 

tax increases. And that’s the legacy of this government, Mr. 

Speaker. They make promises they never keep — never intend to 

keep — and as a result they have no credibility with anybody in 

this province or anybody in this country. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in summary, our opposition party, the New 

Democratic Party, will oppose this Bill on the premiss that it is 

unfair, that it generates more red tape than any other single 

government program in this province, and that it is a ludicrous tax. 

It’s a tax that’s wide open to abuse. We have heard all kinds of 

stories about people lining up when they get their . . . purchase 

their fuel, and they’re paying their tax with credit cards or with 

cash. 

 

And I’ve heard stories about people saying well, they buy $9 

worth of gas and they say, we’ll just leave it at $9 and they put in a 

1 or a 2 beside the 9. And it’s not a matter of people being 

dishonest, it’s a matter that the program is such an incredibly 

badly designed program that people are taking advantage of it. 

 

I wonder what the government is going to do, Mr. Speaker, when 

it comes down to paying these rebates and there’s more rebates 

claimed than there was tax collected. I wonder what they’re going 

to do about that little problem. How are they going to be able to 

check 34 million, or 38 million, or even more gas tax receipts and 

match them to the gas station operators who have issued them? 

 

There’s a story about the gas station being robbed in Regina. And 

they’re not after cigarettes and other oil and petroleum products. 

They’re after the cash in the till and the tax receipt book because 

that’s like cash in their pockets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this fuel tax rebate system is an absolute 

scam; I think it’s wide open to abuse, and as a 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3536 

 

 

result our party will be opposing this Bill. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say a 

few words to this Bill if I might, as well. And my colleague has 

indicated that it’s a bad tax. It was unfairly written — and poorly 

written, as a matter of fact — and that it’s a betrayal of the people 

of this province. 

 

I’d like to speak a few minutes as to how it affects the business 

community and the small-business people who in 1982 heard that 

never under a PC government would we ever see a gas tax in this 

province. And I would like to speak to how they have planned 

their businesses around that and what has happened because of 

this betrayal of the faith that was put in this government in 1982 

and again in 1986. 

 

I’ve talked with small independent truckers who many of them 

spend thousands of dollars a month on fuel; who feel betrayed; 

who made plans to operate their businesses and made their annual 

budgets expecting to pay a certain number of cents per litre, only 

to find that this budget brought down by the Finance minister, who 

in turn took his direction from the Premier of this province — only 

to find that they had been betrayed by both of them. 

 

I want to speak about the role of the Finance minister in this tax. 

As I’m speaking about the business community, I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that I don’t believe that there’s a corporation in this 

province that would keep on a man in charge of fiscal matters for 

that corporation who has displayed the kind of incompetence that 

the Finance minister of this province has done. 

 

In 1986 we were led to believe prior to the election that the deficit 

in the province would be something in the order of $389 million 

only to find that the same Finance minister, less than a year later, 

tells us that there’s a problem. He tells the people of this province 

that he’s going to have to collect some $1.235 billion, and that part 

of that is going to come in the form of a gas tax. There are two 

things that bother me about that. The first is that this Finance 

minister isn’t capable of operating fiscal matters of this province. 

 

I want to go back to the point that I don’t think there’s a 

corporation in this province that would keep him employed in that 

position or, I would suggest to you, in any other position having a 

record as dismal and as pathetic as what the record of this Finance 

minister has been. 

 

Let me take that one step further, Mr. Speaker. His boss is none 

other than the Premier of this province, and for the Premier of this 

province not to have shed himself of that kind of incompetence 

tells me that the people of this province have a responsibility as 

well. They have a responsibility to shed themselves of the 

leadership of the Premier of this province who would allow a 

Finance minister to betray the people of this province, number 

one, and number two, to display the incompetence that he has. 

 

I ask, who will follow this Premier and this Finance 

minister with their record? I ask, who will believe them, with their 

record? I would suggest that less and less people will be following 

and less and less people will be believing, and every time that they 

fill their tank and fill their cars and their trucks with fuel, it will 

bring them one more step closer to the realization that both the 

Premier and the Finance minister, the cabinet, and the rest of the 

members on that side of the House have to be removed. 

 

(2030) 

 

I said before that every time a Saskatchewan resident fills their 

tank with fuel and pays that extra 7 cents a litre, that they’re going 

to feel betrayed and that the Finance minister has indeed deceived 

them. I would like to for a moment, if I could, ask the members on 

that side of the House — and they haven’t been able to answer 

anyone on this side or anybody that I know — how they’re going 

to set in place the tools to collect this money. Now there’s going to 

be thousands of people across this province submitting bills. My 

colleague has indicated that he isn’t quite convinced, and a lot of 

people in this province aren’t quite convinced that the bills are 

going to be legitimate, a lot of them that are submitted. 

 

But I’ll put that aside. Let’s just deal with the numbers of invoices 

that are going to be coming before whoever is setting these rebates 

in place. I’d like to know, is the Premier going to be in the 

basement of this building adding up those invoices? Or is the 

Finance minister going to be, or are they going to bring their kids 

downstairs to count all of these thousands and thousands of 

invoices? Or the Deputy Premier — is he going to bring his family 

downstairs? How many people is it going to take to calculate the 

rebates, how many secretaries, how many accountants, how many 

people are going to have to be employed to rebate a tax of this 

magnitude? I don’t even think that they can comprehend or can 

understand how it’s going to be done. I just don’t believe what 

they were thinking of when they wrote this legislation and when 

they presented it to the people of this province and this legislature. 

I don’t understand how they figured they were going to put this all 

together and collect all of these bills, put them together and mail 

cheques to all of the people that are submitting them. It’s not a 

reasonable way to try and tax people. 

 

Can you imagine the magnitude of the costs involved in collecting 

this tax? And then can you imagine . . . And I’m talking about the 

costs that are perpetrated upon the business people who are writing 

the invoices, paying people to write these invoices, and then the 

costs of all of those employed to put all of this together — totally 

non-productive work, an absolute unfair and unreasonable 

situation, but another indication that this government is 

incompetent, has no direction, and knows not where they’re going. 

 

I was talking about the small-business people and how some of the 

small-business people are being affected. And where was the 

small-business critic? Where was he when this government was 

putting an extra 7 cents a litre cost on a travelling salesman? And I 

ask why this travelling salesman wasn’t exempt. The tools of his 

trade, his vehicle, his time . . . Those vehicles cost many, many 

dollars — and I’m sure we both know that — to keep 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3537 

 

 

operating, and if there’s one segment of this society that you’ve 

totally ignored and neglected, it’s been the business community. 

People with delivery trucks on the roads can’t claim this 7 cents a 

litre — haven’t budgeted for it, I would suggest. And they’re 

going to find their bottom line shrunk because of what this 

government has done. I say to you that you have hurt, and this 

government has hurt, more small-business people by this unfair 

tax than you even imagine. And I suggest to you that there are 

going to be some 20,000 business people in this province who are 

going to be willing to make you pay for it. 

 

You haven’t thought of the administration and how you’re going 

to be giving these rebates, if indeed they’re going to get rebates. 

You haven’t listened to the road builders association in this 

province who said, for goodness sakes, if you’re going to 

implement a road tax, put it into highways. You’ve been 

neglecting them since 1982, and you’re creating a massive 

investment for some government somewhere down the road when 

these highways are going to start to be repaired. And they’ve said 

to you, if you’re going to put on a tax on fuel, direct it to the 

highways. Has this government done that? Not on your life. 

 

What this government has done is implemented that fuel tax, but 

where does it go? They tack it on into general revenue, and from 

there it goes to pay the $3.4 billion deficit or interest on that 3.4 

billion. That’s where it’s gone. It’s a tax, not to deliver a service to 

the people, because we’ve seen those services cut back from 

everything from dental care to the drug prescription plan. It hasn’t 

gone there. Where has it gone? 

 

It’s gone to the Peter Pocklingtons, and to the Weyerhaeusers, and 

to the bankers wherever you’ve borrowed the money. We 

understand you need about $340 million a year just to pay the 

interest. That’s clear to us. It’s clear to the people of this province. 

 

But why haven’t you listened to the road builders association and 

said, yes, we’re going to put some money into highways and 

getting your people back to work, your employees back to work; 

and we’re going to be delivering a number one road system like 

we’ve had in this province and like we will again in the future? 

But I’m afraid not under this administration. 

 

You haven’t put it to road building where those people can 

employ people who are now on social assistance and on 

unemployment insurance. It hasn’t gone there. And how do you 

expect to generate some economic prosperity in this province 

when you’ve got people not working? You’re increasing taxes to 

the point where middle income people are not middle income 

people any more but lower income people; and I say to you, all 

because of incompetence and because of mismanagement. 

 

I look at the new Messiah in this province, tourism, and what have 

you done? Is this new road tax or this new fuel tax, this new gas 

Bill, is that going to enhance tourism in this province? I say to you 

it’s not going to. The facts are that about 85 per cent of the tourism 

travel in North America is done by automobile. And I say to you 

as well, they’re not looking for a place where there’s high added 

fuel costs. People right now — because of the Reagan government 

in the United States and because of the Mulroney government in 

Canada — the middle income people are being taxed and they’re 

being strapped. They don’t have the kind of disposable income 

that they would like. And so I say what you’ve done in this 

province with this new gas Bill is just to add more problems, more 

burden, and I say to you, going to be less tourism. 

 

And what else have you done? What else have you done? What 

kind of indirect taxation are the people in this province going to 

face? School boards and municipalities don’t qualify for the rebate 

so the school boards got increased costs, some of them thousands 

of dollars a year, tens of thousands. And where does this money 

come from? It comes from farmers and from business people and 

from working people who you’ve already taxed through the flat 

tax, who you’ve already taxed through the increase in the E&H 

tax, and now you tax through the gas Bill. 

 

You’re causing more and more undue hardship for more and more 

people. And I say, because of the way you’re directing your 

taxation in this province, this government will pay, and I say pay 

dearly. Members on this side of the House will not support this 

Bill, and we’ll not support it because we want to be able to go 

back to our constituents and say that we feel we’ve done the right 

thing. And I don’t believe that there’s a member on that side of the 

House that can in good conscience go back to their constituents 

and say, we voted for the gas Bill because we wanted to do the 

right thing. 

 

What I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re going to have to go 

back to their constituents and they’re going to say, we’ve betrayed 

you. We’ve betrayed the faith that you put in us; we’ve betrayed 

your confidence in us; and all because we’re led by an 

incompetent Premier — an incompetent Premier that has betrayed 

almost every election promise that he’s ever made. And I suggest 

to you that the members on that side of the House that are 

following that kind of leadership are going to be severely chastised 

by their constituents one day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll close, but in closing I want to say that I believe 

the members on this side of the House can go to their constituents 

with a clear conscience because they haven’t betrayed them by 

promising one thing, and when they get into the House after an 

election, doing another. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

begin by going back to 1982, to a little headline. “Save 40 cents on 

gas; vote Progressive Conservative” — little buttons they were 

handing out. 

 

First of all, it wasn’t 40 cents, it was about 28 cents. Just another 

little miscalculation by this government — saying that they were 

going to take the gas tax off and leave it off, and not many years 

later what do we see — a gas tax. 

 

As has been said in this House before, that certainly is a betrayal, 

Mr. Speaker, a betrayal of a promise given to the people of this 

province by a government that had only 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3538 

 

 

one thing in mind. One thing, and that was self-interest — power, 

the motive behind this government, Mr. Speaker. Power. They go 

to any length to get power and the gas tax is one good example — 

putting out the bait, the carrot on the end of the stick. All of a 

sudden, now you see it, now you don’t. 

 

School divisions and R.M.s are suffering because of this gas tax. 

The R.M.s, Mr. Speaker, I take for example one R.M. that I have 

talked to buys 500 gallons of fuel a day during the summer. 

Multiply that out, that’s a $160 a day extra money needed by the 

R.M.s to cover the cost of this gas tax. And who pays for that? The 

people of this province; the farmers pay for that and the R.M.s. 

And that’s the whole point here. Who’s going to pay? 

 

I mean we hear all the arguments about the money coming in and 

going out; responsible government; have to keep our House in 

order; times are tight. But who pays? The people pay. And I hear 

all the arguments about the formula being adjusted to compensate. 

But when it’s overall, when the money’s down, who pays? The 

taxpayer pays, and he pays, and he pays, and he pays some more. 

 

And if that same R.M. had to buy a road grader at a $100,000, 

roughly, without a trade-in, again they’re paying — another 

promise broken. Or there’s another R.M. that will buy about 150 

to 190,000 litres in a year. That’s about $13,000 a year extra, Mr. 

Speaker — $13,000 a year. 

 

How can this government stand up here one after the other and 

vote in favour of this Bill when it was a promise made by this 

government and a promise broken by the government and a loss to 

the people of this province — a loss of their tax dollars. 

Everything that they buy, all the gas that these R.M.s and urban 

municipalities buy adds up to a lot of money and that money, as 

I’ve said, has to come out of the pockets of the taxpayers. And not 

only are they doing that, they’re cutting back on their share of the 

transfer payments to the urban municipalities. So combine the two. 

 

(2045) 

 

I have a letter here from Mr. Don Abel, the president of SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) saying that in 

Yorkton the third quarterly transfer payment should have been 

about $308,000 but they only got $111,000. So you add that to 

moneys they don’t get, add to it the losses from the gas tax, and 

the squeeze is on. 

 

Now in order to compensate that, they have to go out and borrow 

the money and on that borrowed money they have to pay interest. 

It all adds up, Mr. Speaker, to more loss for the taxpayer because 

he either has a choice of losing services or dishing out more 

money for those services because the government is falling down 

on their part. 

 

That’s right. That’s what the government has done. All the while 

they’re saying, we’re going to manage this province in the best 

possible way, they are putting the squeeze on the taxpayers of the 

province. They are putting a squeeze on the taxpayers of this 

province because their coffers are running low or empty. And why 

are they running low and 

empty? Why do they need the gas tax? They need this gas tax 

because this government, Mr. Speaker, is unable to manage the 

affairs of this province. 

 

They are able to manage only for those people who they wish to 

manage for, not for the majority of the people in this province. 

They are able to manage for the Pocklingtons and the 

Weyerhaeusers, putting money into the hands of those people. So 

they have to get it somewhere, so they put on a gas tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this gas tax is incredible when you think of the 

management of managing the bills coming in, repaying the 

receipts from the bills that came in. I mean, can you just imagine, 

out of 641,000 licensed vehicles that operate in this province, can 

you just imagine the number of bills that are coming in? Can you 

imagine the administrative nightmare that’s being created? And 

they say, oh, but we’re going to hire 80 students during the 

summer. I mean, how ridiculous! How ill conceived and poorly 

thought out. They have a situation where they’re going to be 

swamped — swamped — with these receipts. 

 

Besides that, how many people aren’t going to put these receipts 

in? That’s the real question that I ask. There’s people who are 

going to lose them, older people who just couldn’t be bothered, 

young people who just couldn’t be bothered. And that’s what this 

government’s counting on, not paying back a substantial portion 

of that 7 cents a litre. 

 

And I say, all because they can’t manage the affairs of this 

province, all because we have a Premier and a Minister of Finance 

who are incapable of looking at a situation through eyes other than 

those that are rose coloured for themselves. They’re incapable of 

managing the affairs of this province for the people in general who 

need a break right now. 

 

But no, we have to keep our house in order, they say, we have to 

keep our house in order. Keep our house in order — when they 

have squandered money time and time again, when they have had 

ridiculous patronage appointments. 

 

This is the type of government that we’re seeing right now, and 

how does the Premier respond? The other day in the Leader-Post 

the headline is “The Premier’s name may put limit on time 

allowed to discuss budget”. 

 

So they’re doing all these things, and the Premier of this province 

has the arrogance to stand up and say, we’re not going to let you 

ask us any questions; we don’t think the people of this province 

have a right to know what we’re doing; we don’t think we should 

be accountable to anybody, so we’re going to cut off this debate. 

That’s the type of arrogance we’re seeing from the Premier of this 

province and the members opposite lined up right behind him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we have a situation where the dollars are short 

in this province and the government is incapable of managing 

those dollars, incapable of keeping their house in order. Why is it 

that the people have to suffer when the government goes merrily 

on its way — merrily on its arrogant way? 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3539 

 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Why do the people of this province have to be 

put in a situation? And this is what they’re asking me — what are 

we going to do? Is there any way to get rid of these guys right 

now? And that’s what I unfortunately have to say — no, there 

isn’t. And so they say to me, you mean, we’re going to have to put 

up with this type of mismanagement, this type of incompetence, 

this type of arrogance, and this type of . . . I can’t think of the 

word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Credibility. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — No — irresponsibility, to the people of this 

province. Do we have to put up with this irresponsibility? And I 

say, unfortunately, yes. Buy I say, there’s one way you can change 

that and that’s next time you go to the polls. And they tell me, 

well, it’ll be changed. And I think they’re right, Mr. Speaker, it 

will be changed. 

 

We have a situation where the truckers of this province, the 

taxi-cabs, all those people who rely on a living based on miles 

travelled and gas consumed — those are the people who are 

paying. They’re paying through the nose for a government who 

can’t manage its own house. It says the Road Builders and Heavy 

Construction Association of Saskatchewan says the PC gas tax 

will add nearly $7 million dollars to this year’s provincial highway 

budget — $7 million because the . . . and they’re competing for 

fewer dollars. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How much of that will go to roads? 

 

Mr. Upshall: — And that’s the question: how much will go to 

roads? They say, sure, if it goes to roads, we wouldn’t mind 

because their costs because of the shape of this road are going 

sky-high because of all the holes and the cracks and the general 

poor condition of the roads. They’re beating their vehicles apart. 

And will the gas tax go to fix that so that it’ll bring their costs 

down? No, it goes into general revenue because the government 

hasn’t managed responsibility responsibly enough, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — hasn’t managed responsibly enough to keep the house 

in order. 

 

Giveaways, tax holidays, patronage, incompetence, pleading to the 

people of this province saying, can’t we get rid of them before 

three years? No wonder they’re saying that. 

 

So. Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that the people of this 

province are getting disgusted and so am I, because there is no 

way that this government should be allowed to carry on this type 

of mismanagement. There is no way the Premier of this province 

should be allowed to carry on this type of irresponsibility, 

arrogance, and mismanagement. 

 

There is no way that the members opposite, any of them, should 

be allowed to stand up in this House and say, we’re building for 

the future. Because when they come down hard on the people of 

this province as they have time and time and time again, whether it 

be health, whether it be education, whether it be finances, the 

people just shudder. They look around and they say, what next? 

What’s going to come next? And they repeat, isn’t there anything 

we can do to get rid of this government before the next three 

years? And all I say to them is this. You have to wait to get rid of 

this government, but don’t forget. And they say, we won’t forget. 

 

And believe me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure they won’t forget. 

So for all those and many more reasons, Mr. Speaker, I am totally 

opposed to this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think 

that most people in Saskatchewan are aware, at least if they’re 

drivers, about the rebate program under this gas tax. They know 

that if they save their receipts and send them in at some point next 

year, if they have the receipts, they’ll get a rebate for the amount 

of money that they expended on the gas tax. 

 

But I don’t think that many people are aware, except for those that 

use the service, that the transit systems in our cities are not exempt 

from the gas tax, neither will there be any rebates provided to 

these transit systems for the moneys that they have spent on the 

gas tax. And these are very considerable costs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

One estimate, I understand from the city of Regina, and probably a 

comparable sum for the city of Saskatoon, suggests that the transit 

system in Regina will be spending an additional half a million 

dollars this year because of the additional fuel costs. That was not 

a sum that the city had budgeted for, but the city and all the cities 

concerned must now absorb that. 

 

At the point that this measure was introduced by the government, 

we expressed concerns about these additional costs and the fact 

that these costs would ultimately have to be passed on either to the 

users of the transit systems or to the property taxpayers in the 

cities concerned, who are in the position of having to absorb the 

deficit of any of those transit systems. And make no mistake about 

it, all transit systems, or most if not all, operate on a deficit. That is 

a public utility, one in which the user costs simply do not, cannot 

pay for the cost of running the system. When we raised these 

concerns with the Minister of Finance, the minister said, well 

transit systems throughout Saskatchewan can absorb those costs 

and there need not be any increases to the transit riders. 

 

It’s interesting to review the facts that transit fares have gone up 

throughout Saskatchewan as a direct result by this measure by the 

government. The latest example is in Saskatoon where there has 

been an appreciable increase in the past for senior citizens, again 

as a result of increased costs by these transit systems. The other 

thing that has happened is that the deficits, notwithstanding these 

increases in fares, have gone up, and these deficits are having to be 

absorbed by the cities that have the transit systems. 

 

It’s a regrettable state of affairs that the government would on the 

one hand provide a definite rebate for many thousands of 

Saskatchewan drivers, but on the other hand ignore the many 

thousands of Saskatchewan people who 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3540 

 

 

use the transit system, who we encourage to use the transit system 

as an alternative to taking vehicles and to consume energy, and for 

the many thousands who are captives of the transit systems, 

especially the senior citizens, the poor, the students. Those are the 

types of people that urban transit systems are especially geared to 

help. Those are the kinds of people that transit systems provide 

transportation for primarily. 

 

And it’s interesting that this government is, in effect, creating a 

double standard, ruling to provide appreciable help for many, yet 

ignoring again a group of Saskatchewan people — the seniors, the 

poor, and the students of this province. It will not provide them 

with that kind of assistance. 

 

We can only guess as to why there is such a double standard. I 

suppose the most telling comment on that came from the member 

from Weyburn from his seat. When this matter was discussed he 

said, well we don’t have a transit system in Weyburn, and if 

you’re so fortunate in Saskatoon or Moose Jaw or Yorkton to have 

a transit system, why should that be any concern of ours? 

 

And perhaps that’s the telling comment, and that’s the story Most 

of the constituencies served by Conservative members, that 

government does not have transit systems, and for them there is no 

political benefit in providing an exemption or an abatement or a 

rebate for urban transit systems. That’s the story. That’s a telling 

comment. 

 

The comment is also a crude and callous one, because it seems to 

imply that if the expense is a matter of concern, then cities 

shouldn’t have transit systems, so that the seniors and those that 

must get to their doctors and the students should be required to 

walk the 10 to 12 miles, or whatever is required, to get from point 

A to point B. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I want to say that the government has 

moved very badly on this by not extending the rebates to urban 

transit systems, as well as to other sectors that have been 

mentioned. But I think in this particular case it particularly points 

out the lack of any influence, the lack of any clout that the 

Minister of Urban Affairs has in that cabinet, because no Minister 

of Urban Affairs worth his weight would have allowed that 

cabinet to proceed in this fashion and not provide for an 

exemption to urban transit systems. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2101) 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 23 

 

Muller Martin 

McLeod Toth 

Andrew McLaren 

Lane Hopfner 

Taylor Petersen 

Smith Swenson 

Maxwell Baker 

 

 

Schmidt Gleim 

Hodgins Neudorf 

Hardy Kopelchuk 

Klein Saxinger 

Meiklejohn  

 

Nays — 17 

 

Brockelbank Goulet 

Shillington Hagel 

Thompson Lyons 

Rolfes Calvert 

Upshall Lautermilch 

Simard Smart 

Solomon Van Mulligen 

Atkinson Koenker 

Anguish  

 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 52 — An Act to 

amend The Department of Revenue and Financial Services 

Act to now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 52 is a consequential Bill to 

51 and the government of the day has head our arguments with 

respect to Bill 51, The Fuel Tax Act, so to expedite the business of 

the House, we’ll let the Bill proceed into committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Klein that Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, just briefly if I might, the 

reason that we’re so strongly opposed to this Bill is that net 

property taxes in Saskatchewan are now the third highest in 

Canada. By net property taxes, one takes property taxes and 

deducts from that any grant programs that might be provided by 

provincial governments such as the property improvement grant 

which was in existence in Saskatchewan until a few years ago and 

was done away with by the PC government. But those net 

property taxes are third highest in Canada. 

 

Now that statistic by itself is not a matter of concern, but when one 

examines the type of tax that the property tax is, it’s very much a 

matter of concern. The property tax is generally conceded to be, 

generally acknowledged to be, an unfair tax, a regressive tax. That 

is to say, there is very little relationship between the taxes that one 

must actually pay and the ability of the of the taxpayer to pay 

those taxes. That is why we are very strongly opposed to this Bill, 

because this Bill purports to shift even more of the overall 

provincial tax burden to property taxes in Saskatchewan — to take 

that burden away from provincial taxpayers and away from the 

any sources of revenue that are available to the government, 

whether it’s 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3541 

 

 

income tax, sales tax, corporation taxes, resource taxes, even 

profits on various aspects of government operations such as the 

Liquor Board. All those sources of revenue are available to the 

provincial government. 

 

The property tax is one of the few sources of revenue for 

municipalities. As a consequence of cutting back on revenue 

sharing — as a consequence of that — municipal councils 

throughout Saskatchewan had to increase taxes or defer increases 

in taxes which are likely to come in the ensuing years. That is 

why, Mr. Speaker, we are very much opposed to this Bill and we 

will vote accordingly on second reading. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I’ve got plenty to 

say about net property taxes, about consultation and its process — 

something totally unfamiliar to the members opposite. And they 

laugh, Mr. Speaker, they laugh because they don’t agree with it, 

and they think consultation is funny. Well people don’t think 

consultation is funny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, things to say about tax increases and how the 

member opposite, my critic, all the time that he sat in city council 

did nothing to address the taxes in the city of Regina — absolutely 

zero — the highest taxed city in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all about fairness of revenue sharing and how it 

worked when we held it to minus 1 per cent. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to talk about municipalities doing a good job and some even 

reducing mill rates in this year, contrary to what the member 

opposite makes statements about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about that member’s inaccuracy in 

statements. I would like to talk about his incomplete and total 

ridiculous arguments and comparisons. I would like to talk about 

rumours and how they get started. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I will save my remarks for debate in committee. 

And I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order please. Order. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 23 

 

Muller Martin 

McLeod Toth 

Andrew McLaren 

Lane Hopfner 

Taylor Petersen 

Smith Swenson 

Maxwell Baker 

Schmidt Gleim 

Hodgins Neudorf 

Hardy Kopelchuk 

Klein Saxinger 

Meiklejohn  

 

 

Nays — 14 

 

 

Brockelbank Hagel 

Shillington Lyons 

Thompson Calvert 

Rolfes Lautermilch 

Solomon Smart 

Anguish Van Mulligen 

Goulet Koenker 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Gas Inspection and 

Licensing Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The 

comments that we’ve had to make in the . . . have already been 

made at second reading, and we’re prepared at this time to let the 

Bill pass committee. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Boiler and Pressure 

Vessel Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Shillington: — As was said by my colleague, Regina 

Rosemont, our comments were made on second reading. We have 

no questions on this Bill and we can proceed. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Time Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I merely ask the minister for assurance that 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) asked 

for this. This is an unusual way to settle an election, to hold . . . to 

settle a tie, to hold a new one. We have no real objection to it so 

long as it does, in fact, express the wishes of SARM. So I ask the 

minister for a comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 

  



 

October 26, 1987 

 

3542 

 

 

member’s question, I’ve consulted SARM. They’re in full 

agreement with this. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Gas Inspection and 

Licensing Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title.  

 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Boiler and Pressure 

Vessel Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Time Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I move this Bill be now read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(2130) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 p.m. 

 


