













































August 28, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 28, 1987 

 

2139 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Duties on Saskatchewan Potash Industry 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question, in the absence of the Premier, I guess is either to the 

Deputy Premier or to the Minister of Economic Trade and 

Development. So we’ll make it to the Minister of Economic 

Trade and Development. 

 

As the minister knows, it’s been a week now since the United 

States Commerce department has made a preliminary finding 

with respect to the import of Saskatchewan potash into the 

United States. And as the minister also knows, he has been 

aware of this impending decision, one way or the other, for 

some several months prior to the actual announcement. 

 

Yesterday the minister told the House that he would have a 

ministerial statement today on this matter. My question to him 

is this: will you be making a statement on this very important 

matter outlining in specifics the action that your government 

proposes to take in response to the United States’ moves? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member indicates 

that it’s been a week since the preliminary determination. I 

think he also should be aware that it’s just this week that 

companies are in fact receiving the details of that preliminary 

determination from Washington. 

 

Yesterday, both inside the House and outside the House, I never 

gave any indication that I would be making a ministerial 

statement. I indicated that you would see further action by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and I think that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — On this very day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . this very day you will probably see a 

statement and some action by the Minister of Energy and 

Mines. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to 

the hon. Minister of Economic Trade and Development. I think 

the hon. minister would understand that the legislature is in 

session. Even he would understand that. And therefore there’s 

an obligation I would say to you, sir, to make any kinds of 

statements or announcements with respect to the government 

action to this House. 

 

My question to you therefore, specifically, is this: will you tell 

the legislature today what it is that your Premier and your 

government is planning to do in response to this very serious 

action against Saskatchewan potash workers and families – 

today in this legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure you and the 

members of this Assembly that I recognize that this Assembly 

is in session. There are a lot of people . . . I might say from 

talking to people outside the walls of this institution, that is not 

a widely held view by many people. 

 

Be that as it may, I can assure the hon. member that we, and I, 

recognize the rules and the tradition of this Assembly and that 

we will honour those; that the Minister of Energy and Mines, in 

fact, will make a statement today – small as that might be, large 

as that might be – make a statement today. 

 

This particular problem we take very seriously. This particular 

problem, I would hope, I would hope, in the interests of 

Saskatchewan, in the interests of resources, and the people of 

our province, that we try to do this in the most collective way 

and look at the common enemy, which is the protectionist 

mentality in the United States, and try not to politicize every 

step of the way of how we must try and attempt to deal with a 

very difficult problem – a great deal at stake for our province, a 

great deal at stake for our province. And I think collectively we 

can respond in a way that is to the benefit of our province and 

the benefit of our country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I have a new question, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

directed to the Deputy Premier in the absence of the Premier. 

We have just been advised by the Minister of Economic Trade 

and Development that he won’t be making a statement today, 

but that the Minister of Energy and Mines will be making a 

statement for today. The minister is not in the House. 

 

Can the Acting Premier tell us where it is that the Minister of 

Energy and Mines is going to be making the statement? Why 

isn’t she in the legislature to tell this Assembly what this 

government is going to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And I know that the hon. member, Mr. 

Speaker, is very disappointed that the Minister of Energy and 

Mines is not here. I want him also to know that he will not be 

disappointed for the whole day, because she will be here, and 

she will be here very soon, and when she does get here . . . and 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, she may in fact have to ask for 

leave to revert to notices of motion to deal with her particular 

statement today. And I’m sure that the House will 

accommodate her in that request immediately after question 

period, or before orders of the day. 

 

But I hope that the hon. member from Riversdale has had his 

disappointment somewhat diminished with the arrival of the 

Minister of Energy and Mines. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Indeed my  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2140 

 

disappointment has faded away, because I am now pleased to 

see the Minister of Energy and Mines here. So I will direct a 

question to the hon. member. 

 

Madam Minister, I wonder if you’d be kind enough to tell the 

Legislative Assembly what it is that your government and your 

department plans to do in response to the United States 

Commerce decision with respect to potash, which 

announcement, as you know, places at risk approximately 4,000 

potash families, workers, and the communities in which they 

work. What action do you intend to take? Will you please give 

us the details today – now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, while I’m not at 

liberty to give the hon. member the details, I will say this, that 

we have been concerned for some time over the action. We 

have not been caught flat-footed, as was suggested yesterday. 

We have been in consultation with the industry and the various 

players within the potash industry. 

 

I can assure the member the action that will be taken will be 

taken in the best interests of the workers, the industry, and the 

province as a whole. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the 

Hon. Minister of Energy and Mines. Just a few moments ago 

the Minister of Economic Trade, your colleague in cabinet, told 

the House, informed the House, that somewhere, somehow, 

sometime – we quite don’t know where; it might be in secret in 

the middle of the night in some dark corner of the legislature – 

you’re going to be making a statement on potash. 

 

And my question to you, Madam Minister, is this: is that so? 

Will you be making a statement of government policy on this 

very crucial problem; and if that is the case, why not make it to 

this legislature now, in question period, and under ministerial 

statements? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the 

agenda outlines the opportunity for statements, and I can tell the 

member that if he waits till question period is over, that there 

will be notice. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask a question to the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade, or the Minister of Energy, 

whichever want to answer. 

 

The question, Mr. Minister, it that it’s been about a week, or a 

full week, since the decision or the ruling was made. And what 

I ask you is: do you have now in your possession the written 

decision, the reasons behind the decision, the calculations, and 

all the background material which shows how the levies or 

tariffs were in fact calculated? Do you have that information in 

respect to the potash corporation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As the hon. member full knows,  

that information, I indicated to the hon. member from 

Riversdale, is being provided to the various companies in the 

industry this week. If the hon. member is interested in what the 

specifics and the details would be from those particular 

companies, if that’s his question, they are being provided to the 

companies this week. I have not yet seen the specific details of 

what that provision is. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, are you proposing to take action 

and to respond to the proposal by the U.S. Department of 

Commerce without having the knowledge of the exact 

documentation on which the case was based? Is that what 

you’re saying? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I understood the question from the hon. 

member was, do we have the i’s dotted and the t’s crossed of 

everything with regard to the Department of Commerce ruling 

that the companies had. Those rulings go to the companies. It’s 

the company that was part of the court action, of course. 

 

What in fact the preliminary ruling is, is clear to the whole 

world, if it’s not clear to the hon. member from the Quill Lakes. 

What the Department of Commerce did was levy some fairly 

significant dumping duties – and I know you were perhaps 

away this week – some fairly significant dumping duties on a 

variety of companies and at various levels, anywhere from 

about 9 per cent up to about 85 per cent. And those dumping 

duties are, in fact, very severe, and they are real, they are not 

imaginary. They are real. 

 

And the companies are getting the total specifics of some of the 

rulings and some of the arguments, as you are aware, I hope. 

The companies now have an opportunity to go before the 

Department of Commerce to advance some of their defences to 

that particular argument as to the amount of damage that, in 

fact, the allegation is against the Americans. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. 

Mr. Minister, do you have any of the information on behalf of 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in your possession? 

Have you had a chance to look at it, or the Minister of Energy, 

whichever, and then will you, in fact, be prepared to table that 

information? Obviously, on a basis . . . you must be partly 

making your decision on the basis of the decision of the 

Department of Commerce. Do you have that information, and 

will you table it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if your question is: 

does the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan know what the 

tariff is that’s been levied against them? Yes, they do, and so 

does the rest of the world. 

 

With regards to specific information that Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan might have received from the Department of 

Commerce, I’m not aware of that. The minister responsible for 

the potash corporation is more appropriate the person to 

determine what information will and will not be released by the 

potash corporation. You have to bear in mind though, and bear 

this in mind, that this is a competitive world in the potash 

business, and  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2141 

 

potash corporation, while it’s owned by the people of 

Saskatchewan, also competes against the various other 

companies, and I don’t think you’d want to get all information 

out public that puts them to a disadvantage with regards to the 

other companies. 

 

Write-off of PCS Debt 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, have a 

new question to the Minister of Trade. Mr. Minister, I think it is 

becoming more and more well known that your plans to write 

off the debt of the potash corporation have had an influence on 

the decision that was made by the United States Commerce 

department. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: will you now 

undertake to stop this political insanity so that the efforts that 

now have to be made to get this decision in the United States 

changed and turned around will not be once again jeopardized 

by the kind of statements which have been coming from your 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You asked that question a couple of 

days ago. I indicated that it was not true. So I’ve read some 

media reports where the same question was posed to the Leader 

of the NDP, the member from Elphinstone, and he indicated 

that it’s probably not true either. I would take his knowledge 

more than I would take your knowledge if it comes to a 

question of that particular thing. Number one, it is not true; it is 

not true, and I would suspect that Adam Zimmerman from 

Noranda would also say it’s not true, being that he didn’t write 

anything off, nor suggested to write anything off, and he got 

cracked with an 85 per cent tariff. So it’s absolutely not true, for 

the same reasons I told you the other day. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m rather 

pleased the minister gave me that answer. Mr. Minister, your 

inability to come to grips with this issue has put the futures of 

thousands of Saskatchewan’s families in jeopardy. I ask you, 

Mr. Minister: why, as the minister responsible, did you not 

know that the plans to write off the potash corporation’s debt 

were considered by the lawyer in Washington who was fighting 

to get the tariffs imposed on Canadian potash to be an argument 

which was going to help him win the case, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I think the member’s misinformed 

three days ago, and he’s still misinformed today. I read a press 

statement from the Mayor of Carlsbad, who saw that as a 

positive statement that PCS was now starting to, or appear to be 

starting to, operate like a regular business in a regular world, 

and I think perhaps were taking some confidence in the fact that 

PCS is in fact going to be functioning like a real company. 

 

The observation made by the hon. member that the idea of 

whether or not the debt is written down, or dealt with in some 

fashion, has absolutely no impact. And if you understand the 

way the Department of Commerce works on this particular 

issue, it is the constructed cost and the constructed selling price 

between the dates of September 1986 and February of 1987, 

and that’s what we’re talking about. And there’s rules there. 

 

I would recommend over the weekend to the hon. 

 member from Regina North East that perhaps he take some 

time and review and research just exactly what the Department 

of Commerce is about in the United States. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, Mr. Ted Kassinger, the chief lawyer 

from Washington who is arguing the case stated, and it’s quoted 

in the Leader-Post, that the plans to write off the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan’s debt will ultimately strengthen 

the U.S. anti-dumping action. 

 

Your Minister of Finance, Mr. Minister, said in March: 

 

The provincial government has scrapped its plans to write 

off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan’s $340 

million debt for fear the move will be seen as 

subsidization by the Americans already lobbying for tariffs 

on Canadian potash imports. 

 

Now how do you square those statements, Mr. Minister, with 

your irresponsible position in the House that you’re taking here 

this morning? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I simply say to the hon. member that an 

argument might be advanced by the Americans that to write off 

the debt is a countervailable action; that it’s not something 

involved in anti-dumping. That is clear to anyone that has 

studied at all in this particular field. The actions taken or 

alleged to be taken have nothing to do with the anti-dumping 

action, and the member should know that or stay in some other 

field that he understands a little bit better. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you referred the member 

from Regina North East to do some weekend reading. Let me 

recommend some weekend reading from you from The 

Northern Miner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — And I will preface my question by a 

quotation. This is from the June . . . from a feature article in the 

June edition of The Northern Miner. It says: 

 

Already at the anti-dumping . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member rose on a supplementary, 

and therefore, I’m sorry, I cannot allow the quote. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question then. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t believe that you can stand on a 

supplementary and then suddenly change it to a new question 

because of a ruling. So I just ask you to put your 

supplementary. I’m sure you can do it without the quote. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, my question is: are you 

aware that in the June edition of The Northern Miner in a 

feature article called “Dumping on Potash,” that journal takes 

the position that the write-off of the debt did materially indeed 

contribute to the difficulties south of  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2142 

 

the border? And in light of that, and in light of the fact that 

these opinions are shared in very different quarters, both in 

Washington and in Timmins, Ontario, which is where this is 

published, will you admit that the confusion which this 

government has shown in, first, having a $400 million debt and 

then an $800 million debt, and then writing it off and then not 

writing it off, will you admit that this confusion has contributed 

to your problems – your problems are, in part, Mr. Minister, 

self-induced? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, I will not admit that. The lawyers in 

Washington advised us – our lawyers – advised us absolutely 

has no impact, no influence whatsoever. And I would take that 

advice far, far ahead of some journalist in Timmins, Ontario, 

who probably knows sweet-all about Saskatchewan potash. 

 

Possible Potash Embargo 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask the 

Minister of Trade about the speculation that he is engaged in 

about the possibility of an embargo on Saskatchewan potash 

moving into the United States. That sort of move, of course, 

would require some kind of federal co-operation, indeed 

probably very specific federal action in terms of legislation. 

 

I wonder if the minister has the consent and the approval of the 

Government of Canada with respect to a proposed embargo. I 

wonder also if the minister has the consent and the approval of 

all other Canadian premiers. It appears that the premiers have 

expressed solidarity in defending Canadian trade against United 

States action. But did they, yesterday in their meeting, 

specifically and explicitly approve this particular move of a 

potential embargo? And further, do the companies operating in 

Saskatchewan approve, and do you have their specific approval 

and consent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I thank the hon. member for his 

question. Let me say this: at least the hon. member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg takes the attitude of interest in the 

industry in this province and the people working in this 

province, and doesn’t look for small and cheap political tricks 

every time he stands to ask a question. So I do give him credit 

for that. 

 

With regard to the embargo, the embargo was but one of many 

options that could have been used or pursued by the 

Government of Saskatchewan. Certainly the allegation of the 

embargo received the attention, got the attention, of many 

people in this country and many people in the United States. 

 

Now the Premier – I’ve talked to him yesterday – indicated that 

the discussion at New Brunswick with the other 10 premiers . . . 

I think we saw in the media what the other 10 premiers of the 

country said is basically to support Saskatchewan, to do what, 

in fact, we can do to deal with this very difficult problem and 

this very ugly attitude that seems to be existing in United States 

today. 

 

Obviously, when it comes to the question of what jurisdictional 

power a province has, and what  

jurisdictional powers the federal government have, we will get 

into that lawyer talk and those battles as we go on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our view, at this point in time, is that we prefer to 

proceed on this particular issue as the jurisdiction of the 

province that owns the resource – a position taken by many 

premiers of resource producing provinces that it’s the province 

that owns the resource that has the power to deal with that 

resource. We take that issue very seriously and intend to pursue 

that in that regard. 

 

Involvement of Prime Minister in Potash Situation 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Minister of Economic Trade and 

Development. I wonder if the minister would advise the House 

whether or not the Premier, or he as the Minister of Economic 

Trade, has contacted the Prime Minister of Canada to alert the 

Prime Minister about the gravity of the situation to 

Saskatchewan potash families, and if so, what action the Prime 

Minister has promised to undertake on behalf of the 

Saskatchewan government, and all Canadians, in support of our 

situation out here? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the hon. 

member that the Prime Minister of Canada and the senior 

cabinet ministers in the Government of Canada and the other 10 

premiers have been well advised of this particular decision by 

the Americans, and appreciate the gravity of the problem that 

we face as primarily, as Saskatchewan, as the main producer of 

potash in the world. They have indicated to us their support and 

co-operation in addressing this very difficult question, both the 

federal government and the other provinces have, and I think 

that is to be commended. 

 

I watched the premiers well on Canada A.M. this morning – did 

very well I thought. What he indicated is that we were going to 

stand on this issue; that the Americans had to be shown that 

Canadians were not going to be pushed around; that Canadians 

were going to stand up, and he has 10 premiers standing behind 

him. And I think that is to be commended, and I think that’s a 

proper approach for a Canadian province and a Canadian 

Premier to take. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order. Order. Order. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to revert to 

Notice of Motions. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall, on Wednesday, September 2, move first reading of 

a Bill, entitled: 

 

An Act Respecting the Potash Resources of Saskatchewan. 

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2143 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, may I suggest to the Hon. 

Minister of Energy and to the House Leader and the 

government opposite that as far as the opposition is concerned 

we will waive the required notices under the rules and permit 

the hon. minister to table the first reading of the Bill today, so 

that the public of Saskatchewan knows exactly what is in it, and 

so that we can study it over the weekend. And we offer that 

here to expedite the business of the government on this 

important issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the kind offer 

of the opposition House Leader. But in the normal course of 

events, there is a 48-hour notice requirement. We will deal with 

this very important matter in the normal course, and I think that 

Tuesday will be our first opportunity. And if you want to waive 

private members day, we will do it at that time. Normally it 

would happen on Wednesday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, because this is an urgent matter, 

and because the item before us at this moment requires 

unanimous consent for it to proceed immediately, I just want to 

make it clear, from my point of view, that unanimous consent 

is, indeed, forthcoming and it should be proceeded with at once. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 10:32 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 30 – An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Bill No. 35 – An Act for granting Her Majesty certain sums of 

Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending on 

March 31, 1988 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:34 a.m. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 20 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. 

Minister, last night, because you are the minister responsible in 

this province for advancing the interests of women, I brought to 

your attention the fact that your government is sadly lacking 

with respect to initiatives in the area of advancing the interests 

of women. I brought to  

your attention the fact that the many cut-backs in education, 

health, transition homes, and so forth, that were made in the last 

budget of this PC government have drastically and very 

severely affected women in this province. And now I want to 

continue my questioning, specifically with respect to the 

women’s division. 

 

Now in subvote 20 of your department, Mr. Minister, there’s a 

reference to “Grants to third parties concerned with economic 

and social equity” – 234,200. Would you please provide us with 

a detailed list of all the organizations and agencies which are to 

receive grants under that subvote, or which have received grants 

under that subvote already in this fiscal year? And also could 

you please tell us what the amounts of those grants are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — First of all, in answering the first part of 

your question – the preamble with respect to transition houses – 

there is a giant misconception that is perpetrated by the NDP 

and by the member for Regina Lakeview that there are 

somehow massive cuts in this province, and “cuts” seems to be 

the buzz-word of the NDP these days. 

 

And they’ll tell you about cuts in health, and the Health budget 

is up $36 million over last year. They will tell you about cuts in 

social services, and the Social Services budget is the same as 

last year. They’ll tell you about cuts to transition houses. And in 

law there is a principle of minimus, and that means that when 

something is so insignificant, the courts do not consider it. And 

the cuts that she refers to to transition houses in a dollars and 

cents point of view are not very significant. 

 

In fact, the massive cuts do not exist in Yorkton, they do not 

exist in Regina, they do not exist in Prince Albert, they do not 

exist anywhere. There was a reduction in Regina of one and 

one-half . . . funding for one and one-half staff positions, an 

assistant administrator in Regina, and a half-time counsellor. I 

think it may be a sore point that I notice that the assistant 

administrator in Regina is an NDP activist – writes letters to the 

Leader-Post. Most likely these letters were written for her by 

the NDP as is their standard practice, and so we have a 

politically motivated discussion here. 

 

But there are no massive cuts. There is an increase in funding 

and the number of beds in Yorkton. And so this is a grand 

misconception that the members opposite would like to convey 

to the public, which is similar to their constant barrage on 

myself as an individual, as exemplified by the member from 

Regina Rosemont, and they would try to have the public believe 

that I have no heart. And the people who know me, and the 

people who this government, know what the truth is. And I 

would suggest that they would give up on this constant rhetoric 

of massive cuts in health when there’s an increase, and this kind 

of behaviour the public can see through. 

 

The second part of the question was: what is the subvote 20 

comprised of? The total sum of $234,200 – grants to third 

parties concerned with economic and social equity. The 

Saskatchewan Indian Women’s Association receives $91,600, 

approximately the same as last year, slightly greater. The 

Saskatchewan Native Women’s Association receives $91,600, 

approximately the same as last year.  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2144 

 

There is $45,000 for women’s grants, which is spent for the 

operations of the advisory council, the provincial advisory 

council. And there are miscellaneous grants budgeted of $6,000 

for a total of $234,200 in that category. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, with respect to your comments 

about New Democratic women and New Democrats attempting 

to cast unreasonable light on your cut-backs, do you deny, Mr. 

Minister, that there was a 14.5 per cent cut to the Regina 

Transition House? Do you deny that, Mr. Minister? Is that what 

you’re saying? And don’t you understand that when 

organizations are cut back that amount, that it makes it very 

difficult for them to function? 

 

It may not be much money to you, Mr. Minister, who pays 

$50,000 a year in income tax. That may mean nothing to you, 

Mr. Minister . . . or 41,000 or whatever it is, and I’d like to 

know what sort of income pays 41 to $50,000 in income tax; I’d 

suggest something over 100,000, Mr. Minister. 

 

(1045) 

 

No wonder you’re so insensitive. No wonder you’re so 

insensitive to these cut-backs to ordinary men and women who 

don’t have that sort of money. No wonder you’re so insensitive, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

The Transition House in Regina was cut back by 14.5 per cent, 

and I wasn’t going to get into a lot of detail over the cut-backs 

to transition homes, but you brought it up, Mr. Minister. So let 

me just give you another example of how you’re misleading the 

public with respect to transition homes. The funding for the La 

Ronge shelter, for example, for ‘87-88, was 108,900, and yes, it 

is more than ‘86-87, which was only 94,500. But what you 

failed to tell the public of this province, Mr. Minister, which is 

very typical of the way you manage things, what you failed to 

tell public of this province is that that funding at the La Ronge 

shelter was for a six-month period only – for only a six month 

period. And the level of funding that the La Ronge shelter needs 

to operate is 147,000, so in effect, there has not been an 

increase, Mr. Minister, there’s been a decrease of 35 per cent 

below the required operating level. And that’s the kind of 

misleading facts, Mr. Minister, that you and your government 

perpetrates to the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Don’t tell me that women haven’t been affected by those 

cut-backs because I know, and the members on this side of the 

House are fully aware at how severely they’ve been hurt by 

your government cut-backs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Now, Mr. Minister, with respect to pay equity. 

On July 21, we had an opportunity to debate the issue of pay 

equity, and for the viewing audience who didn’t have the 

opportunity of the July 21 debate, pay equity means “the 

recognizing of the relative value of work performed irrespective 

of the gender of the employees.” It means that employees do 

not . . . employers, rather, do not pay different salaries and 

benefits to male and female employees who are  

performing work of equal value. 

 

The question of pay equity, Mr. Minister, is a moral and 

economic issue. And why are we talking about pay equity? 

We’re talking about pay equity because women in this province 

earn approximately 57 per cent of what men earn, and 34 per 

cent of women are single and depend on their income, and 

many women who are single have dependants for whom they’re 

responsible, Mr. Minister. That’s why pay equity is important. 

But even though they may be responsible for dependants (and 

single), and depend on their own income, they’re earning 

approximately 57 per cent of what men earn. But, Mr. Minister, 

groceries and housing and clothes don’t cost 43 per cent less for 

women, they cost the same. 

 

And in the interests of brevity this morning I will not repeat all 

the points made on July 21. But I must say that in this tight 

labour market, Mr. Minister, that exists today in Saskatchewan, 

it is even more important to put forward pay equity legislation. 

And The Labour Standards Act, contrary to what you said in 

your argument on July 21, because obviously you didn’t 

understand what pay equity was all about, The Labour 

Standards Act, as it now stands, is not pay equity. It’s 

something different. It doesn’t meet the standard of pay equity. 

 

We need to move on this, Mr. Minister. We need to move on 

this, Mr. Minister. We need to move on this because women’s 

jobs have been traditionally low-paying . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . not because they’re menial and worthless, au 

contraire; many of these women perform very valuable work 

for society – but they’ve been traditionally low-paying because 

employers in society place too little value on women’s work 

and therefore it’s become easy to underpay women’s work. And 

although it won’t solve all our problems, Mr. Minister, it’s 

something that we have to get on with. 

 

Now on July 21, you talked about, you thought we had pay 

equity with respect to the union. Mr. Minister, that was such a 

narrow point of view. Don’t you realize that pay equity is 

something that goes beyond the union, to out-of-scope 

employees as well, and it goes into the private sector? The 

Labour Standards Act doesn’t just apply to union employees as 

it now stands, Mr. Minister, but obviously you weren’t familiar 

with the concept of pay equity. And I think your comments on 

July 21 showed that you didn’t understand. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, you showed a positive attitude. You said, “ 

. . . we clearly believe in equal pay for equal work.” Or for work 

of equal value, is what you should have said, because I believe 

that’s what you wanted to say, Mr. Minister. And I accept those 

comments. And you held out to the public that you were going 

to look into it and see whether or not there were any inequalities 

in the public service. 

 

Now as recently as about one week ago, I understand you 

hadn’t yet looked into it. You hadn’t yet contacted somebody in 

the Public Service Commission. And I’m wondering now, Mr. 

Minister, because I understand you’ve received correspondence 

inviting you to approach them, saying: let’s get together and 

talk about it, in spite of the fact you said you were going to get 

together and talk about it and hadn’t. I’m wondering now if 

you’ve  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2145 

 

made any contact with SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Union) to talk about the concept and the possibility 

of implementing pay equity forthwith. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, over and over 

again I’ve watched the sanctimonious member for Regina 

Lakeview, Ms. Poverty, Ms. Sensitivity, spokesperson of 

ordinary persons, come here and lead us to believe that only she 

understands other people’s plight. 

 

Let us examine the true facts here. I would submit that my 

understanding should be as great as hers. Yes, it is correct that 

my family paid over $50,000 in taxes last year. But let’s 

examine her family, a two-income family. Her husband is a 

provincial court judge, is paid by the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan at least $73,000 per year. The member opposite 

is an MLA, is paid the same as I am as an MLA – I believe it’s 

about $36,000 a year. That gives her a family income of 

$109,000 per year. And because as a cabinet minister I make 

about $65,000 a year, and my wife and I have income, that is 

not derived from taxpayers, in excess of $65,000 a year – 

somehow because she receives, in her family, $109,000 – at 

least $109,000, plus benefits, two pension plans – that somehow 

her experience with poverty is greater than mine, and she is the 

expert on how the poor people live. And this is the kind of 

double-talk that we hear from the NDP: We understand the 

poor; we only have an income of $109,000 a year. 

 

And then I read . . . The member opposite writes a letter to The 

Melville Advance, in my constituency. And she comes into my 

constituency and writes a letter talking about poverty and 

suggesting I don’t understand my constituents, that I don’t 

know anything about the real world. And she should go and see 

the real world. How does anybody with an income of $109,000 

know anything? Maybe she’d recall . . . Her and I, I agree, both 

grew up fairly poor, not in spirit, but fairly poor. I know her 

family well; we were even related, and we know each other. But 

here she stands in this House and says: oh, because my family 

pays a large amount of taxes we don’t understand anything 

about the real world. Well we earn that money in the real world. 

But here is the member from Lakeview, with a family income 

in excess of $109,000 a year, and she says she is an expert on 

poverty. 

 

I think what we have to do, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is that we, as 

members here, have to use our broad experience of the world. 

We have to go out into our constituencies, as we do on this side 

of the House, and deal with our neighbours. My neighbours are 

farmers, my relatives are farmers, my relatives are unionized 

workers. My father was a member of the Grain Services Union 

for 19 years. The union that the member from Regina North 

once was a leader of, my father was a member for 19 years. So 

we’ve drawn our experiences, and we understand the plight of 

all Saskatchewan people. 

 

And so let’s not stand here and compare incomes and plead 

poverty. What we have to, here, plead is that we have wisdom. 

The members on this side of the House have wisdom, and we 

try to govern for the benefit of all the citizens in this province, 

and we try to do it as fairly as possible. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has 

consistently showed a total insensitivity to women’s issues and 

the plight of poor people in this province. There is no question 

in our minds about that – absolutely no question. 

 

So he obviously, if he lives in an environment where he 

associates with people who are having difficulty making ends 

meet, he’s not listening, Mr. Minister. He’s not listening, and 

this government’s not listening. 

 

And he didn’t listen to my question, Mr. Minister – he didn’t 

listen to my question. Instead, he felt it was necessary to go on 

an ad hominen personal tirade, to get it off his chest, and that’s 

fine, that’s okay. But my question to him, Mr. Minister was: did 

he write to SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 

Union) – and I’ll ask him again – and say that he is prepared to 

look into the problem of pay equity and see whether or not he 

would amend the legislation to comply with pay equity? Did he 

do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we contacted the 

Public Service Commission, and I have on my desk, on the third 

floor of this building, a letter to SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union) on the very topic. I was going 

to sign it yesterday, but I didn’t get a chance to look at the final 

draft and sign it. I was too busy guarding my tongue from the 

member from Regina Rosemont, and I didn’t have time to sign 

the letter. 

 

Then in the meantime, at the direction of the member from 

Lakeview, SGEU has sent me a letter on the very same topic, 

and I expect that at some time in the not too distant future I will 

be meeting with the SGEU, or I think it was SFL 

(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour); I have to check the letter. 

I’m not sure if it came from Nadine Hunt or Barb Byers; I get 

quite a lot of correspondence form them, but it was from one of 

those two individuals. We will be dealing with the topic and, 

should we finish estimates today in reasonable time, I will go 

upstairs and sign the letter and we’ll continue the process. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, we won’t finish estimates today 

if you continue to go on with the sort of tirades that you’ve 

already engaged in this morning. 

 

It’s very interesting to see that you haven’t contacted SGEU 

yet, and you say there’s a letter sitting on your desk. And that’s 

a very typical excuse that one can give. I just hope that this 

doesn’t go on as long as the Women’s Advisory Council – 

December to June before you do anything. And you didn’t 

really do anything until our office wrote to your office asking 

who was appointed before you really moved on anything with 

respect to that even. So, Mr. Minister, that just shows that your 

government does not put women’s issues and women’s 

problems as a priority. 

 

Now I have further . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that 

has been well established a number of times in the last few 

hours since we’ve been on these estimates. 

 

Mr. Minister, who is responsible for employment equity? I 

asked you a question last night about the dismantling of  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2146 

 

the employment equity branch and the so-called – to use the 

words of the member from Weyburn – absorption into the 

Human Resources and Labour department. Tell me who’s 

responsible for employment equity. Employment equity would 

be the branch, Mr. Minister, that deals with pay equity, to give 

equal wages for work of equal value to women, or that concept. 

It would deal with affirmative action to advance women in jobs. 

Tell me: who’s responsible for employment equity in your 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I recall answering that 

question last night. I suppose the member has forgotten it. The 

answer is Leah Siebold. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Now if the employment equity branch, Mr. 

Minister, has been transferred to Human Resources and Labour, 

why aren’t the estimated expenditures for this department 

included in your department’s budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated last 

evening, this is a recent happening that the responsibilities 

transferred to my department was done after the budget was 

printed. In addition, the person that is responsible there has a 

position in my department. There is no new expenditure for that 

individual’s salary, so we do not have to budget at this time. 

There may be some incidental expenses and we’ll have to deal 

with those as we go. 

 

(1100) 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, in the ‘86-87 budget for the 

Public Service Commission, affirmative action or employment 

equity, if you like, had $582,930. Are you telling me that that 

money is no longer available or budgeted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Certainly we would like to have that 

money in our department, but that money is budgeted in the 

Public Service Commission. You’ll have to ask that question on 

the estimates of the Public Service Commission. 

 

Ms. Simard: — But the employment equity branch is in your 

department, Mr. Minister. What good is that money going to do 

in the Public Service Commission if it’s been transferred to 

your department? Obviously it’s not available, another example, 

Mr. Minister, of your government’s unwillingness to put 

women’s issues at the forefront and to give them the priority 

that they do. A $600,000 cut to affirmative action, Mr. Minister 

– that’s disgraceful. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to take you back to the ‘86-87 

women’s secretariat estimates showing that grants to 

organizations and agencies concerned with women’s issues, 

$45,000, ‘86-87. Could you please tell me what organizations 

received grants under that amount and what amount each 

organization received? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the only 

expenditure in that area was for the provincial advisory council. 

They spent approximately $23,000 last year; they had $45,000 

budgeted. We’ve again budgeted $45,000, and I would hope 

that they would put the  

$45,000 to good use. We’re quite happy if they do spend the 

entire 45,000. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Sorry, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t hear. How much 

did the provincial advisory council spend? I didn’t hear the 

figure, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Exactly $24,636. 

 

Ms. Simard: — The other thing that I’m wondering about, Mr. 

Minster, is in the ‘85-86 public accounts, it shows that under 

other expenses, this is at page 573 of the ‘85-86 Public 

Accounts, other expenses for women’s secretariat, 40,263.14. 

Could you please tell me what was spent under that; what the 

40,263.14 was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, as far as we can 

ascertain, this is in 1985. Some of my people that are now with 

me today were not in the department at the time, and we’re 

trying to reconstruct this. As far as we can recall, most of that 

$40,000 was for the salary of a Janet Wile, seconded from 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance office, and that was to 

pay her salary while she was assisting in our department, in the 

women’s department. Now this individual in no longer within 

the province, and this expenditure is not necessary at this time. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, how much was the salary please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, her salary was 

$3,274 per month. 

 

Ms. Simard: — The figure there, Mr. Minister, is 40,263.14. 

Could you tell me whether your information that you have here 

today shows that there was polling done under that amount; 

polling done with Tanka or Decima polling? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, as far as we 

know, all of that money – the 3,274 – was paid to the 

individual, who was a public servant in Saskatchewan and is 

now a public servant in Manitoba. And we know nothing of any 

polling. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Now, Mr. Minister, in light of your comments 

about the employment equity branch being phased into your 

department, the $600,000 being lost with respect to it, I want to 

refer you, in light of those comments, to your own internal 

policy document from the women’s secretariat, which I’m sure 

you’re very familiar with. And on page two of that document it 

says – and this is a document that was put out by the women’s 

secretariat, talking about a Saskatchewan plan of action to 

enhance opportunities for women. Very good document, Mr. 

Minister; I suggest that you should follow it a little more 

closely. The document says: 

 

The first principle is increasing economic opportunities for 

women. And this will provide significant benefit to 

women, to government, to families, and to the economy. 

 

And it addresses the fact that 64.8 per cent in the Saskatchewan 

labour force in 1983 were employed in  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2147 

 

the service and trade industries. And women employed full time 

earned, it says here, 66 per cent of the income earned by men. 

Now I’d asked you about pay equity, Mr. Minister. Are you 

going to amend The Labour Standards Act tomorrow, within 

this session, to ensure that pay equity is implemented in this 

province? Your paper here is suggesting that you should do 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, The Labour 

Standards Act that we now have was written and passed by the 

NDP, has not been amended by this government. If there’s 

anything wrong with it, it was the NDP who implemented the 

Act. We are studying the amendments to that particular Act, 

and we’ll try to include as much fairness as is possible. 

 

There will always be a debate over what is fair and what isn’t 

fair. We certainly have, as a number one priority, economic 

equality of women in this country. And a lot has been done. 

Women are now legally equal in Canada in all respects. But I 

agree that they do not have full economic equality at this stage, 

and we will continue to work towards full economic equality 

for women. But we will not pass laws that women will be paid a 

certain sum and men will be paid another certain sum. And our 

laws will be equal for men and women. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, times are changing. When the 

present Labour Standards Act was amended with respect to its 

equal pay for similar work, it was very progressive legislation. 

But you seem to be living in the past, or perhaps you’d like to 

turn the clock backwards; I’m not sure, Mr. Minister. 

 

Times are changing and we’re advancing – we’re advancing 

constantly. And Saskatchewan is lagging behind. Pay equity has 

been an acceptable principle for several years now, and it’s time 

for this government to get off its butt and implement the 

concept of pay equity. It’s time to proceed in that fashion. 

 

Don’t give me this silly thing that we hear constantly from the 

members on the other side of the House that, oh well, back 

before 1982 this is the way things were. This is five years later, 

Mr. Minister. Are we going to have to wait another five years 

before you do anything on this? The women of this province are 

not prepared to wait, Mr. Minister. They want justice now. 

 

Now I’m going to refer you to another statement in your 

internal policy paper which says that you should consider the 

problems inherent in the fact that 70 per cent of single parent 

women live below the poverty line, and 71 per cent of 

minimum wage-earners are women. Your women’s secretariat 

has pointed that to your attention. And what do you say about it, 

Mr. Minister? We will monitor minimum wage. You don’t 

really care, Mr. Minister, that 71 per cent of the minimum 

wage-earners are women. You don’t care that 70 per cent of 

single parent women live below the poverty line. 

 

Now I want to know from you, Mr. Minister, how you are going 

to implement and act on the recommendation of your own 

women’s secretariat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we are already 

implementing and acting on curing some of these problems. 

First of all, with respect to single parents – 90 per cent of which 

are women; 10 per cent of which are men – this government is 

pursuing actively, in every way possible, maintenance from 

spouses who do not support their children. This is something 

that this government has initiated and is following up on very 

carefully, and we expect to have more and more progress in this 

regard. 

 

I can tell you this, that as a man, I will not tolerate men who do 

not support their children. I can tell you this, that as a person, 

no one would tolerate men or women who do not support their 

children if they are able to do it. This government will not 

tolerate that. We are not tolerating this kind of conduct, and we 

are doing everything possible to assist single parents, 

predominantly women, in collecting money from responsible 

spouses who are, I might say, acting in an irresponsible manner. 

 

Secondly, there are at present 2,500 people on the Social 

Services payroll that were clients of ours who are in training, 

receiving education, so that they will be able to obtain jobs, be 

self-sufficient, and earn higher wages in order to assist the 

living standard of their families. Of those 2,500, the first 

priority is single mothers, mothers who have been deserted by 

their spouse – the first priority. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, this kind of program did not exist until 

we initiated welfare reform in this government. It did not exist 

under the NDP. There are 2,500 people at any given time 

getting additional training and additional education so that they 

can obtain jobs at higher wages. And this is geared primarily for 

single mothers. 

 

So it seems to me that the members opposite have a short 

memory and were short on ideas when they were government, 

did not implement the practical things that are needed to assist 

women in this province, but got up on their soap box and 

spieled away about rights and equality. We are practical people, 

and we’re dealing with these matters in a practical way. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I can’t help but comment on 

your comments about maintenance in that you’re trying to get 

maintenance for these women. And you know, I’m not 

knocking the maintenance enforcement division. I think that’s a 

good division, although there, once again, I believe the 

government is not moving on it as quickly as they should or 

putting as much into it as they should, but are holding back. 

 

(1115) 

 

But the whole attitude that: well, if we can get these women 

maintenance, they’ll be okay . . . By all means pursue 

maintenance, but many of these women cannot get maintenance 

from their husbands because their husbands can’t be located, or 

because they’re not earning sufficient money to provide them 

with maintenance. So this whole attitude, that if we can get 

these women maintenance they’ll be okay, and that solves the 

problem, just shows an ignorance about what the real problem 

is out there, Mr. Minister. I’m sad to say that, but it does. 

 

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2148 

 

When you started slashing programs to technical institutes, your 

government paid no attention to the fact that many of these 

programs, the majority of these programs, were programs that 

were filled by women. You paid absolutely no attention to that, 

and yet I hear from you today about education enhancing 

women’s opportunities. But you weren’t thinking about it when 

you cut back on the technical institutes in this province. 

 

And so I’m hearing double-talk all the time from the members 

on the government side – double-talk about things that are very 

serious and concern women in this province. Now, Mr. 

Minister, your internal policy paper also says that the third 

principle emphasizes the need for basic physical and financial 

security, in addition to legal equality for women. And it goes on 

to talk about: 

 

that the government will continue to foster a society that 

respects human dignity and recognizes the right to security 

for all persons. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, when I look at the problem of wife-beating 

or wife-battering in this province, and the fact that – I know 

you’ll say that there have been no cuts, but you know in your 

heart of hearts, Mr. Minister, that’s not true. There have been 

substantial cuts to certain transition homes in this province – 

some in your riding, for example, or your constituency may not 

have been cut, but there are other transition homes that have 

been cut. There’s something like 4,134 women in this province 

who were turned away from transition homes in the last two 

years, and yet your own internal policy paper speaks to that 

issue and states that it’s something that has to be dealt with and 

action has to be taken on it. 

 

Now I want to know form you, Mr. Minister, what your plans 

are to solve the problem of these women and children who are 

fleeing from life-threatening situations? I want to know what 

you’re going to do now, and I don’t want to hear any rhetoric 

about how good the situation is, because the facts are against 

you, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the 

member opposite would try to suggest that we on this side of 

the House know nothing about violence against women, or we 

know nothing about abuse of women. I can tell you this, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman, that I personally, as a prosecutor working to 

enforce the laws of this province, have sent wife-beaters to jail. 

I have personally assisted women in moving out of their house 

with the RCMP present. I have personally got up at 3 o’clock in 

the morning and gone to the house of women who have had 

problems with their husband being violent, and tried to help 

with the situation. 

 

So we have some understanding that there is a problem there. 

We are doing what is possible. I have also, personally, 

prosecuted men for beating their wife, and then watched the 

wife move back into the violent situation, and prosecuted the 

man again. And we have to try to figure out ways of trying to 

solve these problems. Unfortunately, I . . . as a government, we 

on this side of the House – no government can legislate 

kindness; no government can legislate sobriety; alcohol is often 

involved in these cases. No government can legislate common 

sense. 

 

We have to work through the law to prosecute people. We have 

to work towards the correction of these offenders. We have to 

work towards detection, but above all, we have to keep in mind 

that these are families, and we have to work to try to keep these 

families together, if possible, and make an improvement in the 

lives of the husband and the wife and the children. And if these 

families cannot be kept together, then we have to assist the wife 

in living independently form her husband who, in some cases, is 

beyond correction. 

 

And that is why we have 2,500 people on the Saskatchewan 

skills development program and on a Saskatchewan 

employment development program to assist these people. And I 

don’t think this is an area where people should get into political 

rhetoric. We are doing everything possible to cure a situation. 

Most likely . . . Wife-battering is not on the increase, but is now 

being detected and coming out into the open. And we are doing 

many, many things to try to correct that. 

 

The member opposite will know that in family disputes, that the 

Attorney General’s department will, only on the rarest of 

occasions, withdraw a complaint where a wife has made a 

complaint about wife-battering. And I recall that in the past 

these complaints would be made, and then the wife would 

withdraw the complaint, and nothing would ever be done about 

it. And the Attorney General’s department, under our 

government, has had a policy, where a wife makes a complaint, 

they proceed with the prosecution, and so the husband cannot 

coerce the wife into giving up or dropping the charges. 

 

We have made improvements in many, many areas, but 

unfortunately we can’t legislate kindness or common sense. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, what your government is doing 

to help these women is to cut back on legal aid and impose user 

fees for those women who wish to use legal aid to get out of 

violent situations. That’s what your government has done for 

these women. 

 

What your government has also done for these women is turned 

away 4,134 women in two years from transition homes. Now, 

Mr. Minister, wouldn’t you agree that perhaps the first step 

would be to open up your doors to those 4,134 women who 

leave transition homes, women and children who leave 

transition homes because there isn’t adequate space for them. 

Isn’t that the first thing to do, or at least one of the things that 

should be given top priority by your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, transition houses are important, 

but they are not the solution to all problems, and we have to 

look at a broad spectrum of solutions in this area. And the next 

thing that we have to look at is where the transition houses 

should be, and there’s a concentration in Regina, Saskatoon, 

and a few other centres. There’s none in my constituency. There 

are none in the Estevan area, none in the Swift Current area. 

And we have to look at serving the entire province, so we will 

examine the areas where the greatest need is. 

 

We have little information of the actual internal workings.  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2149 

 

These are non-governmental organizations, and it’s not like 

having your department, so we have difficulty obtaining 

information on the details of the workings of the transition 

houses. And we know that they serve a good purpose, but as to 

the amount of money required to operate one transition house as 

opposed to another transition house, it’s rather difficult for us to 

judge. And so we try our best. 

 

In addition what we have is . . . we’re concerned with 

duplication of services, and we’re looking at the possibilities of 

how services to women can be consolidated. We have sexual 

assault lines; we have women’s transition houses; we have 

crisis centres; and we have native groups providing services; 

and we have non-native groups providing services. 

 

And from the point of view of the department, we have to 

examine whether some of these services could be consolidated 

and therefore provide a better service in that you would have 

people with a broader area of skills, and you wouldn’t have a 

situation where for a certain type of problem you’re directed 

here; for another problem you’re directed there. We would like 

to have some degree of constituency, so we’re examining this, 

and intend to make continuous improvements in this area. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to hear that 

you’re examining it. I would think that opening the doors to 

women who are fleeing violent situations should be a top 

priority with this government. I don’t believe it’s too much 

money to spend when you have billions of dollars, billions of 

dollars to give away in tax holidays and incentives to large 

corporations from out of province. A few dollars here in 

Saskatchewan to protect our women is not too much to ask of 

this government, Mr. Minister. 

 

And with respect to legal aid, as you know, women and children 

leaving violent situations often depend upon legal aid for 

protection. And a woman who’s experiencing trauma and stress 

associated with having to deal with and leave an abusive 

relationship, will also experience additional financial and 

emotional burden. You know that, Mr. Minister, and yet your 

government has approved the imposition of legal aid user fees. 

And these women are going to . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Order. I would like to 

remind the hon. member that we are dealing with Human 

Resources, Labour and Employment, and you’re bringing up 

the legal aid issue, which is part of Social Services. So we’ll 

have the opportunity to discuss that then. 

 

Ms. Simard: — The women’s secretariat, Mr. Chairman, is 

responsible for anything relating to the status of women in this 

province. So with all due respect, I beg to differ with you. It’s 

right here in their mandate; they’re responsible for anything 

pertaining to women. And if you like, Mr. Chairman, I will read 

you the section, because perhaps you didn’t have a copy of this 

legislation. It says that: 

 

The minister has the responsibility for matters relating to 

the status of women, and may co-ordinate policies and 

programs (and legal aid is  

a program), and activities of the Government of 

Saskatchewan relating to the status of women, and the 

minister may provide any assistance that the minister 

considers appropriate to improve the status of women in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, when women are fleeing violent situations 

and have to pay user fees to get legal aid, I would suggest that 

that’s an issue that pertains to women and should be looked into 

by the minister responsible for improving the status of women. I 

think it quite logically follows, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — You may proceed. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Now my 

question to the minister, Mr. Minister, is that an overwhelming 

majority of family law cases opened by the legal aid are filed by 

women. And often these women are in desperate situations and 

require immediate legal action to obtain restraining orders, 

custody of children, and/or maintenance orders. And so I want 

to know how the minister – because he is responsible for 

improving the lot of women in this province – how the minister 

will guarantee that women will receive quick, legal action from 

legal aid even if they can’t afford the user fees and even if 

they’re not on social welfare. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is very 

simple. 

 

First of all, Mr. Chairman, you are correct in your ruling that 

legal aid is paid for and voted in this Assembly under Social 

Services. Your ruling was correct, and the member opposite 

should have more respect for the Chair than to challenge the 

Chair in that manner. 

 

In any event, since we are on the topic, and somehow it has 

snuck into these estimates, I have nothing to hide and will 

answer the question. The answer to the question is very simple: 

women who cannot afford to pay a user fee at legal aid do not 

have to pay a user fee at legal aid. That is the criteria: can you 

afford to pay any kind of a fee. 

 

Secondly, the great majority of the work done at legal aid right 

now is criminal work. And if the criminal work-load is not as 

high, then there will be more time for the legal aid clinics to do 

work in family law. And I don’t know if it’s going to be lower, 

but certainly we wouldn’t expect the work-load to be higher. 

 

So there is ample time for legal aid to deal with family law 

problems, and I would hope that they could give these problems 

a priority. In the past, they have done a reasonably good job in 

this area; I expect they will be able to continue to do the job. 

But the member’s question answers itself, you know: those who 

cannot afford to pay any kind of a user fee will not be asked to 

pay a user fee, and so that’s the end of the matter. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Obviously the minister doesn’t understand 

what happens in these situations, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Women may be able to afford it several months down the road 

when they get themselves together, but initially they  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2150 

 

may not have any money; their husbands may be supporting 

them. So obviously the minister didn’t understand. 

 

(1130) 

 

And I just wish to comment on the statement he made about 

your ruling, Mr. Chairman. I do believe your ruling was right, 

which is that he’s responsible for those issues in the sense that 

he’s responsible for women. And if he chooses to deny that, 

then I suggest that he’s not fulfilling his mandate under The 

Women’s Secretariat Act, and he precludes himself from acting 

as minister for women’s issues in this province any further if he 

refuses to accept responsibility for that area, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And if he’s suggesting that in my getting up and explaining to 

you what the mandate of his grounds are, in the manner that I 

did, in a genuine and forthright manner, if he’s suggesting to 

you that there was any impropriety in that, then it is typical of 

his attitude that people should not be allowed to voice their 

opinion, and notwithstanding the fact that they may have sound 

and reasonable grounds for doing so. But that’s typical, Mr. 

Chairman, of this minister. 

 

Now I wish to get on to the internal policy paper which says on 

page 3, the internal policy paper of the minister’s department 

which says: 

 

That the policy of the department should be to redesign 

and enhance education and training support programs and 

to expand economic advantages for women. 

 

Which may not be on page 3, the first part being on page 3. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, public service cuts and their effects on 

women. The statistics I have will show you that in the 

Department of Highways – now I’m only talking about in-scope 

positions, Mr. Minister, because we have been unable to get the 

information with respect to out-of-scope positions; it hasn’t 

been available. So I’m now directing myself to in-scope 

positions. 

 

Highways, the percentage of positions occupied by women that 

were eliminated was 29.2 per cent; in Justice, 77.8 per cent; in 

Parks Recreation, Tourism, 44.9 per cent; in Tourism, visitor 

reception centres, I have here, 83.3 per cent; technical institute 

instructors, 39.6 per cent; dental plan, 97.8 per cent; 

prescription drug plan, 84.6 per cent; SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids 

to Independent Living), 18.2 per cent; Rural Development, 0 

per cent. 

 

But do you know what that totals up to, Mr. Minister – 

positions occupied by women that were eliminated by this 

government? Do you know what that totals up to, Mr. Minister 

– 75.2 per cent of the in-scope positions eliminated were 

positions that were occupied by women. 

 

And I think that that is atrocious, Mr. Minister, and it once 

again tells me that this government doesn’t consider the 

advancement of women’s interests a priority. They’re prepared 

to cut back positions that affect those who can  

least afford to have them cut back. Considering the fact when 

we look at minimum wage and all other statistics, no question 

about it – 75.2 per cent, Mr. Minister. 

 

And there were something like 277 unfilled positions were 

eliminated. And because these positions were unfilled, Mr. 

Minister, it’s been very difficult to determine exactly how these 

cuts would affect women. But we have taken a look at the type 

of job and whether or not it’s gender specific, and we’ve come 

to the conclusion, and we believe it’s a conservative estimate, 

that something like 165 of those unfilled positions would have 

been filled by women – would have been filled by women, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Now you may not have these statistics at hand, you may not 

have them at hand, Mr. Minister. And if you don’t have these 

statistics at hand, this is what the women’s division or the 

women’s secretariat, the newly reorganized body, should be 

doing is looking into the effect of your cut-backs in government 

on women, and then, Mr. Minister, they should have the 

mandate to make that information public – to make it public. 

 

And originally in these estimates I criticized your government 

for not giving the women’s secretariat the mandate it should 

have, a mandate to advance the interests of women and, if need 

be, lobby government to do that. Now I’m asking you, Mr. 

Minister: will you look into the effect these cut-backs have had 

on women, and will you make that information public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, it’s rather 

difficult to operate a government under the double standards 

that the NDP suggest we operate. On the one hand, they suggest 

that we hire on an equality basis – this government does not 

hire on the basis of whether a person is a male or a female – and 

on the other hand, we have a mandate to assist women. Now we 

try to assist women, and we try to be an equal opportunity 

employer, and it’s rather difficult. It’s a fine balance to try to do 

this. 

 

So the member opposite, the member from Lakeview, quotes 

statistics that could only be available to, or from, the SGEU, 

because the government doesn’t keep track of hiring on the 

basis of men and women outside of my department. It tries to 

monitor to see how we’re doing. But there is no direction, that 

there is a desk there with a chair, and we’re going to fill that 

chair to have somebody stare out the window because we have 

a certain quota of something or other. And we hire people that 

we need. 

 

We try to keep in our minds that we want to treat women fairly 

and equally. But to be an equal opportunity employer, and then 

to suggest that any kind of a lay-off would be done other than 

by union seniority, is ridiculous. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you haven’t answered my 

question. Are you going to look into the effect of your 

cut-backs on the women of this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, usually I don’t 

read long speeches in this Assembly. As a matter of fact, I don’t 

read speeches. I have a little bit of information that I wish to 

read here, one-half of a page here, which  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2151 

 

answers a lot of questions in this area. 

 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission reviewed 

the government employment equity plan on June 9, 1987, 

and has granted interim approval for the plan. In doing so 

the commission set forth a number of terms and 

conditions. These are: (1) that an update on the 

committee’s structures and monitoring system is to be 

submitted to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission by August 31, 1987; (2) that the following 

information be submitted to the Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Commission by October 31, 1987 – (a) an update 

of the work-force analysis as of August 31, 1987, (b) goals 

to March 31, 1988, (c) goals for the fiscal year 1988-89; 

(3) that a public hearing will be held into this interim 

affirmative action program on October 9, 1987; and (4) 

that a comprehensive affirmative action plan developed by 

a joint committee of representatives of management and 

the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union be 

submitted to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission by June 30, 1988. 

 

Indicating that we are proceeding with something the NDP 

never accomplished, and I believe the member from Lakeview 

was the vice-chairperson of the Human Rights Commission, 

wasn’t able to accomplish anything to this extent, and that these 

issues will be negotiated with the SGEU and will be resolved 

during the negotiations. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I’m finally pleased. I’m finally 

. . . I’m glad that finally after five and one-half years you’ve 

managed to put together an affirmative action program in the 

public service. I’m pleased to see that because in 1982 we were 

so close that it would have happened almost immediately. But 

when you were voted out, it was put on hold for five and 

one-half years. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, that’s okay. I just hope that notwithstanding 

the fact that you have eliminated $600,000 of funding to insure 

that that affirmative action program operates properly, I just 

hope that it still goes ahead and does what the women of this 

province want it to do. But I seriously question the possibility 

of that because, as I said to you in my opening remarks, this 

government pays lip-service to advancing the interests of 

women, but when the bucks have to be put where their rhetoric 

is, it isn’t forthcoming. 

 

And you told us today that the employment equity branch 

disappeared, the $600,000 wasn’t carried over into your 

department, although it was in your department, and now you’re 

telling us we have an affirmative action program. And I wonder 

whether the support will be there to see that program through. I 

wonder, Mr. Minister. I hope it is, and I hope that you, as 

minister responsible for women, will make sure that it is. 

 

But with respect to that affirmative action program, it doesn’t 

exactly answer my question with respect to the cut-backs, 

because although you allude to the fact that there will be a 

review of the status of employment in government, affirmative 

action is usually geared at, particularly in the public service, at 

getting women into  

management levels and higher up the hierarchy. And so your 

affirmative action program may not deal with those women who 

are working at the lower end of the scale, Mr. Minister. So your 

reply doesn’t really answer my question. 

 

But I wish to move on to another area at this time, and that is 

cuts to technical institutes. And I want to refer to your policy on 

page 3 in your own internal policy document, that it’s your 

policy to redesign and enhance education and training support 

programs for women. 

 

And then when I look at the percentage of female students, or 

the programs . . . female students at Wascana Institute affected 

by cuts to, or the transferring of programs, they are as follows, 

Mr. Minister: dental therapy, for example, 98 per cent of those 

are women – the percentage of students in the program that are 

women – 98 per cent; barbering and hair styling, 88 per cent 

were women affected by your cuts; aesthetician, 90 per cent are 

women affected by your cuts; occupational choices, 45 per cent 

are women affected by your cuts; administrative studies and 

business, which is transferred, as opposed to a cut, 50 per cent 

are women affected by your cuts. 

 

But 98 per cent, 80 per cent, 90 per cent – with statistics like 

that, Mr. Minister, how do you explain that, Mr. Minister, in 

light of your own policy to redesign and enhance education and 

training support programs when these women have been 

affected by your cuts and by your transfers of these programs? 

 

And we’ve heard from some of these women, publicly, when all 

these cuts were taking place, about their very personal situation. 

And there’s no question, you can’t get around the fact that 

women have been severely affected by the cuts in those 

programs. How do you explain that, Mr. Minister, in light of 

your own internal policy paper? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I explain it as common 

sense. If you are running technical institutes, and people are 

encouraged to take courses, and only one out of four will be 

able to find a job when they graduate, then it’s common sense 

that you say this course is no longer relevant to society today, 

and that these courses should be changed to courses that are 

relevant. And so, you know, the question you get in an 

educational system is between having people get an education 

in something that interests them, and having people get an 

education in something that will provide them employment. 

 

(1145) 

 

And so when I went to university, I didn’t study not one class in 

political science because I did not consider those classes 

practical towards any form of employment. And certainly you 

have to have some balance and the broadening of awareness, 

but you cannot educate people for positions that are no longer 

required by a changing society. So the answer to that is 

common sense. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the answer to that may be 

common sense to you. And that’s an easy thing to put off these 

individuals who were deeply hurt by these cuts to say it’s 

common sense to disregard their rights and their . . .  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2152 

 

Some of these individuals were part way through a program. 

But that didn’t matter; it didn’t matter that they were in the 

middle of final exams when your government made the 

announcement in its heartless fashion. And now you say it’s 

simply common sense, and that’s the way you deal with it. 

Well, Mr. Minister, it doesn’t wash with the public, I can assure 

you. 

 

Now I would like you to advise me, Mr. Minister, whether 

publicly funded institutions in this province have been 

requested . . . whether your government has requested publicly 

funded institutions to put in place voluntary programs for 

affirmative action. And if so, what are those institutions of 

which you’ve made that request? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, that is more 

appropriately a question to the Minister of Education. And I 

believe he answered that, to some extent, indicating that the 

institutions were voluntarily going in that direction; and his 

report, towards the year 2000, deals with that topic. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, that is not a more appropriate 

question to the Minister of Education. I’m talking about 

affirmative action to publicly funded institutions. That is in 

your area. You should know what institutions, if any, have been 

asked to implement voluntary affirmative action. That’s not an 

Education question, Mr. Minister, I’m sorry to say it’s not. 

 

You say it right here in your own internal policy paper: “request 

publicly funded institutions to implement voluntary programs.” 

Haven’t you read this, Mr. Minister? Haven’t you read this 

document? Instead you say, it’s the Minister of Education’s 

responsibility. Another example, Mr. Minister, another example 

of your government’s lack of priority. You pay lip-service to 

things such as this, but you tie the hands of your own 

employees; you tie the hands of the women’s secretariat. You 

haven’t even read the document, obviously. 

 

Now another policy put out in this principles and policy paper is 

to – and I’ll read it to you, Mr. Minister – “encourage voluntary 

programs by large companies which have government 

contracts.” Now would you please name for me which large 

corporations you have encouraged to implement affirmative 

action programs with respect to women? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we encourage all 

corporations, all institutions, to consider affirmative action and 

deal with the laws of Saskatchewan. And I publicly stand here 

and ask all of them to do so. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Okay. What corporations have you specifically 

contacted, Mr. Minister, and how did you encourage them? Did 

you just pat them on the back and say, you know, maybe we 

should have an affirmative action program; or did you say to the 

corporations, if you don’t implement an affirmative action 

program, or if you want this particular contract, you must look 

at an affirmative action program? That’s what you should be 

doing, Mr. Minister. And when have you done that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve . . . two good 

examples would be: NewGrade, the largest project in  

Saskatchewan, where we have met with NewGrade, considering 

the upgrader. We have 120 native people working there; eight 

women are working there in non-traditional roles. We have 

done the same with Weyerhaeuser. Weyerhaeuser has 14 per 

cent native people working on their construction project right 

now. These are two substantial corporations, corporations that 

are not near to the hearts of the NDP, but corporations that are 

being good corporate citizens and treating Saskatchewan people 

fairly. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, how many women are employed 

at Weyerhaeuser? Do you have an affirmative action program 

that pertains to women, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we wouldn’t force 

people to do construction work if they didn’t apply. And at 

Weyerhaeuser and all construction sites, the number of women 

working there would depend on the number of women who 

apply; and if women are not applying for those jobs, it’s hardly 

possible for us to have a corporation hire a large number of 

women if women are not applying for those jobs. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, obviously, obviously you 

haven’t been insisting on contract compliance, affirmative 

action programs for women. The only programs you can cite to 

me are programs that deal with jobs that women may not be 

interested in applying for. You’re not insisting on it, obviously, 

and that’s the answer. And you should just come clean and give 

us the correct answer, which is that you’re not following your 

own recommendations. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to know whether you will be 

bringing forward in this session legislation that will require 

affirmative action programs in the private sector with respect to 

large corporations that deal with government; will you come 

forward with legislation to that effect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we will review the 

legislation and take that into consideration when we are drafting 

legislation. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I hope that’s not a no, because you’ll be 

hearing about it from me again, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I’m afraid it might be a no, but that’s okay, 

we’ll be back here. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I would like to know your paper, policy 

paper, talks about increasing the opportunity for women to 

participate in private and public pension plans. And, of course, 

you will automatically refer to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

because you constantly pat yourself on the back. Now we have 

made points with respect to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan that 

it excludes those women who are on low income and cannot 

afford to make the $300 a year payment that excludes them, and 

that those women will be the women who need it the most 25 

years from now. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Minister: in light of that criticism, what do 

you intend to do to make sure that those women are able to, and 

can, participate in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, so that 25 

years from now they will have 

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2153 

 

 their own pension, and they’ll feel good about it because they 

won’t necessarily have to go on welfare in order to obtain 

payments? Because there’s some argument, well we don’t want 

to pay welfare in advance. But it seems to me, that if you can 

provide some incentive for them and some way include them in 

that plan, that it would be to everybody’s benefit in 

Saskatchewan. And I would like to know what ideas you have 

in that regard, Mr. Minister, and what you will be doing to 

protect those women? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I think 

we’re making some progress here. The member for Regina 

Lakeview is finally considering something other than the 

narrow point of view and considering that there are various 

possibilities that have to be weighed. And she is quite correct; 

we are not going to pay welfare in advance; she is quite correct 

there are incentives to make contributions to the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan. It is the best form of saving a man or woman 

could do in this province because it is matched by the 

government and protected from income tax until withdrawn. So 

even if one would not be in an income tax bracket, the savings 

that a person would make would be doubled instantly – the best 

investment any citizen could make in their future. 

 

I am pleased that the member opposite is considering the 

various options and understands the considerations that went 

into the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. And I’m pleased that she 

acknowledges that it is a giant step forward, something that no 

other province has done, and we did it as a government to show 

the way for other provinces and for the federal government. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I don’t acknowledge, Mr. Minister, that it’s a 

giant step forward. And my arguments are on record and in 

Hansard. I say that I’m glad the government is considering 

pensions for home-makers, but you are excluding some 

home-makers who can’t afford it, and those who need it the 

most, and the plan is surely lacking because of it, Mr. Minister, 

surely lacking. 

 

Now your paper also says . . . and so I don’t believe it’s a giant 

step forward. It’s also, to make a point, since we’re on the issue, 

it’s also interfering with federal-provincial negotiations to set 

up a federally-funded plan which is where we should be 

moving, Mr. Minister, instead of jumping the gun and coming 

forward with pre-election promises that haven’t been thought 

through and that don’t meet the real needs of this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, your own paper here says that it’s your 

policy to review labour legislation and revise where necessary 

to reflect present labour market composition and conditions. I 

would like to know, Mr. Minister . . . I’d like to know if we 

could have the results of your review and analysis; and I’d like 

to know what actions you’ve taken as a result of your supposed 

review and analysis. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the review will 

be completed in a few months, and the results will be available 

at that time. The member opposite asks for things that are not 

possible at this time. And we will consider this, and the answer 

will be made available when the final decisions have been 

made. 

 

Ms. Simard: — And I hope there will be a lot of things in it,  

Mr. Minister, to solve many of the problems that we’ve 

discussed today. We will be awaiting this eagerly. 

 

Mr. Minister, another policy of yours is continued, planned, day 

care development with a view to increasing the number of day 

care spaces available, developing a wider range of options, and 

increasing subsidies to low-income workers. Now my question 

to you, Mr. Minister, is: in what direction is this development 

going? What are the wider options? And could you please reply 

to that, first off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, at this time we 

are awaiting the final federal position to see how this will 

correlate with our plans in Saskatchewan. We expect that will 

be out very soon. There was an indication it would be out by the 

end of June, but that was not the case. We expect it will be out 

very soon, and then we will be able to assess the day care 

situation and the future directions we can take, taking into 

account the federal position on day care and federal funding that 

might be available. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, is it true that grants to day care 

have been frozen? Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, day care is a 

vote under Social Services, totally within the jurisdiction of 

Social Services. As far as I know, the answer is no, and we are 

considering opening some new day-care centres within the 

province, but I don’t have my officials here to get details on 

things. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, would you please provide us 

with that information when you have it? 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. The child-care issue is under 

Social Services, vote 36, number 16, so at that time the minister 

will be able to deal with that. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll accept your ruling on that. I 

simply want to make the point that this is also a matter that 

pertains to women going out into the labour market and 

advancing the interests of women and, therefore, I believe the 

minister should be informed about that, even if it is in Social 

Services. It pertains to women, and therefore he should inform 

himself. 

 

Now you have said in your policy paper, as well, Mr. Minister, 

that the government will strive to increase opportunities for 

women to choose the manner in which they participate in public 

life. And you’ve specifically said, to encourage municipalities, 

co-operatives, sport and recreation and cultural associations to 

increase their representation of women on boards and 

commissions, in those areas. Now could you please advise me, 

Mr. Minister, what have you done – specifically what you have 

done, not general statements – specifically what you have done 

to encourage municipalities to increase the representation of 

women in local government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

specifically we have set an example by increasing the number 

of women on boards and commissions from 7.5  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2154 

 

per cent – 7.7, I think, if I recall correctly – 7.7 per cent when 

the NDP were kicked out of office, to 29 per cent today. As I 

indicated yesterday to the member opposite, we are screening 

all the government boards and commissions with a view 

towards increasing the number of women even further. 

Specifically, we are setting an example for all of Saskatchewan 

and that is probably the best way to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — For all of Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — My learned colleagues say, for all of 

Canada. Yes, and that is setting an example, is the best way of 

showing the province and the country how it’s to be done and 

what should be done. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you may be giving yourself 

self-congratulatory praises. I say to you that you’re not moving 

quickly enough on this issue, not nearly quickly enough. You 

move from affirmative action from 9 per cent to 17, or 

whatever, and you think that’s great. That’s not good enough, 

Mr. Minister, and the women of this province don’t think it’s 

good enough. It’s not good enough. And I don’t want to wait 

another five or six years to see another 8 or 9 per cent of 

women into managerial positions. There has to be action on 

this, and it has to be taken now, and you have to pursue this 

matter more aggressively. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Minister, the answer is that you haven’t 

specifically gone to municipalities or recreational boards and 

told them about the direction that you would like to see them 

moving. Obviously you haven’t done that, Mr. Minister, or you 

would have told us today. 

 

Now I want to know whether or not, Mr. Minister, you’re 

reviewing family laws with respect to child custody, abduction, 

access, and maintenance, and what your intentions are with 

respect to the unified family court model, for example. And 

what is your government doing in that regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — First of all, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

today is my 16th wedding anniversary. It’s a very, very happy 

day for my wife and I. And that reminds me of my wife’s 

opinion on some women’s issues and what some women say. 

And my wife advises me that the women who shout the loudest 

do not necessarily represent her views. So I say to the member 

from Lakeview, she does not represent all women in 

Saskatchewan, nor do all of them agree with her views. And so 

my wife . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. The ancillary 

conversations are very interesting, but they do make it difficult 

for the two members who are discussing the issue at hand. So 

could we please co-operate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize for my 

colleagues who were reminding the member from Lakeview 

that her family income is over $109,000. They shouldn’t do that 

from their seats. 

 

The situation is thus, that with respect to family law, we are 

reviewing the family laws of Saskatchewan with the view to 

assisting families. And I agree, in particular, the laws need to 

assist single parents the most because those  

are the most difficult families to operate in. And we are 

reviewing all of those laws. We’re reviewing the child care Act; 

we are reviewing many, many laws, and there will be 

amendments. 

 

I think, if you look at the statutes of Saskatchewan, this 

government has set a record for amending laws in the last five 

and a half years. We have kept up a tremendous pace at 

updating laws, and all of the laws with respect to family law are 

being examined and will be improved from time to time. 

 

Ms. Simard: — When are these improvements going to be 

forthcoming, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, some of them in 

this session, depending on how long it lasts. The members 

opposite indicate it may go till March, in which case some of 

them will be in this session, some of them in the following 

session. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Could the minister tell us what improvements 

he’s referring to; what specific improvements he’s talking 

about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I know 

that the member from Lakeview is eager to criticize, and she 

will have ample opportunity to be negative when these 

improvements are introduced. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Obviously, Mr. Chairman, the minister isn’t 

going to be forthcoming about what changes he is considering. 

I’m wondering then, Mr. Minister, whether he’s prepared to 

discuss these anticipated changes with the women’s 

organizations in this province, or will he continue to do it 

behind closed cabinet doors as he did the reorganization of the 

women’s division, informing them about it after the fact. 

 

I’m wondering if the minister is prepared to come forward and 

tell the people of this province, instead of using this petty, 

insignificant rhetoric of his and . . . Conversation here that has 

taken place this morning in the last few minutes has been 

ridiculous. But I wonder if the minister is prepared to rise above 

that; I wonder if he’s prepared to rise above that and say that he 

will meet with women’s organizations around this province to 

discuss what changes should be implemented and what he is 

thinking about, so that women’s organizations have an 

opportunity to make some input into it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The answer is yes, Mr. Chairman. I will 

meet with women’s groups throughout the province. I’m not 

likely to meet with very many NDP women’s groups, but I’m 

prepared to meet with non-partisan women’s groups and discuss 

these issues and consider their advice and recommendations. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the internal policy paper of the 

women’s secretariat goes on to make a number of other 

suggestions. I’m not going to go into them this morning in 

detail. I would advise the minister to take a close look at that. I 

would advise the minister to pursue the objectives that are set 

out in that policy paper, genuinely, sincerely, immediately, and 

not to just pay lip-service to the fact that he’s interested in 

advancing the  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2155 

 

interests of women in this province. 

 

I want to move on to another area that causes me concern, and 

that’s the cut-backs to the Human Rights Commission. And that 

causes me concern, Mr. Minister, because one-third of the cases 

that go before the Human Rights Commission are cases dealing 

with sex discrimination, and therefore within your mandate. 

 

And in 1983, or shortly after 1983, there was a report that come 

forward by the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission that 

suggested the commission Act should be amended to bring it 

more in line with the charter. And I would like the minister to 

advise whether or not he is pushing the Minister of Justice to 

come forward with these amendments to the Human Rights 

Commission that will bring the code more in line with the 

charter of rights. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, my jurisdiction 

lies over many things, but not over the Human Rights 

Commission, and it’s certainly something that we consider from 

the point of view of women’s issues, and we confer in cabinet 

on those issues. And the member opposite will have ample 

opportunity to ask those questions of the Minister of Justice 

when those estimates come up. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I was asking the minister whether he was 

lobbying the Minister of Justice to make those changes. That’s a 

simple question, and all it requires is a yes and no answer. And 

because he hasn’t given us a yes and no answer, I have to 

assume it’s no. And I’m suggesting to the minister that that’s 

part of his mandate, and I’m urging him to lobby the Minister of 

Justice to bring forward those changes. 

 

Now what we’ve heard here last night and this morning, Mr. 

Chairman, is that the women’s division has been reduced from 

18 to 9, and the minister was not able to advise us that there are 

any other positions in the public service that are specifically 

designated to dealing with the interests of women. He wasn’t 

able to tell us that, so I have to assume, Mr. Chairman, that 

there aren’t any. 

 

We found out that he’s let the advisory council slip. The term of 

appointments of members was in December of ’86, and there 

have been a handful of women appointed some time in June of 

this year, and I point out – but there are still more appointments 

to be forthcoming. But this government doesn’t consider 

women’s issues a priority, so they have neglected to appoint the 

members to that advisory council. We heard that last night, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

The appointments, I believe, he said were made some time in 

June with respect to these women, and it’s interesting to note 

that it was in June that we wrote to the minister asking him 

about this problem. And so I have to ask myself whether or not 

the minister is only reacting to what we bring up, or whether 

he’s taking real individual initiative in this area. We learned last 

night that the minister knew nothing about the disbanding of the 

employment equity branch, or he didn’t wish to acknowledge it. 

Either way I think it is seriously lacking and shows that he 

wishes to ignore his responsibilities. 

 

He wouldn’t give us any details of the reports from the  

Women’s Advisory Council. It seems to me he should have one 

file with all the reports of the Women’s Advisory Council in it, 

easy access to all the reports. He couldn’t bring forward those 

reports, and I’m asking myself whether there are any reports 

and recommendations, or if there are, whether the minister has 

chosen not to follow the recommendations of his own advisory 

council. We were unable to get this information, Mr. Chairman. 

Another example of how this government does not make 

women’s issues a priority. 

 

And this government is not performing its responsibilities and 

duties under its own legislation. Another example, and we 

understand that there’s some $20,000 or something that went to 

the Women’s Advisory Council. We have no idea how this 

money was spent. We asked the minister about 17 conferences 

that the Women’s Advisory Council attended in one year, how 

many people went to each of those conferences? And he once 

again avoided the question by saying he wouldn’t give us any 

names. We never asked him for names. We just asked him how 

many and how much was spent, but he wasn’t forthcoming with 

the information. 

 

I’m beginning to wonder whether he has a handle on that. And 

I’m beginning to wonder whether he has been encouraging the 

advisory council to perform the responsibilities that it was 

established to perform, to come forward with research and 

recommendations that urge the government to further advance 

the interests of women. We get nothing, no information, no 

reports, nothing of the conferences, no reports coming from the 

conferences, no recommendations, no answer as to how the 

government’s moving on these things, and, Mr. Minister, that’s 

seriously lacking. I’m very concerned that perhaps there isn’t 

any information to be coming forward. 

 

We talked about the cut-backs in government yesterday, and 

how the vast majority of these cut-backs, Mr. Minister, affect 

women. Cut-backs in Health, for example, cut-backs in Health 

severely affect women and their children, because women and 

children access health more than any other sector in society. So 

the minister understands that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

We talk about the women who work in the health care system. 

Most of the people working in the health care system are 

women, and they’re burning out. So cut-backs in Health, Mr. 

Chairman, are affecting women that way. They’re are also 

affecting women in the sense that when there is not professional 

services there because of cut-backs in Health, women revert to 

the traditional role of being caretaker and looking after the sick 

and elderly. And I’m not suggesting that they shouldn’t, Mr. 

Chairman, but those people should be receiving professional 

care. 

 

(1215) 

 

We talked about cut-backs to legal aid which hurt women who 

are fleeing violent situations, cut-backs to legal aid that now 

require them to pay user fees. We talked about, in the opening 

remarks, about discrimination at Pine Grove, the lack of 

facilities and training centres for women. 

 

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2156 

 

We talked about cut-backs to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission into the Saskatchewan Human Rights Association 

and the fact that one-third of those complaints coming before 

the commission are directly related to sex discrimination and, 

therefore, those cut-backs severely affecting women in this 

province. 

 

We talked about pay equity, Mr. Chairman. We talked about 

pay equity and the minister’s inability, or refusal, to bring 

forward serious legislation with respect to pay equity. His lack 

of sincerity when he spoke in the legislature on July 21, and 

told this House that he would be contacting the main 

government union to talk about pay equity, and so far no letter 

has been forthcoming. 

 

We talk about the failure of this government’s need . . . the 

failure of this government to meet the needs in child care. 

We’ve talked repeatedly in this House, further back than 

December of ’86, but December of ’86 was the first time I 

mentioned it, about the inadequacies to the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan. We talked about the reorganization of the 

women’s secretariat that took place, reorganizing cutting 25 per 

cent of the budget, reorganizing splitting it up into three, 

bringing it back into one, and then amalgamating it in this 

unwieldy Department of Human Resources and Labour, making 

it very, very difficult for the top-notch personnel that’s working 

in that area to properly perform their duties. 

 

We talked about the failure to implement a real affirmative 

action program. As far as we can tell from the information 

that’s been forthcoming today, the affirmative action area, 

employment equity has been cut some $600,000 . . . or 582,000, 

whatever the specific figure is. 

 

And the list goes on, Mr. Chairman, the list goes on. And when 

we look at cut-backs to mental health organizations, transition 

homes, the mentally disabled, native organizations, and so on – 

agencies which advance the interest of women, and agencies 

which advance the interests of those who are discriminated 

again in our society – the picture is very dismal, Mr. Chairman, 

it’s very dismal. This government cannot point to a 17 per cent 

thing in affirmative action and stand up, and hold their heads, 

and say we’re protecting the rights of women, because they’re 

not. They’re falling short, and they’re lacking in their strength 

and determination to pursue this matter, and properly and 

adequately protect the interests of women in this province. They 

are not doing the job, Mr. Chairman, and women just don’t 

count to these people. 

 

And as minister of women’s services, Mr. Minister, you should 

be going about this province and advancing the interests of 

women. You should be pushing for affirmative action. You 

should be lobbying the Minister of Justice to come forward with 

human rights legislation. You should be dealing with the child 

care issue from a woman’s perspective as well. You should be 

pushing for these things. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, repeatedly in these estimates, what we heard 

was: well, that’s not my responsibility or, that comes under 

another area or, I don’t know anything about that or, I don’t 

want to comment on it – and that’s  

what we repeatedly heard in these estimates, Mr. Minister. And 

these are the things you should be doing instead of cracking 

dumb jokes about parts of women’s anatomy. These are the 

things you should be doing, Mr. Minister. 

 

And now that I’ve raised it, I just want to comment on that 

dumb joke of yours, and the fact that you sloughed it off. The 

fact that you sloughed it off, that the women of this province 

who were concerned about it were solely concerned for political 

reasons. I suggest, Mr. Minister, that that’s another insult to the 

women of this province, that’s a second insult, that you would 

say that those women who were concerned about your 

derogatory remarks were solely doing it for political purposes. 

 

And I believe your Premier goes along with you because you 

never made an apology. You just made some tongue in cheek 

comments. You made no real apology to the women of this 

province. And you will say to me, well some women don’t 

mind. Some women don’t mind, that’s what you’ll say. But 

that’s no response, Mr. Minister. Some women may not mind, 

but many do. Many do, Mr. Minister, and to undermine those 

women who don’t mind, by saying they’re merely being 

political, is absolutely disgraceful. 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Minister, instead of cracking your dumb 

jokes – and it’s not a question of sense of humour because 

there’s no way you have a market on a sense of humour, Mr. 

Minister, and there’s nobody in this province who would think 

that you do. But instead of cracking your dumb jokes, you 

should be pressing for these things that really affect women, 

and that women are really interested in. And that’s what I want 

to see you do in the next year. 

 

And if you don’t believe in it, Mr. Minister, or if you don’t 

want to do this, if you don’t really believe in these issues, Mr. 

Minister, then get out and let somebody else who does take over 

your job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the women of the province want 

research – research about the problems that exist in 

Saskatchewan so they know what action to take. They want 

representation, they want competent, strong, and genuine 

representation, Mr. Minister, genuine, sincere, and competent 

representation and they deserve nothing less, Mr. Minister – 

nothing less. And if you can’t fit that bill, Mr. Minister, if you 

can’t fit that bill, if you don’t believe in it, then you should get 

out and let somebody else take over. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the member 

from Lakeview is truly a sad case. A person with no sense of 

humour whatsoever, a totally politically motivated person with 

the narrowest of approach to everything . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member from Rosemont’s wish to cut out 

my tongue. I don’t really know what the member from 

Lakeview would want to do to me. 

 

But I can say this: that in this province, the people of 

Saskatchewan know the difference between common sense, a 

good government, and between radical  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2157 

 

statements made by the member opposite. The people in this 

province know that a government has a responsibility of 

governing for all people. The people of Saskatchewan are 

entitled to a fair and honest government. We must govern for 

the benefit of everyone, even the benefit of the member from 

Lakeview, much as it is difficult for me to do it. But we govern 

for her benefit and the benefit of her children and the benefit of 

her husband and her family, and we do it as fairly and honestly 

as possible. 

 

And truly the people of Saskatchewan have a choice. They now 

can see an example of what kind of government they rejected, 

what kind of a government they could get in the future, and 

what kind of a government they now have. And the people of 

Saskatchewan have made the correct choice. And the people of 

Saskatchewan will continue to receive good government. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I agree, Mr. Chairman, we must govern with a 

fair and honest government serving the interests of all. And the 

minister certainly hasn’t done that in the eyes of many women 

in this province, and in the eyes of many women’s 

organizations. He hasn’t governed with respect to these issues 

in a manner that serves the interests of all women. 

 

And so I wish to make that comment as a final comment, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I, too, have a final 

comment. Amen. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I have a 

number of questions I would like to address to the minister this 

morning – this afternoon, I guess it is now – in relation to his 

responsibilities in these estimates. 

 

And first of all, before we leave the topics of the various 

women’s issues that have been discussed for some hours in 

these estimates most recently, I’d like to return with the 

minister to the subject of the Women’s Advisory Council for 

him and for his department, and the process that is now under 

way to appoint people to that council. 

 

I understand the minister to have said that the previous council 

was in office, based upon appointments that expired on the 31st 

of December 1986, and that since that date, in the first half of 

this year, a few – not nearly all but a few – new appointments 

were made to the council, I believe the minister said, between 

April and June of 1987. 

 

I wonder if the minister can tell me, in relation to those four or 

five persons who have been appointed most recently to the 

Women’s Advisory Council, what was the basis upon which 

those appointments were made? Were those specific individuals 

recommended to the minister by various women’s groups and 

organizations in Saskatchewan; or did those names originate 

within the department or with the minister himself? What was 

the basis upon which those few appointments were made to 

date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — In answer to my . . . I say my colleague 

from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I gave the names yesterday. I 

could give them again if you wish: Donna  

Roadway, Saskatoon, radio announcer; Marilyn Stradecki, 

Balcarres, home-maker and farmer; Paulette Vanderlinde, 

Regina, school principal; Mary Muir, Kindersley, director of the 

Danny Fisher Centre for Alcohol and Drug Abuse. 

 

Some of the individuals appointed so far have been, for lack of 

a better word “carry-over,” but people who are continuing from 

the former appointments. Some have been recommended. We 

receive recommendations from women’s groups, professional 

groups, from various people in the department who have had 

contact with some people. So as a result of that cabinet makes 

orders in council picking people, and we will continue to fill the 

council with a broad cross-section of society and try to locate 

people throughout the province. And that’s generally how it has 

always been done and that’s how we intend to continue doing it. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, could you indicate – beyond the 

four or five people that you have mentioned just again in the 

committee – can you indicate how many additional 

appointments you would intend to make to bring the council up 

to its full complement? And can you give me some indication 

when you would be in a position, specifically, to respond to the 

recommendations that have been made to you already by the 

Saskatoon Council of Women and the Provincial Council of 

Women? When do you think you might be in a position to react 

to their specific recommendations about persons to be 

appointed to the advisory council? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I could tell you that all of the 

recommendations will be considered in a pool of people that we 

will pick from; that we want to do it as soon as possible. We 

would expect to have another eight people, more or less, in 

addition to the four that are now there. 

 

And I do acknowledge that the advisory council has been 

running short on members for the last few months – I do 

acknowledge that. I take responsibility, on behalf of the 

government, indicating that boards and commissions are being 

reviewed, and this is part of the general review process. I also 

indicated that with session and a difficult budget that it was 

hard to complete all of the boards and commissions and 

replacements from a cabinet point of view, and that we hope to 

have this council up and running a lot better in the next year. 

Not within a year; I’m saying for the next year. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Could the minister say if he has the intention 

to respond to the recommendations that he has received and to 

make the appointments, for example, Mr. Minister, within the 

next month. Would it be reasonable to suggest that you could 

have completed your examination of this matter and have all of 

the appointments concluded by, say, the end of the month of 

September? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m advised by my staff that the 

recommendations are coming in very slowly because of 

summer holidays. I don’t think we can complete the council, 

full strength, within a month. I’m hopeful to do it within two 

months, but within a month I don’t think we can complete it. 

 

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2158 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, you have had some 

recommendations, perhaps not all that you wish to receive, but 

some recommendations specifically forthcoming from the 

Provincial Council of Women and the Saskatoon Council of 

Women. Could I ask you, since those recommendations came 

into your office and to your officials, have you had any contact 

with either the Provincial Council of Women or the Saskatoon 

Council of Women to indicate to them exactly the status of the 

recommendations that they have made to you, and when those 

two particular groups could expect a response to the 

recommendations that they have made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We’re still, Mr. Chairman, in a 

gathering of names process here, and I suppose we could give 

them an interim report. We would rather gather in all the names, 

then advise them as to how we’re proceeding and advise them 

as to who has been selected. We will try to deal with the matter 

as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would urge the 

minister to be in touch with the Saskatoon Council of Women, 

in particular. If you’re not in a position to make any definitive 

answer to them in terms of the recommendations they have 

made, I am sure that they would appreciate an interim report on 

where things stand and how you intend to proceed with it. I 

would recommend very strongly, Mr. Minister, that you be in 

touch with that particular group, because they are concerned 

about the status of it, and where it stands, and when they can 

expect the matter to be finally concluded. 

 

If I could move on, Mr. Minister, to another subject that has 

been dealt with in part in the estimates of your department. I 

would like to ask you some questions about the labour force in 

Saskatchewan and the numbers of people employed in our 

province today. 

 

I believe in previous answers in the committee you drew a 

comparison between the situation today and the situation in 

1982. And if I heard your arithmetic correctly, I believe you 

indicated that the labour force in Saskatchewan in 1982 

consisted of some 420,000 people, and that in 1987 that figure 

had grown to 475,000 people, for an increase in the actual 

working labour force of Saskatchewan in the order of 55,000 

people. That’s interesting, Mr. Minister, in terms of a historical 

analysis. 

 

But I wonder if I could invite you to cast your mind forward to 

the next five years, as opposed to the last five years, and to give 

us the best information that you and your department have in 

terms of the likely changes in the Saskatchewan labour force, 

say between now and the year 1991 or 1992. In specific terms, I 

wonder if you could tell us what your official forecast would be 

about the rate of growth, or the rate of change, in the 

Saskatchewan labour force projected between now and 1992. 

And in total numbers, Mr. Minister, what is your official 

projection about the size of the Saskatchewan labour force five 

years into the future? Where do you think it will be at that point 

in time in terms of your department’s planning? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I say to the  

member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that I’m not a 

fortune-teller. It’s rather difficult to forecast that far into the 

future. If I could forecast that far in the future I would be more 

inclined to go out of politics and go into the business of making 

money on forecasting. 

 

But as you are aware, the labour force will depend on 

commodity prices. It will depend on the success of western 

diversification and the federal government initiatives in that 

regard. It may depend on who wins the next federal election. So 

there’s so many variables I cannot really give you a direct 

projection on what the labour force will be five years from now. 

The most I can say to you that it will be considerably higher 

than if the NDP were government, and probably slightly higher 

than if the Liberals were government. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would think that from 

the point of view of your responsibilities in respect to 

employment, that forecasting changes in the labour force is a 

rather critical matter. And it’s something that I’m sure you and 

your officials must turn their attention to in trying to anticipate 

the kinds of changes that will take place, and the rate of those 

changes. 

 

And I’m wondering if your department has prepared any 

specific forecasts looking, if not five years into the future, then 

perhaps three years or two years or one year, any official 

forecast respecting the labour force size. Are you aware, Mr. 

Minister, of any official Saskatchewan government forecasts 

respecting labour force size in the next, say, two- to five-year 

period? Is there any such forecast in existence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I understand, not 

in my department, but in other government departments, people 

do guess at these things, and you may hear an announcement 

from time to time, but I don’t have the information, nor do I 

wish to guess at what the labour force will be like five years 

from now. 

 

I can give you some general characteristics, that the labour 

force five years from now will have a greater percentage of 

women than today. It will be an older labour force; there will be 

fewer young people in the labour force at that time; the youth 

unemployment will be down somewhat from what it is now; 

unemployment, in general, will be slightly lower if everything 

goes according to predictions; and there will be more native 

people in the labour force at that time. And this is based on the 

current trends. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, to the minister. I 

wonder if the minister is aware of a document produced on this 

subject by the Policy Secretariat of the Executive Council. Is 

that sort of material exclusively the purview of the Premier, or 

would that information, in the normal course of things, come 

into your hands for consideration, bearing in mind that you are 

indeed the minister responsible for employment policy? Are 

you aware of a forecast with respect to the labour force, 

produced on this subject by the Policy Secretariat of the 

Executive Council? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don’t, Mr. Deputy Chairman, recall 

personally seeing that forecast from Executive  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2159 

 

Council. It would be an internal private working document, and 

I’ve never seen it, although I would have access to it. If the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has this internal 

document, he may use it to whatever purposes he wishes, but I 

don’t really want to talk about that document. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I’m concerned about that 

document and the forecast that it contains because it is 

obviously prepared by senior officials of the Government of 

Saskatchewan – officials in the secretariat of the Executive 

Council. They are, presumably, the closest advisers to the 

Premier. They are dealing with the issue of employment and the 

size of the labour force, and it’s my understanding that they are 

forecasting that 85,000 people will leave Saskatchewan in the 

next five-year period, and that that is basically the only reason 

why we might see an improvement in the actual unemployment 

rate in this province, because the numbers of people in the 

labour force will go down due to outward migration. 

 

And I would ask the minister to acquaint himself, with that 

document and with that forecast if it does indeed project that 

Saskatchewan is going to be losing something in the order of 

85,000 people over the course of the next four or five years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I don’t 

really have the document that the member refers to before me. I 

would submit, if there is such a report, it would be too 

pessimistic; I would be more optimistic. But the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg should really take that matter up with 

the Premier because he’s referring to documents that originate 

out of the Premier’s department. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, do I take it then from 

the minister’s answer that the most senior advisers to the 

Premier, when talking about employment matters, do not share 

that information, or their view of the information, with the 

minister’s department? I’m concerned that the minister 

responsible for employment policy does not seem to have 

certain information relating to his direct responsibilities which 

would be available to others within the government. I would 

think that that kind of information, first and foremost, wherever 

it may be prepared within the Government of Saskatchewan, 

would come immediately to the attention of the minister 

responsible for employment development. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, my officials tell 

me that they’ve looked at the document referred to, and the key 

question is what commodity prices will be five years from now. 

If we are successful, and we expect we will be successful in 

starting a new heavy oil upgrader in the Lloydminster area of 

Saskatchewan, then that will have a significant change on those 

statistics. So the question really is: what will be the price of oil; 

what will be the price of wheat; what will be the price of 

potash; and who will be buying our potash five years from now. 

And really that is the question. We take an optimistic view, 

especially towards oil, potash, and grain, and we expect that the 

situation will be considerably better than the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg fears. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’d like to move  

on to another subject area with the minister, having to do with 

employment and employment policy. I take it, Mr. Minister, 

from what you said in your estimates last evening, that in the 

absence of the employment development fund, what used to be 

called the employment development fund, that the government 

is using, as its central pillar in its employment strategy, the 

so-called home program that was implemented in September of 

last year. 

 

Just as a matter of clarification so I can begin my questioning 

on this subject, knowing where the minister starts out, did I hear 

him correctly in his answers last evening that the home program 

is, in fact, a central pillar of the government’s employment 

strategy in the absence of what used to be called the 

employment development fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the member is 

partly correct. The home program is a key pillar, not the only 

pillar, in the employment creation in this province. It replaced 

the winter works program in a very large and substantial way. 

Winter works, as my recollection, was something that was 

designed by Liberals about 20 years ago, and it was all right at 

the time, but we feel that something like the home program is 

much superior to a winter works project, and has had a greater 

impact upon the economy in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, before I have some 

specific questions about the impact of the home program, I’d 

like to ask the minister one or two things about the previous 

employment development fund. Mr. Minister, I’m curious about 

the way that fund suddenly came into existence at one point in 

time, and then suddenly disappeared a short time later. 

 

Could you tell me exactly what was the actual legal or financial 

framework for what was previously called the employment 

development fund. Was it simply a promise or a commitment 

upon the part of the government that was verbalized at one 

point in time by the government? And is it true that there is 

actually nowhere established as a matter of law, or as a distinct 

financial entity, something called the employment development 

fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, in a nutshell it 

was umbrella budgeting that took place quite some time before 

the member was elected to this Assembly. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I take it, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that in fact it 

was something that remained in the realm of a general political 

commitment, or a general undertaking or promise, and that it 

did not at any point have the official sanction of a law to create 

it, or a specific financial framework to create it; that it did not 

exist as either a legal or a financial entity, but was, at best, a 

broad policy statement by the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I can’t really 

comment on whether it was legal or illegal. I can say though 

that it did a lot of good for the people of Saskatchewan. And the 

technicalities of whether it was legal and whether it was within 

the finance Act or what it  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2160 

 

was, I don’t really know, and my department is not concerned 

about that. That is something for the Minister of Finance or 

lawyers to sort out. We feel that it was $600 million of 

commitment to jobs in Saskatchewan, to building jobs in 

Saskatchewan; it was money well spent. 

 

I pointed out yesterday that if you drive past Santa Maria 

nursing home, you will see the sign, 48 new beds, and a cost of, 

I think it was $2.1 million or something of that nature – maybe 

it’s higher. And these are the kinds of things that the money was 

spent on. Whether it was technically legal, I couldn’t venture to 

say yes, it was; or no, it wasn’t. But it was money well spent, 

and it was the right thing to do at the time. And we continue 

now with those kinds of developments, but the umbrella 

funding is no longer there, and the funding is back in the 

departments. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Well, Mr. Minister, bearing in mind that there 

probably wasn’t a precise legal authority for that fund for so 

long as it existed, and bearing in mind that it does not seem to 

have a very precise or identifiable financial framework, bearing 

in mind that experience with that particular program, I would 

like to turn to what the minister has referred to as a key program 

in the government’s employment strategy now, and that is the 

home program. 

 

If that is a key pillar or a central pillar in your employment 

strategy, I wonder if you could tell me the specific legal 

authority for the home program. Where does that exist in the 

law of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, first of all I 

wouldn’t want anybody to get the impression that the 

employment development fund was illegal in some way. I’m 

just not prepared to get in to the legal technicalities of that fund. 

But I do recall I was present when this Assembly voted that 

money. And since it was democratically voted by the elected 

representatives, I would presume that it was legal to do it. And 

the technicalities may still exist, but this Assembly voted the 

money, $600 million at the time. 

 

With respect to the home program, it is not a program 

administered by my department. And while it has created 

17,000 jobs, I cannot tell you about the legality of the budgeting 

on the home program. But I can tell you that it is a very widely 

accepted program. It is a responsible program, a matching grant 

program. It is considerably cheaper than the NDP’s 7-7-7 

proposal. And I wouldn’t know how it would compare with 

Liberal proposals because clearly not many people paid 

attention to Liberal proposals in the last election, so they’re not 

that relevant. But I could tell you that 17,000 jobs in 

Saskatchewan at this time, attributed to this program, is very 

significant. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I want to pursue that arithmetic 

with you. I’m sorry that you’re not in a position to deal with the 

legal basis for the home program, because I suggest to you there 

is considerable doubt about the manner in which that program 

was implemented, and there may well be some legitimate legal 

questions to be raised as to how it was done. 

 

But in terms of its impact, which is more appropriately  

within your jurisdiction, you have used again the figure of 

17,000 jobs created as a result of this program. I think on 

another occasion the Premier has suggested the number might 

be as high as 19,000. The Minister of Urban Affairs, on the 

other hand, has conceded that the program has probably created 

no new jobs. He talks about it in terms of being an employment 

maintenance program and not a new job creation program. 

 

And so I’m curious, Mr. Minister, about the arithmetic. There 

seems to be a good deal of confusion about it. You say the 

actual number is 17,000. Do you say that in terms of new jobs 

created in the province of Saskatchewan, or are you merely 

talking about the job maintenance argument that the Minister of 

Urban Affairs refers to? And specifically in terms of that figure 

of 17,000: how was it arrived at, and what evidence can you 

cite in this Assembly to show that there is any substance at all 

to that number? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we will get into the 

estimates of the Minister of Urban Affairs, but the Minister of 

Urban Affairs passes on a message to the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that he denies the quote that has been 

attributed to him, so they can deal with that matter amongst 

themselves when they get into his estimates. I simply want to 

advise and give notice that there is dispute over the quote. 

 

With respect to why these new jobs, or what kind of jobs are 

they; yes, they would be new jobs. But in statistics, the question 

you have to answer is, how many actual net new jobs are there 

in Saskatchewan? And you would have to take into account the 

loss of about 5,000 jobs in the oil industry and the loss of jobs 

in agriculture, which this government has tried very hard to 

maintain. 

 

But despite trying hard to maintain those jobs in oil and in 

agriculture, there has been a loss of jobs there which is offset by 

the increase in jobs under the home program. So these are new 

jobs. But if someone who was working in oil before and is now 

working in renovation, that would be a new job. But it certainly 

may be the same person doing the two jobs. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I take it from the 

minister’s answer that he may well be talking about different 

jobs, but not in fact a net increment to the total number of jobs 

available within the province of Saskatchewan. And there’s a 

fundamental difference between those two points of view. And 

it would appear, even from the minister’s answer, that there 

may well be considerable doubt as to the actual economic 

impact of that program. 

 

The minister seems to content himself with saying they are new 

jobs in the sense that they are different jobs, but not new jobs in 

terms of actually adding to the net number of job positions 

available in this province. And I would like to ask the minister 

how he would respond to those within Saskatchewan and 

outside of the province who have been highly critical of this 

program. I would refer him specifically to an economics 

professor at St. Thomas More College at the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Bob Lucas, who has indicated that his 

analysis of the situation shows that the program has really had 

no net impact upon  

  



 

August 28, 1987 

2161 

 

employment. I wonder how the minister would respond to that 

argument coming from a distinguished university professor at 

the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Secondly, if the minister doesn’t really like Professor Lucas’s 

analysis of the situation, I wonder how he would answer Mr. 

Jim Chase, the president of the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association, who says that a far different program from the 

home program would have been more beneficial, especially in 

terms of job creation within the province of Saskatchewan. 

Again, I would be interested to know how the minister responds 

to Mr. Chase. 

 

And thirdly, if the minister really doesn’t like the argument 

from Professor Lucas, and if he really doesn’t like the argument 

from Mr. Chase, I wonder how he would answer Mr. Michael 

Walker, the director of the Fraser Institute. He describes the 

program as an expensive election goody that will simply add 

hundreds of millions of dollars to the deficit in Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d be interested to know how the minister would answer those 

three critics who agree with me that the home program is not a 

good program for the province of Saskatchewan; that it is 

ineffective; it has a distorting effect on the economy; it is 

unfair; it is costly; and it may well be illegal in terms of its 

manner of introduction. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’ve never heard 

of Professor Lucas, so I couldn’t really comment on his stature 

here. I’ve heard of Jim Chase, and then Jim Chase’s statement 

would be somewhat self-serving because I believe that he 

would rather have the money spent on office buildings and 

large edifices rather than on people’s homes. And of course he’s 

entitled to that view, but he represents the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association, which is substantially large 

construction companies. 

 

As for Michael Walker, I believe that his criticism of the plan is 

that it’s too liberal. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I’m not sure if the government House 

Leader wants to continue with this. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 


