













































September 14, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 14, 1987 

 

 

 

2483 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Clerk: — I’d like to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker is 

unable to be present to open this sitting today. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, I hereby favourably report on the 

following petitions under rule 11(7). I lay them on the table for 

reading and receiving: 

 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, 

praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

urge the Government of Saskatchewan not to change the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Collapse of First Investors and Associated Investors 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 

was to be to the Minister of Consumer Affairs, but I will 

address my question to the Minister of Finance because it’s 

very important that we get to the bottom of the issue of the 

collapse of First Investors and Associated Investors. 

 

I’m dealing with a statement that the Minister of Consumer 

Affairs made in this legislature on July 15 in answer to a 

question about why her department had licensed these two 

companies to do business in Saskatchewan under The 

Investment Contracts Act. She replied, and I quote: 

 

We rely, Mr. Speaker, upon the audited reports that are 

filed with the department every year before we issue a 

licence. 

 

If this is true, Mr. Minister, why did the Department of 

Consumer Affairs renew the Saskatchewan licences in 1986 and 

1987 for those two companies when they knew they were 

insolvent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the answer has 

been given on numerous occasions to the hon. member and 

members of the opposition, that the department relies as well on 

the advice of the incorporating jurisdiction or the prime 

jurisdiction. We’ve been over that many times, and that’s the 

position as stated. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Then why did the minister say that you rely on 

the audited statements? 

 

A new question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On July 17 in this 

legislature she said, and I quote: 

 

We had no information prior to the end of June to  

indicate that these two firms were in financial difficulty. 

 

Obviously that statement was not accurate since those audited 

statements were filed with the Department of Consumer Affairs. 

I want to know whether the Minister of Consumer Affairs 

deliberately misled the public with that statement, or was she 

just unaware of what her department had received, and failed to 

act on that information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I have indicated on numerous 

occasions that there is a national policy dealing with securities 

legislation. Obviously, the hon. member is not familiar with it. 

But all provinces rely on the incorporating or so-called prime 

jurisdiction, with one exception being the documents not 

necessarily being tabled in French, and they have a different 

effect in the province of Quebec. So again, there is a national 

policy which applies to all provinces that they are to rely on the 

incorporating or prime jurisdiction. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the Minister of Finance 

telling me that The Investments Contracts Act, which is a 

Saskatchewan law requiring that these audited statements be 

sent to the department here in Saskatchewan, that that law is not 

being upheld, and that he constantly refers to the trust 

companies as if it’s something different than that Investment 

Contracts Act. What is he talking about, and isn’t he going to 

obey the law of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

doesn’t understand the securities legislation or the way that the 

matter operates in Canada, Mr. Speaker, that a company may 

incorporate in another province. And let’s take, for example, it 

may be in the province of Alberta. The incorporating province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the one that supplies the information to 

the other jurisdictions. This has been the historical practice and 

the practice in Canada. And we are able, and we have relied on 

that, Mr. Speaker, the reason being to have any other system 

nationally would require a massive bureaucracy in each 

province to review every company that wanted to come along 

and do business. And of course that’s not, I think, a desirable 

situation. Obviously the opposition is advocating that. And so 

we do tend – and it’s part of a national policy – to rely on the 

information from the prime jurisdiction. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member doesn’t understand the 

historical practice. She obviously doesn’t understand the need 

for the national policy which allows a province to rely on the 

information from the so-called prime jurisdictions. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been over this numerous times. 

The hon. member is not prepared . . . the NDP opposition say 

we’ll be over it again; they’ll be over it again. They want the 

bail-out. They don’t want to talk about potash. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Does  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2484 

 

the Minister of Finance know that since The Saskatchewan 

Investment Contracts Act requires companies selling 

investment contracts to have assets on deposit, with a chartered 

bank or trust company, which will be sufficient at all times to 

pay out the outstanding investment contracts? Was that 

requirement complied with in Saskatchewan, according to 

Saskatchewan law, and if not, what did the Department of 

Consumer Affairs do about it, and when? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think the Hon. Minister of Consumer 

Affairs had indicated some considerable time back that the first 

advice that the department had got was shortly before the two 

companies went into receivership. And that’s the advice that 

she gave. Again, if the NDP would come out and ask and admit 

what they’re asking for. They are asking for two things, and that 

is, in effect, a massive provincial bureaucracy in every province 

for every financial institution to do ever do business; secondly, 

Mr. Speaker, they’re actually asking for a bail out. 

 

Again I find it surprising, and I think most people found it 

shocking over the weekend, that the NDP opposed this 

government giving aid to Saskatchewan investors and 

depositors in Pioneer but are so quick, Mr. Speaker, to ask the 

people of Saskatchewan to bail out – to bail out, Mr. Speaker, a 

company from another province that went into receivership. 

And I find that a rather inconsistent – and I believe I’m being 

very polite when I say inconsistent – position from the New 

Democratic Party. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

The minister has just said that his government did not receive 

any indication of problems with these companies before about 

mid-1987 from Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister: do you not consider a financial 

statement from an Alberta set of chartered accountants, showing 

that the companies were insolvent, as some evidence that you 

ought to take some steps to protect Saskatchewan investors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, it’s the same debate we’ve had 

for the last couple of days. The financial statement, Mr. 

Speaker, shows the position at any given time and I’ve tried to 

indicate to the hon. member opposite that a company may lose 

money. That is no indication that it is in fact insolvent; that it 

shows a picture at a particular given time that you’re entitled – 

and I think it’s necessary – to have further information from the 

prime jurisdiction which would tend to indicate if there was a 

problem, that there was in fact a problem. And that has been the 

way it has operated historically, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that 

any other change in operation would have a far greater cost to 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I 

ask the Minister of Finance: have you seen the financial 

statements of First Investors as at December 31, 1985, and can 

you stand in your place and say that those financial statements 

do not show that that company was insolvent – not that it’s lost 

money, but that it was  

insolvent on that date? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hon. 

member puts his own interpretation on the financial statements. 

Again, the fact that a company is losing money in one particular 

year, and I gather in the financial statements, as the hon. 

member has indicated, you get a difference of opinion from the 

auditors as to whether the assets are properly valued. 

 

Obviously that was a matter of some dispute in the province of 

Alberta with the auditors. Given that sort of circumstances, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, one would, I think it is fair to say, assume that 

if the prime jurisdiction, in that case the province of Alberta, 

would have been concerned, and under the national policy they 

would have advised. So again, I think that will show up if there 

is problems with the way the officials in Alberta handled it; that 

will show up in the inquiry that’s before the courts of Alberta. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, it justifies again the province of 

Saskatchewan having counsel in Alberta to appear 

notwithstanding the criticisms of that from members opposite. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m sorry if my question was not clear. I asked the minister this: 

when you looked at those financial statements, could you stand 

up in this House and say that as at December 31, First Investors 

was not insolvent? Would you just tell the House that there’s 

any doubt in your mind as to whether First Investors was 

insolvent after you looked at those financial statements? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I think it fair to say that any 

time you get a financial statement which indicates that there’s a 

dispute as to the valuation of assets, there has to be some doubt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

Would the minister not agree that that financial statement 

showed that on any reading of it, the company was insolvent, 

and that the only dispute between the company and the auditors 

was the extent of the insolvency? Isn’t that what the financial 

statement said? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 

putting his interpretation on the financial statement. I suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, that there’s a national policy which is to deal with 

the situation, certainly that existed here, but deals with the 

situation, Mr. Speaker, that companies incorporate in one 

jurisdiction. The incorporating jurisdiction, also called the 

prime jurisdiction, does the assessment and has the bureaucracy 

to deal with any of the financial commitment statements or 

anything else that may be made, or the state of the financial 

institution. 

 

It then is the national practice in Canada that information is 

given to other provinces. The reason that the  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2485 

 

information is then given to other provinces is so that the 

companies are able to carry on business without going through 

a massive, costly reapplication. And that’s the way the national 

policy has operated. And that’s the national policy upon which 

the Government of Saskatchewan relies. 

 

I suggest to the hon. member to take his argument that every 

province, if a company wants to come in and do the business, 

that they are going to have to set up and go through a massive 

bureaucracy so we have a full policing operation in each 

province. The cost to the people of Saskatchewan would be 

horrendous. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — New question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

doubt whether the cost would be horrendous to find a minister 

who can read a financial statement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I doubt whether it would be 

horrendous to have an organization which would deny a 

company a licence to sell when it has filed a financial statement 

showing it’s insolvent. 

 

Now my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: last Friday you 

took notice of a question as to whether or not the Consumer 

Affairs department had denied the public access to information 

filed with the department under The Investment Contracts Act. 

You took notice of that; what is your answer to that question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t have the information yet from the 

department, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Privatization of SGI 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the absence 

of the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance and in the absence of the minister in charge of 

economic development and privatization, my question is to the 

Deputy Premier. 

 

Can you confirm that SGI is the next privatization target for 

your government, and that you’ve decided to sell off SGI’s 

general insurance business to the private sector? And in light of 

that decision, can the minister tell Saskatchewan people why 

you no longer consider virtually mandatory insurance needs 

such as home, business, and fire insurance to be part of SGI’s 

public insurance mandate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, any announcements 

relative to privatization or public participation, beyond those 

that were stated in the throne speech some months ago, will be 

made at the appropriate time, which I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

would be in due course. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Deputy 

Premier telling us that SGI is not, in fact, being privatized. Is 

that what you’re telling us here today? Is it? 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, Mr. Speaker, obviously the hon. 

member wasn’t listening. I said any announcements relative to 

privatization or public participation will be made at the 

appropriate time. SGI, among others, obviously have been 

candidates for an analysis as to whether they would be good 

candidates for public participation or privatization – one of 

many, I suggest. And that shouldn’t surprise anyone here, Mr. 

Speaker, because those kinds of things were talked about in the 

throne speech several months ago. And I don’t know why it is 

now, just now, that hon. members opposite are just cottoning on 

to what was announced in the throne speech. 

 

Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Premier, that’s the same old song and dance you gave to the 

people of Saskatchewan just before you privatized or sold 

shares in Saskoil. And I’d remind the Deputy Premier that of 

the Saskoil shares that were sold more than three-quarters of 

those shares sold have been sold to interests outside of 

Saskatchewan, and further that Saskoil is almost . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Does the member have a 

question? Order. Would the member get to his question. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was a new question, 

and as such I think a preamble is somewhat in order. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — A short preamble. Would the member 

get to his question. 

 

Mr. Trew: — My question to the Deputy Premier, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is how can you say that selling shares in SGI to people 

from Ontario and other out of province places is going to 

protect Saskatchewan consumers in any way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, without even responding 

directly to the question as it relates to SGI, which I think at this 

point at least is dealing hypothetically – and of course we all 

know that dealing in hypotheses is out of order in question 

period. 

 

But he did make a reference to Saskoil, Mr. Speaker. And so I 

want to respond to Saskoil, because that is not in any way 

hypothetical; that’s real. And we did have a share offering of 

Saskoil last . . . about a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and it was a very 

successful share offering. We now have . . . we have one of the 

strongest oil companies in Canada, headquartered here in 

Regina, Mr. Speaker – headquartered here in Regina, and I 

make no apology for the successes of Saskoil. 

 

I might also point out, Mr. Speaker, that that was done in 

advance of the last provincial election, and the people of 

Saskatchewan, I believe, Mr. Speaker, endorsed that in the last 

provincial election. 

 

Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. New 

question: short preamble. I have here a letter from Alex  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2486 

 

Wilde, president of SGI, and I’m going to read one sentence of 

it. It was June 9, 1987, and I quote: 

 

A proposal to provide a public share offering of the 

general business is being developed by SGI for 

consideration by the government. 

 

Direct quote. My question is you is: do you want to explain to 

the Saskatchewan consumers why they should feel good about 

paying more for their general insurance needs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I was a little worried that I wasn’t 

going to be able to take what the member said as gospel, but 

I’m prepared to do that since he did complete the sentence that 

said: for the consideration of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the consideration of government means just 

that. You have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that the government 

is still the shareholder of SGI, and the government will 

ultimately make that decision. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Nobody in 

this province believes you when you say we’re now 

hypothetical after the information that has been brought 

forward. It is ludicrous to think that SGI is not about to be 

privatized. My question is: can you justify to the consumers, to 

the insuring public, how they are going to possibly in any way, 

shape, or form benefit from the privatization of SGI’s general 

insurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, my guess is that SGI 

attracts the business that it attracts now simply because it is able 

to be competitive or better than competitive. And my guess is 

that in the event, in the event of any public offering or any 

privatization strategy, if in the event that SGI or the general 

insurance side of SGI is privatized or if, heaven forbid, the 

member for Regina Centre were to buy some shares in such an 

organization, if that were to happen, my guess is that it would 

be equally as competitive, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And he says: oh yes, just like Weyerhaeuser. 

I’ll tell you, just like Weyerhaeuser. Weyerhaeuser is one of the 

true success stories in the province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

Special Security Section of Property Management 

Corporation 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had intended in 

directing my question to the minister in charge of the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, but in his 

absence I may direct it to the minister who answers for the 

minister in charge of the Saskatchewan property development 

corporation when he’s away, or the Deputy Premier since the 

Premier is not here. 

 

And my question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has to deal with the 

special security service section recently created in the 

government’s Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. This security section with at least five employees 

is led by the former head of the RCMP Saskatchewan 

intelligence unit which dealt in  

sophisticated electronic surveillance and undercover 

intelligence work. The minister has said that this new security 

section will provide increased security to cabinet ministers and 

certain government buildings. 

 

I want to ask the minister who will be responding: has there 

been an increase in threats to members of the provincial 

cabinet? And if not, why is this kind of expense necessary in 

this time of PC restraint? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I thought your question was going to 

be: if not, why not? But the simple answer to your question, Mr. 

Speaker – and I’m not close to this, so you’ll forgive me if I’m 

not entirely right on – but my understanding is that this is in 

co-operation with the federal government in a program called 

Vital . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Vital Points, I think it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . Vital Points. But to give you 

further detail as to the specifics of the question, I will take 

notice and have the minister responsible respond in the 

appropriate way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I shall eagerly 

await the response as promised to me by the Deputy Premier, 

since his information comes from quite high up in the 

government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, since the days of the plumbers’ unit and 

the political dirty tricks of Richard Nixon in the White House 

. . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Supplementary questions need 

no preamble. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I ask a new question of the 

Deputy Premier, now I’ve isolated who’s going to answer the 

questions today. 

 

Since the days of the plumbers’ unit and the political dirty tricks 

operation run out of President Nixon’s White House, the public 

has been extremely sceptical of the so-called security units 

answerable only to politicians. This new security is made up of 

the former RCMP wire-tap expert and undercover agents, and 

they are answerable only to the minister and his cabinet 

colleagues. That, in my view, for what it’s worth, is an abuse – 

an opportunity for abuse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — If this security section has no political 

overtones, I assume that the government would have no 

problem with the creation of a special independent committee 

of this Assembly, with nominees from all parties, to act as an 

oversight committee on the work of this new unit. If this is 

truly, Mr. Minister, a non-political security unit, surely you will 

have no problem with an independent oversight committee. Are 

you prepared, Mr. Minister, to do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2487 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously I’m not 

prepared to commit the minister, in his absence, to anything. 

I’ve told you, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well if he’s not here, you have got to 

answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And he sits there chirping, he’s not 

here, so I have to answer. Well I can answer. I can answer, Mr. 

Speaker, but I can’t think for the minister; I can’t think for the 

minister who doesn’t happen to be in this House today, and I 

appreciate the acknowledgement of the hon. members opposite 

for recognizing that finally. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Having said that, Mr. Speaker, as with 

the first question, I will take notice of this one and give it to the 

minister responsible, and he will answer in the appropriate way, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 

 

Collapse of First Investors and Associated Investors 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, before orders of 

the day I rise pursuant to rule 39 to seek leave of the Assembly 

to move a motion of an urgent and pressing nature. 

 

I will take a moment to explain the issue and will then indicate 

the substance of the motion for which I seek leave. The issue is 

the government’s incompetent mishandling of its responsibility 

to protect the people of Saskatchewan with respect to the 

Principal Group of companies, and particularly with respect to 

the collapse of First Investors Corporation and Associated 

Investors of Canada. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, it was revealed that at least as early as 

the first part of 1986, more than a year ago, the Government of 

Saskatchewan knew, or ought to have known, that First 

Investors Corporation was insolvent and that Associated 

Investors of Canada was insolvent. And I say insolvent on the 

basis of the company’s audited financial statements which were 

available to the government but not available to the public. 

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite renewed 

the company’s licence to sell investment contracts to the people 

of Saskatchewan, and it was renewed for 1987. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the facts are clear. The facts show first that more 

than 3,000 Saskatchewan people have lost savings, and second, 

that in regulating First Investors and Associated Investors, the 

government was incompetent and negligent. It is no less clear, 

Mr. Speaker, that what is needed here is a full, independent, 

public inquiry into the government’s mishandling of this affair, 

an inquiry into the government’s negligence. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the Assembly to 

move a motion along the following lines: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 

Saskatchewan for failing to fulfil its obligation to protect 

Saskatchewan people with respect to First  

Investors Corporation and Associated Investors of 

Canada, two of the Principal Group of companies. And 

further, that this Assembly urge that the Government of 

Saskatchewan do establish an independent public inquiry 

to examine the government’s negligence in this matter. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move, seconded by my colleague, the 

member for Quill Lakes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before orders 

of the day, I rise to table documents signed by 1,120 

Saskatchewan citizens. These documents call upon the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The point of order is this, Mr. Speaker. 

There is a place, there is a place in routine proceedings for the 

tabling of petitions, or reading and receiving petitions. There is 

no place on the order paper for tabling documents, and the 

practice has always been, if you have documents to table, you 

stand up and table them. You don’t have an opportunity to give 

a great political harangue every time you table a document, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The point of order is well taken. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I table this on behalf of 1,120 

citizens who are concerned about . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I ask 

members on both sides of the House . . . Order. The point of 

order I found was well taken from the Deputy Premier. There is 

a place on . . . Order. There is a time and a place to table the 

documents. There is no time and place for tabled documents. 

Reading and receiving petitions is dealt with every day. 

 

Order. If the member wishes to table the documents, the 

member can. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might comment 

on your . . . I wonder if I might ask you a question. It has . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Then a point of order. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — State your point of view. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — The point of order is that it has been 

customary to table documents which are not petitions before the 

order of the day, and it has been customary to give a few words 

of introduction to explain what you’re  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2488 

 

tabling. Members opposite have done it, and we have done it, 

and that’s all the member from Regina Lakeview is doing. And 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that what the member from Regina 

Lakeview is doing is in keeping with decades of practice in this 

Legislative Assembly. There’s nothing new about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I have ruled on the Deputy Premier’s 

point of order. The member . . . Order. The member is welcome 

to table the document. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, these documents were 

not tabled for formal presentation as petitions in the legislature. 

They are like any other documents that other people have tabled 

in here, and they’ve always been entitled to give a preamble as 

to what the content of the document is about. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. If the member wants to table 

the documents, she may table them. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in due course, if 

you could give us a citation and a written ruling with regard to 

this matter to clarify it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I will take notice and 

come back with a ruling. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I will now table these documents, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, representing some . . . over 1,000 . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, point of order. Prior 

to orders of the day, it’s a rule, Mr. Speaker, of this Assembly 

that a special debate is a matter of pressing and urgent public 

importance. And obviously, the Leader of the Opposition on his 

motion today brought up a matter that has been a matter of 

some debate for the last couple of months in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m raising my point of 

order. I have a right to raise my point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Allow the 

Minister of Finance to state his point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a matter of 

the special debates or matters of pressing and urgent public 

importance. Unless that is the overriding criterion, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, then it will become the opportunity for members of 

this Assembly to simply raise matters not of pressing and public 

importance or without other opportunities to debate, which is a 

factor in that, Mr. Speaker, and merely abuse that particular 

system. 

 

Now that matter has been before the House. There’s ample 

opportunities to debate it in the past, and I frankly think that the 

motion was abuse of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I urge Mr. 

Deputy Speaker to perhaps bring forward to the Assembly the 

guide-lines for what constitutes pressing and public importance. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to speak 

to the point of order. 

 

The member suggests that this matter has been before the 

House for months. The matter I raised had to do with the 

circumstances which became public when a financial statement 

of First Investors became public three or four days ago. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden 

admitted that he hadn’t even seen the financial statement and 

was unwilling to comment on it, even though he now says the 

matter was around for two months. Can we believe what he 

says? 

 

It is very clear that this is new material, material of an urgent 

nature, material which he has not even seen, he admits, but 

which he should have seen and which should be considered by 

this House on an urgent basis, notwithstanding the efforts of the 

member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden to stonewall public 

knowledge about the incompetence of the government on this 

matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I find the points 

of order not well taken. They’re . . . Order! Order! It’s a dispute 

between two members; it’s not a point of order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 36 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. When we 

broke off review of the estimates of the Department of Social 

Services on Thursday evening slightly before 10 o’clock, under 

discussion then before the review of the Assembly was the part 

of the Social Services delivery system that guarantees some 

basic security to Saskatchewan people who are deprived of 

security by way of income. 

 

We also took a bit of a review, Mr. Chairman, with the track 

record of the present government as related to this particular 

delivery of service within the Department of Social Services, 

and were able to pin-point that really it’s the income security 

branch, or the social assistance program specifically, of the 

present government, combined with the track record in 

unemployment, that most clearly spells out the abject failure of 

the Saskatchewan government for people in Saskatchewan. 

 

And we also saw, Mr. Chairman, how this failing Saskatchewan 

people in the number one responsibility  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2489 

 

that government has, as a matter of fact, has led to an even 

further hammering of people who are most vulnerable, who are 

most in need in Saskatchewan society today. 

 

(1445) 

 

Just a quick review of the facts to put it into context, Mr. 

Chairman, because I want to continue this review of the 

Department of Social Services in the context of the entire 

Progressive Conservative government track record over the past 

five years. 

 

And if we look at that track record over the past five years up 

until . . . and if we compare the period of time in which the 

government inherited – the Progressive Conservatives inherited 

the government, if we compare April of 1982 with April of 

1987, we see some alarming facts, Mr. Chairman. We see that 

in Saskatchewan, from 1982 to 1987, unemployment increased 

by 14,000, from 27,000 to 41,000 people in Saskatchewan 

unemployed and looking for work. 

 

We see at the same period, in the same five years, Mr. 

Chairman, that here in Saskatchewan the social assistance 

beneficiaries increased by a like number. There were 48,000, 

and an increase to 62,000 people in Saskatchewan living in 

families dependent upon social assistance, and I suggest, not 

purely coincidence, an increase again of 14,000 Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

When we look at how those people got there, I think there’s a 

telling story as well, Mr. Chairman. In 1982 there were 11,800 

social assistance cases, and this is applicants for social 

assistance who were described as being capable of employment, 

looking for work but not able to find it. But in 1987 that number 

is slightly over 20,000. 

 

And so we find an increase of in excess of more than 8,000 of 

those social assistance cases being people who are capable of 

working, looking for work, and not able to find it – a 70 per 

cent, Mr. Chairman, increase in the number of cases in 

Saskatchewan over a five-year period of people who have 

become dependent or who require social assistance in order to 

survive and make ends meet. And what a sad statement that is, 

Mr. Chairman, what a sad statement. 

 

In Saskatchewan today, two out of every three applicants for 

social assistance is applying for assistance because they’re 

unable to find work in order to support their family. And when 

we look at those families, what do we know, what do we know 

about the people in Saskatchewan who have become dependent 

upon social assistance in order to survive, in order to make ends 

meet. When we look at the 62,000 people in Saskatchewan, we 

find that 29,000 of those folks are 19 years or age or younger, 

truly the young people of Saskatchewan – 29,000. 

 

By anybody’s definition, Mr. Chairman, a young person easily 

is someone who is 14 or under. And we find in Saskatchewan 

today there are 23,000 young people who are of the age of 14 or 

younger who are living in families dependent upon social 

assistance. And saddest of all, when we talk about the families 

in Saskatchewan, saddest of all, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that 

in Saskatchewan  

today there are 10,000 pre-schoolers, 10,000 little children four 

years of age or younger who live in families who are dependent 

upon social assistance, and living in families without a great 

deal of hope, families oftentimes living in despair, families 

whose sense of dignity is being challenged on a daily basis. 

And I think that that is a condemning fact, Mr. Chairman – a 

condemning fact. 

 

When we look at the dollar figures, we find that the present-day 

government is spending nearly twice as much on social 

assistance in Saskatchewan today. Having taken over a budget 

of . . . an expenditure of $105 million for social assistance last 

year, the Saskatchewan government spent $204 million on 

social assistance – $204 million, Mr. Chairman – $204 million 

compared to $105 million being spent on social assistance for 

the poorest of the poor in Saskatchewan today. 

 

And I suggest that the number . . . the fact that we have 

increased the numbers of people who are dependent upon social 

assistance, the fact that the budget for social assistance in 

Saskatchewan has doubled, is directly attributable to the failure 

of the PC government to deal with its most important 

responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s 

providing employment opportunity. 

 

And clearly we can draw no conclusion other than that. Failure 

in employment opportunity leads to failure in the Department of 

Social Services, as realized by increased numbers in recipients 

of social assistance and increased expenditures. 

 

And saddest of all, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that those 

increased expenditures don’t relate to improved benefits. 

Nobody who’s living on social assistance is doing any better. In 

fact, to a person, every one is worse off today than they were in 

1982. So the increased expenditures have nothing to do with 

improving the quality of life, to allow better opportunity for 

participation in community and dignity for the poorest of the 

poor in our province. The increased expenditure of $100 million 

under the PC government is directly related to its failure to 

create employment. 

 

And those are the facts of the matter, Mr. Chairman; those are 

the sad facts of the matter. And I think that it is a common 

opinion in Saskatchewan that we don’t like to be paying large 

amounts of money to social assistance. Yes, those who are 

incapable of earning their own income, I think, have a right to 

expect from their government a basic degree of security that 

allows them some hope and dignity. 

 

But most important of all, to the masses, to two-thirds of the 

cases in social assistance, is an opportunity – an opportunity to 

work. As the social services task force of the New Democratic 

caucus toured the province last March, we heard over and over 

again recipients and people who have daily contact, regular 

contact with recipients, telling us over and over again that the 

most important thing, the most valuable thing that those 

recipients of social assistance in Saskatchewan would like today 

is a job. 

 

And that’s the reality. Those are the factual realities. And  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2490 

 

as we come to review the Estimates before this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s unfortunate that oftentimes, because we’re dealing 

with budgets, we end up dealing with numbers, and sometimes 

dehumanizing the whole process of the review. 

 

And I think that’s the greatest challenge that faces the 

government today, as expressed in the harsh realities of social 

assistance – the challenge to create employment opportunity, 

real employment opportunity, employment opportunity that 

offers full-time employment, with decent wages, and covered 

by labour standards, that provides hope and dignity for 

Saskatchewan families who, more than anything else, would 

like to pay their own way and be able to provide for their own 

families. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, when we left off on Thursday evening, we 

were discussing a specific element of the policy of the 

Department of Social Services, and that has to do with the 

Canada Pension Plan change that was introduced in January 1, 

allowing seniors who are the age of 60 years or older, but prior 

to the age of 65, to take early Canada pension. 

 

And as a result of that opportunity, there was a strange set of 

circumstances occurred in the province of Saskatchewan. The 

Department of Social Services, Mr. Chairman, was requiring, 

has been requiring – and I say that very specifically, noting that 

that’s been confirmed by the minister – has been requiring at 

least some seniors in Saskatchewan who are the age of 60, prior 

to the age of 65, people who are the poorest of the poor in our 

province who are receiving social assistance, to take early 

Canada pension. 

 

And let me point out, Mr. Chairman, the regulation around that, 

because someone who takes early Canada pension has their 

pension reduced by one-half of 1 per cent for every month prior 

to age 65. And that means someone who’s 60 years old and 

poor, who takes the early Canada pension, has reduced their 

Canada pension by a total of 30 per cent for life – 30 per cent 

for life. 

 

And the Department of Social Services has been requiring 

individuals, seniors 60 years of age but prior to age 65, to take 

the early Canada pension, to reduce their Canada pension by up 

to 30 per cent for life, and, Mr. Chairman, most shocking of all, 

then deducting from their social assistance payments, dollar for 

dollar, whatever those individuals receive by early Canada 

pension. 

 

In other words, Mr. Chairman, the Department of Social 

Services was saying to seniors: you have to apply for that early 

Canada pension – I produced a letter here the other night saying 

that if they didn’t that they would be cut off social assistance – 

and then told them: when you get those pension benefits, even 

though you’re reducing your pension by up to 30 per cent for 

life, you will benefit by not one penny today because the 

Department of Social Services will take whatever pension you 

receive away from you entirely. 

 

Well that’s the point at which we arrived Thursday night, Mr. 

Chairman, at which time the government chose then to adjourn 

for the evening. And my question then to the minister is this, 

Mr. Chairman: how many people in  

Saskatchewan who are age 60 or older . . . and I understand the 

context of your answer on Thursday in which you said that that 

was a mistake. You clearly said to this Assembly and I quote: 

 

Well I believe you heard me correctly, and I believe you 

understand that we are not forcing people to apply. We 

are encouraging people to apply; that if they apply, the 

income will be deducted dollar for dollar as pension 

income available, and it’s not earned income. 

 

And then you went on to say: 

 

And in addition, I would encourage people to apply for 

their Canada pension because it will not substantially 

affect the final result of their income. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you: how many people in Saskatchewan 

have applied for their early Canada Pension Plan, and are 

having those benefits deducted dollar for dollar, from their 

social assistance coverage in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, what we’ve just 

heard is another example of political distortion that borders on 

the fringe of the rules of this Assembly. 

 

The situation we’re looking at here is that . . . First of all, 

briefly, with the economy, doesn’t anyone in this city know that 

there’s an upgrader being built? Doesn’t anyone in this city 

know that there are people employed there? I spoke to a man 

yesterday who’s an electrician, has lived in Regina for eight 

years, and this is the first year that he’s ever worked in Regina, 

and he’s working at the upgrader. He’s travelled all over 

Canada to work as an electrician, yet the members opposite 

don’t seem to notice those type of things. 

 

Further with the situation on unemployment and how it relates 

to welfare, with respect to the Weyerhaeuser project in Prince 

Albert. We have another project there, Par Industries project, 

which is training welfare recipients to work in the forest 

industry. Two of those people are now working on the 

construction project at the Weyerhaeuser construction site. They 

received references from Par Industries where they were good 

employees. Those are the kind of co-ordinated things that we 

are doing in this province and yet the members of the 

opposition don’t understand that they exist. 

 

The member for Moose Jaw North has indicated there are 

21,000 – I believe he said 21,000 – people who were 

employable who are on welfare. The case-load statistics show 

that in April 1987 there were 14,500 employable people on 

welfare and another 7,000 partially employable. And we are 

examining the definition of partially employable and how 

realistic that may be. 

 

In 1982 the government that we took over from didn’t even 

count single employables – lumped all employables together, 

whether they had families or didn’t have families. The statistics 

are quite distortive. There are different pressures now than there 

were. 

 

The former government allowed – just before the 1982  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2491 

 

election – allowed the federal government to off-load the cost of 

treaty Indians. At the time we became government, there were 

approximately 1,000 treaty Indians in Saskatchewan on the 

Saskatchewan welfare role. There are approximately 3,000 now 

– a tripling of the number of cases that the federal government 

has been able to off-load on to this government as a result of the 

decisions made by the NDP just prior to 1981 . . . just prior to 

the 1982 election in 1981. That’s an extra 2,000 cases. 

 

We talk about the expenditures. In 1966, when Saskatchewan 

joined the Canada assistance plan, the average case pay out was 

$87.54 per month. It now is estimated in these estimates that the 

cost this year will be $558.32 per month. In 1982, when the 

members of the NDP boasted they had the most generous 

system, it was $434.32 per month. There has been an increase 

in the average case pay out of approximately $120.00 per month 

in the average case pay out. And then the member opposite 

suggests that things were much better five or six years ago; 

we’ll try to take those figures into account. 

 

And then we get to the question: the Canada Pension Plan, the 

one I answered when we last were assembled in this committee. 

The calculations that my department has done is that the impact 

of taking the Canada Pension Plan early only impacts on those 

people in the highest 25 per cent of the Canada Pension Plan 

eligibility and the highest 25 per cent of income people. 

 

(1500) 

 

The people that now require welfare and would apply for the 

Canada Pension Plan early would not be affected in a dollars 

and cents way by applying early other than that they would now 

be receiving money from the Canada Pension Plan rather than 

from the Canada assistance plan and the Saskatchewan 

assistance plan. And they would be, in the short run, saving 

dollars – saving money to the province of Saskatchewan 

because they would be receiving federal money. 

 

And once they reach the age of 65, they would qualify for 

seniors’ income plan and that the slack – the reduced Canada 

Pension Plan that they received now would be picked up by the 

Saskatchewan seniors’ income plan which, I should point out to 

the member opposite, was raised from $25 a month when they 

were government, to $65 a month right now – a two and a half 

times increase. But these are things that the members opposite 

would distort and paint for us that the situation for seniors or 

those people on welfare have somehow gotten worse since we 

have become government. 

 

Lastly, in answer to the question of how many people are 

affected by the taking of the Canada Pension Plan early, we 

expect that the number is in the range of 100, but the 

calculations have, of course, not yet been done because we are 

still encouraging people who qualify to take them, and the 

figures would change every day, but we anticipate that it’s 

approximately 100 cases that are affected. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, if I may encourage you to 

do something more than change definitions, and if I  

may encourage you to create jobs, there are 20,000 applicants 

for social assistance in this province that would welcome an 

initiative by the government to create jobs instead of change 

definitions. 

 

You say that there are approximately 100 people who have 

taken early Canada pensions, seniors who have taken early 

Canada pension, and are having that deducted dollar for dollar 

from their social assistance payments. And I ask you again, how 

are you going to compensate them in the long run to ensure that 

they will not be out personal income past the age of 65? Would 

you please state that clearly for me, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I just explained that the 

Saskatchewan income plan for seniors now pays $65 per month 

rather than $25 per month. People who qualify for Canada 

Pension Plan and welfare, at this stage, if they applied for their 

Canada Pension Plan, it would reduce the amount of welfare 

they receive. It will also reduce the amount of pension they will 

receive when they are over the age of 65; however, the amount 

of Canada Pension Plan they receive when they are over the 65, 

if it is reduced, will increase the amount of Saskatchewan 

income plan they will receive when they are over 65. So they 

would be taking money from the federal government plan now 

and taking money from the province later. Theoretically, later 

we’ll be in a better position to pay for it with current dollars 

rather than with borrowed dollars, and it is always better for a 

province to spend money in the future, rather than to spend it in 

the present. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I will follow that carefully, 

and will apply pencil to paper to ensure that those numbers as a 

matter of act do assure Saskatchewan seniors – and I suspect 

we’re probably talking of these hundred people, the majority of 

those being widows – to ensure that they have financial security 

past the age of 65 that’s not inhibited in any way because of this 

policy decision in your department. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, as you may know, a little over a year ago a 

group of nine organizations in Saskatoon, including some 

doctors, social workers, the United Church, the Community 

Health Services association, Crocus Co-op, and others, made a 

public brief linking poverty to certain physical and mental 

illnesses. There were many experts in that group, Mr. Minister, 

who say clearly that there are people who are sick in 

Saskatchewan today primarily because they are poor. 

 

And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you’re aware of that 

brief, and what you have done to respond to the disturbing 

points made in that brief. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the situation is quite simple. It has 

been for thousands and thousands of years that people who are 

sick do not have an ability to earn much income, and therefore 

because people are ill they may be poor. 

 

We have a health care system that is spending, in addition to 

last year’s expenditure, another $36 million. We have an 

excellent health care system in Saskatchewan, but even that 

cannot heal everyone, cannot rehabilitate everyone, and 

therefore there are systems in place that  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2492 

 

assist people. You have workers’ compensation for injury on 

the job. You have the Canada Pension Plan disability payments 

for people who’ve paid into the Canada Pension Plan, and for 

those people who’ve not been able to make any of those 

provisions, in addition you have private plans. People put away 

money and buy accident and disability insurance. 

 

But in addition to that, for those people who’ve not been able to 

do any of those things, we have the Saskatchewan/Canada 

assistance plan which pays according to peoples’ needs. So it is 

hard to believe that money has much to do with health in this 

province, and if money could buy health, then I could show you 

some of the healthiest people you ever saw. I know people who 

have money, but they can’t buy their health, and they would 

trade their money for their health in many, many cases. 

 

But that is not the situation. The situation is that some people 

are unfortunate, do not have good health, and therefore cannot 

earn incomes and may be poor as a result of that. The question 

then is: to what extent should the state remedy the poverty? 

Should the state restore them to the position they were in before 

they fell ill, or should the state restore them to a position where 

they are covered by what needs they have? And in this 

province, and in all of Canada, people are covered according to 

their needs, not according to their past life-style. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well the point is still left, Mr. Minister, to 

recognize the very message of that brief that was put together 

about a year ago, and the point was not made that illness brings 

about poverty. It was, as a matter of fact, the opposite, that 

poverty begets illness, both physical and mental illness. And I 

think it’s a brief, Mr. Minister, that speaks to the level of 

assistance for those who are forced, who are forced to rely on 

the safety net through social assistance. 

 

Mr. Minister, last year the Regina city council expressed the 

opinion that social assistance rates are too low. And the city’s 

board of health and social planning subsequently proposed that 

an independent agency be established to set social assistance 

rates, an agency independent of the department, independent of 

the government. Mr. Minister, have you considered that option, 

and if not, why not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well you have to take into account, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman, that you should also consider that people on 

welfare are entitled to get all of their prescriptions for $2. They 

don’t pay 3.95; they don’t pay a deductible; they don’t pay a 

percentage. It’s $2. And for those who have the most extreme 

needs for drugs, it is zero. 

 

Then you get down to the question of how much the state 

should be paying. And I submit to the member opposite and to 

the city of Regina council that if they think the rates are too low 

in the city of Regina, they province will not stop the city of 

Regina from paying welfare rates in addition to those that we 

pay to such ever level as their taxpayers think is desirable. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, the amounts that your  

department has to work with to provide social assistance are 

dependent on a number of factors. One is that the Canada 

assistance plan agreement covers half the cost. We’ve discussed 

previously in estimates here that 1 per cent of the total budget is 

assessed to municipalities. There are also, then, the general 

government revenues from a variety of sources that contribute 

to what the government has to offer by way of security to the 

poorest of the poor. 

 

Let me ask you the same question again, Mr. Minister, and ask 

that you answer that question. Have you considered the setting 

of an independent agency or board to set social assistance rates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we had a referendum on 

October 20, 1986, a massive referendum, and the people of 

Saskatchewan picked a board called the Government of 

Saskatchewan to decide what should be done in the government 

of this province. 

 

Now we have the city of Regina saying that welfare rates are 

too low, when at the same time the city of Regina comes to me 

and says, we don’t want to pay our share; the city should pay 

nothing towards the cost of welfare. And did you know what 

the city of Regina pays now? About 1 per cent of the welfare 

costs paid out in this city. The municipalities in this province 

pay $1.9 million out of approximately $200 million – 

approximately 1 per cent of the welfare costs. And then the city 

of Regina says it should be higher. And then they come to me 

and say, we shouldn’t pay 1 per cent. 

 

It seems to me that there’s an inconsistency there. And I have 

said to the municipalities that the 1 per cent they now pay 

seems to be a very reasonable share, and I don’t intend to 

reduce it, and nor do I intend to ask the city of Regina how we 

should spend more money in the city of Regina on the welfare 

cases here. We will come up with the most efficient, the fairest 

system possible, and will be certain that everyone has enough to 

eat. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I agree there was a 

referendum on October 26. If we want to go by the rules of 

referendum, the referendum on October 26 provided more 

support for the members of the New Democratic Party than it 

did for the members of the Progressive Conservatives – if you 

want to measure it in terms of referendum. 

 

Mr. Minister, you do not have a monopoly on caring, and there 

are those who suggest it, as a matter of fact, you not only do not 

have a monopoly, that you’re a little short-changed in that area. 

And let me come back to my question again. I did not ask 

whether you thought the city of Regina should set social 

assistance rates. The city of Regina made a recommendation. 

The recommendation was that the rates would be set by an 

independent agency or board. Have you considered that option? 

If not, why not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No I haven’t because first of all the city 

of Regina pays 1 per cent. How many representatives would 

you give them – 1 out of 100? How do you in this province find 

an independent anything? And it seems to me that this province 

has been polarized for generations  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2493 

 

between socialists and un-socialists. And if you ever add up the 

socialist vote, I believe only once did it ever have more than 50 

per cent – and yet a socialist government in this province for 

most of the last 45 years. 

 

So under the rules, we are the government. Under past rules, the 

socialists were the government. As long as we are the 

government, we will do the best we can to take care of everyone 

within the ability of society to do that. And what we will do is 

not only say we will take care of you, but we will help you take 

care of yourself. That’s our difference in philosophy. The 

philosophy of the NDP is: there should be equality even if it’s 

equal poverty for all. The philosophy of our government is that 

there should be some room for incentives. There should be 

equal opportunity. Those people who do not have the ability to 

care for themselves, do not have the ability to compete in a 

complicated, modern world, should be assisted. And that’s what 

we do. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I am sure that you’re aware that 

many families who live on social assistance have many 

limitations, and among those is the fact that children in those 

families are very, very frequently – the vast majority of times – 

denied normal opportunity to participate in recreational 

activities. It would be the procedure of your department in 

foster home placement or adoptions placement to ensure that 

children going into those homes would be provided some 

normal opportunity to participate in recreation. This, as a matter 

of fact, because of the rate levels applied to social assistance 

families and also due to the fact that there is no specific 

category providing for children’s recreational activities, means 

that there is a difference between those children who are living 

in families who are the poorest of our poor. 

 

I ask, Mr. Minister, if you have or would consider providing for 

those families who have children who are the poorest of the 

poor, depending on social assistance, some means to participate 

in normal recreational activities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am also 

concerned that all children have an equal opportunity to 

participate in recreation and sports, and as much as possible we 

will look at every possible means as far as the province of 

Saskatchewan is involved in recreation. I see a large number of 

sports facilities in the vicinity of downtown Regina – more 

facilities than are available to most children in Saskatchewan – 

and I would hope that these children have an opportunity to 

participate. 

 

(1515) 

 

In addition, not only do I hope, but I will look at all possibilities 

for having all children in Saskatchewan able to participate. And 

that’s not to say that we will buy new skates for all children in 

Saskatchewan if they are not able to buy new skates. My 

children are skating right now in $10 used skates. My wife said 

that he doesn’t skate very well, he should have new skates. I 

said, it’s not the problem of the skates, it’s the feet. And so 

what my son needs is more practice. But I realize that there are 

costs involved that some people may not be able to afford, and  

we will do everything possible to help in that area. 

 

I also am concerned about children who may go to school 

hungry, and ways of alleviating that. But I want to be certain 

that I . . . if I could solve that problem with money I would lay 

the money on the table in the legislature instantly, but I want to 

make sure that that extra money goes to the children and 

provides the recreation and the food that is necessary and is not 

squandered in other ways. So I want to make sure that that 

money goes to the children because I agree that all children 

should have equal opportunity when they are young. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate your sentiments on that, Mr. 

Minister. You will know, as well as I, that one of the strains that 

the providers of recreational facilities, like municipalities and 

others, are having these days is cut-backs in funding through 

other decisions of your government. Unfortunately what that 

means, is that it impacts the greatest on those who have the 

least. 

 

As difficult as it is to afford a $2 cover charge to go skating – 

pick a figure, I’m not getting hung up on figures here – it 

becomes even that much more imposing to pay 2.50 or 3, so 

that as the rates go up because other bodies have more of a 

pressure to recoup the operating costs through fees, it simply 

excludes poor children even more. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, as I’ve said on some other occasions, you 

have my commitment if it is your intent to work towards 

providing recreational opportunity for children in poverty. You 

have my commitment to work in co-operation with you. 

 

Mr. Minister, you will know that single employable recipients 

who are living in urban centres today are receiving through 

social assistance income approximately equal to half the 

poverty line. By single employable recipients – this is the group 

that was particularly hard hit by the reforms of 1984 – and I’m 

referring to people then who don’t have children and who are 

determined to be capable of employment but simply cannot find 

employment, and I want to ask, Mr. Minister, if you find it 

acceptable in the context of the philosophy of your department 

that people who are capable of employment but cannot find 

employment in the province of Saskatchewan, if you find it 

acceptable that they would be living with an income of 

approximately half the poverty line, and that they would be 

living in it with an income that provides, after rent, for up to 

only $123. And I ask, Mr. Minister . . . per month, $123 per 

month. And I ask, Mr. Minister, if you find those support levels 

acceptable and if you have any intentions to bring about 

changes to address that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is a problem 

area – single employables. You have a whole category there. If 

you went from, on a scale of 1 to 10, of single employables that 

deserve assistance, you would have people at a 10 who are 

trying their best to support themselves and just can’t find a job, 

and they would be 10’s. But then you find 1’s, people that make 

no effort whatsoever to support themselves. And how do I help 

the 10’s, the ones that try so hard, and not benefit the 1’s that 

don’t try at all. That is quite a quandary we have at Social 

Services. 

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2494 

 

I was driving into Regina this morning and I was thinking – and 

I’ll tell you what I was thinking – I was thinking that with 

respect to single employables I should devise the system where 

they could keep more of the initial earnings they had on 

part-time wages or casual jobs or things of that nature. And I 

can’t make policy here in estimates while I’m thinking out loud, 

but I will look at a system where a single employable can keep 

a greater proportion of their initial earnings so that there is some 

incentive there to go out and help yourself. 

 

I’ve also looked at the possibility, in a lot of areas, where single 

employables receive a lower rate than employables with 

dependants or people who are unemployable. And I would like 

to see a system somehow, and I’m going to work on it, a system 

where single employables can earn, either through community 

work or some way, bonus credits so that those people who 

genuinely can’t find a job, but say: well look, I will go out and 

help at the nursing home one day a week, even if it’s to visit 

with people and cheer people up. That is useful to society and 

we should take that into account and give them an extra 

exemption or an extra sum. 

 

So that is how I’m trying wrestle with the problem of helping 

those that are very deserving and just can’t get a job, and those 

who could get a job if they put a little effort into it. And I don’t 

want to lump everyone that’s a single employable into one 

category and categorize them as a this or a that, but I’m saying 

there’s a broad spectrum and I’d like to help those people who 

are really trying hard to help themselves. I’d like to let that 

initiative be developed a bit further. On the other hand, I can’t 

encourage those people who do nothing for themselves. So it’s 

quite a problem. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m somewhat pleased to 

hear some of your sentiments expressed here today. I hope 

they’re expressed honestly and sincerely. 

 

It is my view, Mr. Minister, I share with the sentiment that I 

think I heard you imply, and that’s that the amounts to live on 

that are available to single employable persons are insufficient, 

and I share that sentiment with you. It would also be my 

opinion, very clearly, Mr. Minister, that we must work to 

eliminate discrimination in the providing of benefits, singling 

out people who are employable from those who are not 

employable, singling out people who are single from those who 

are not single, and to get our assistance plan back into the spirit 

and the context of the Canada assistance plan agreement of 

1966, which very clearly required that in the benefits to be paid 

by the province. 

 

I share with you as well, your concerns about the incentive to 

work through the earnings exemption policies that you brought 

forth in August – I think was the 21st – in the latter part of 

August. And we’ll deal with that this afternoon in a moment, 

Mr. Minister, because very clearly – and I will give you some 

figures to demonstrate that those changes on income exemption, 

as a matter of fact, have been steps backward in terms of 

incentive to work for every single person who is receiving 

social assistance. 

 

I don’t know if that was the intention of your department. I 

hope not. And it may have been that the department was 

misdirected in bringing about the changes in those policies, but 

we’ll explore those a little this afternoon. 

 

And again, I say to you: you have my commitment. If we are 

moving to remove discrimination for single employable 

persons, and if we are moving to honestly and sincerely provide 

incentive to work so that those who are living on social 

assistance with very low income can improve their lot in life, 

and consistent with their first objective – to get themselves off 

of assistance and become employment earners – those kinds of 

initiatives, Mr. Minister, you have my commitment to work in 

co-operation with you. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’ve heard your statements, and I would like, for 

clarification, if you would answer for me: have the round of 

cut-backs initiated by your government since the last election in 

any way affected negatively the medical, dental, or prescription 

drug coverage of social assistance recipients? 

 

I’m simply looking for your crystal-clear assurance, Mr. 

Minister. I’m anticipating your answer will be that they haven’t 

negatively affected that, but I would like just a clear statement 

to that effect, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is no. And 

woe be to anyone who goes around spreading anything else to 

the contrary. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well it is refreshing to have a clear statement 

like that, Mr. Minister, and I welcome you for that. 

 

Mr. Minister, it has been reported to me that there are seniors 

who have been coming to the Department of Social Services for 

assistance by way of food voucher because they haven’t yet 

received their promised rebates from the prescription drug plan. 

Could you confirm for me, Mr. Minister, whether that, as a 

matter of fact, is the case, and how many situations would be 

there within the province of Saskatchewan where that’s 

occurred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, none that we know of. 

 

With respect to the question that was asked in the House in 

question period one day about senior citizens being forced onto 

welfare because of changes in the drug plan, we have not been 

able to find any cases of that nature. We have been able to 

determine that one of our workers did phone the Leader of the 

Opposition and misinform the Leader of the Opposition. The 

member was suspended for a brief period of time and is . . . or 

the individual that phoned the member was suspended for a 

brief period of time and has now been reinstated and is back on 

the job. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the largest 

case-load handled by a social worker in your department would 

be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have 

different kinds of programs and workers for different things. 

With respect to welfare case workers, the average  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2495 

 

is 173 per worker of which one-third – if you take the 

provincial average – of which one-third would be unemployable 

clientele case-load, people that would be fairly stable disabled 

and wouldn’t have a very large change in circumstances; 

approximately two-thirds would be partially employable or 

employable. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And, Mr. Minister, could you advise me of the 

largest case-load that you have within your department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I realize that the member 

from Moose Jaw North is trying to find some sensational 

statistic that he could quote as the norm and that the SGEU 

(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) could then 

drag forward as the massive overload, but we don’t keep track 

of the highest case-load or the lowest case-load. There are 

situations where you could be dealing with people in 

institutions, a static case-load where it could reach as high as 

350 or possibly 400, but we don’t keep statistics on what the 

highest is, so it would depend on the clientele. The average for 

the province is 173. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I raise the point because it has 

been reported to me that there are certainly more than one 

example in the province of Saskatchewan where social workers 

are carrying social assistance case-loads well in excess of 200. 

I’ve had numbers in excess of 300 and, as a matter of fact, in 

excess of 400 reported to me. 

 

And I simply . . . And also, Mr. Minister, I’ve heard them in the 

context of access to social workers by people who are looking 

for direction to help them cut that tie or that dependency with 

the Department of Social Services, that requirement for social 

assistance. And so as a . . . I’ve had reported to me, on a 

number of cases, that the case-loads are very high, the 

opportunity for social workers to provide counselling, in 

addition to simply mathematical form filling-out, has been 

reduced. And the concern that I have about that is simply that 

we may, as a matter of fact, be throwing out the baby with the 

bath water if the objective is to increase case-loads, streamline 

administrative procedures, but lose in the process that ability of 

department employees to deal in human terms with 

impoverished people in Saskatchewan, and to assist them 

through a variety of means to break that dependency and to 

become more independent – I think that would be all of our 

objective – that if that’s true, and it’s been reported a number of 

times, and that it is a concern. 

 

And it’s in that context that I raise that question, Mr. Minister. 

Could you please confirm for me whether as a matter of fact 

those kinds of numbers do exist in some parts of the province, 

or are these simply false reports that I’m receiving from 

Saskatchewan people in these cases? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I haven’t finalized the 

details yet, but we will be working on changes in the system 

because I believe that social workers should be doing social 

work and financial workers should be doing financial work. 

And I will be looking at changes in the system to allow social 

workers more time to do actual  

social work. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, that is an objective with 

which I concur and I would hope that that’s the direction in 

which we’re heading. 

 

Can you advise me, Mr. Minister, here in the city of Regina or 

say in the city of Saskatoon, what would be the length of time 

an applicant for social assistance who would be described as 

having an emergency, in need for their assistance, how long 

would a person who’s an emergency case applying for 

assistance be required to wait till such an appointment could be 

arranged with a social worker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, same day in the case of 

emergency. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Is that as a matter of fact, occurring in all 

offices, Mr. Minister, to the best of your knowledge? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, that is our policy. I had a 

complaint from somewhere, either Saskatoon or Prince Albert, 

about someone who had been on social services had gone to 

Arizona for several months and came back and insisted on 

receiving assistance the very same day. Our worker set up an 

appointment – I think this was on a Friday, and they set up an 

appointment for the following Wednesday. And you sometimes 

have to judge whether it’s an emergency or isn’t an emergency. 

We believe that someone who has been out of the country for, I 

think it was in excess of six months, I believe it was eight – that 

that would probably not be an emergency situation. But 

otherwise we know that our policy is that in emergencies they 

would be dealt with the very same day. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I’m not interested in dealing with 

red herrings and snide innuendoes and that sort of thing. If we 

can keep this thing on the up and up, that would be just great. 

 

I know what the policy of the department is to provide that first 

appointment in emergency cases the same day, but that wasn’t 

my question. The question is: how long is it taking? And let me 

ask that in the context of the two largest cities – in the city of 

Regina and Saskatoon. As a matter of fact, can you provide 

assurance to Saskatchewan people in need, who are needing 

emergency assistance, that they can get an appointment with a 

social worker the same day that they make that contact with one 

of the department’s offices? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, in Regina and 

Saskatoon, the best information I have is that emergency cases 

are dealt with on the very same day. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well I’m pleased to hear that, Mr. Minister, and 

I take it that if, as a matter of fact, that’s not occurring, that you 

would welcome information to that extent and would take 

action to remedy it. The minister nods his head, and I’ll take 

that as confirmation. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like now to deal with some specifics of 

concern to people who are dependent on social assistance and to 

refer specifically to a number of the  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2496 

 

changes that have been recently announced. And if your ADMS 

(assistance deputy ministers) who are there may want to get 

some paper and pencil ready because I do want to deal with 

some numbers. I want to talk dollars and cents because that’s 

very critical issue, and small dollars and cents are a big issue 

with many impoverished people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 

 

First of all, you announced some reforms – and I don’t have it 

before me – I believe the date was August 21. But to the best of 

my knowledge, the previous revision to rates for social 

assistance occurred in May 1984 –you’ll correct me if I’m 

mistaken on that – and at that time there were some increases. 

There were, as a matter of fact, some decreases to people who 

were described as employable and single. 

 

Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, between May 1984 and, let’s 

say, today, or as of the August 21 date of announcement, what 

your department understands the rate of inflation to have been 

between May 1984 and August 1987? It would be my rough 

calculation, Mr. Minister, that inflation in that period of time 

was approximately 15 to 20 per cent, and could you please 

confirm that for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’m glad the member for 

Moose Jaw North asked the question, because the calculation of 

the inflation rate has always been a statistic that has been 

confusing, and I’d like to explain that statistic. 

 

Taken into account in Statistics Canada’s inflation rate are: the 

cost of a new house – if you purchased a house, housing is 

taken into account. So therefore if . . . Let’s look at Canada as a 

whole. If there was inflation of 20 per cent this year in Canada 

– there isn’t; don’t let anybody say there is – but if there were, 

then cost of housing may go up 20 per cent. But for those 95 per 

cent or more of the people who already have their housing, or 

did not purchase housing, they had no inflation in housing. 

 

With respect to the same situation, the cost of living takes into 

account the cost of cigarettes and the cost of alcohol. So those 

people who had . . . do not consume alcohol or do not smoke 

had no cost of living increase with respect to cigarettes or 

alcohol. 

 

Somehow there is a confusion in this country that everyone’s 

cost of living goes up equally, and it does not. It depends how 

you live. If you live like the middle income, middle class 

Canadian, then your cost of living has likely gone up. But the 

cost of living takes into account the cost of a new car. If you do 

not buy a new car, if you do not buy new houses, if you do not 

buy boats, and all the other things that are taken account into 

the cost of living, your individual costs may not have gone up. 

 

The cost figures that we have . . . costs for Saskatchewan 

average in that period of time – you’re talking about two years, 

are you? – we would have to try to break it down because it’s 

always calculated on a yearly basis. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it would be a three-year period. 

The last revisions were May of 1984, and you announced some 

in August of 1987. So it’s a three-year  

period we’re talking about. My assumption is that that you 

would refer to the consumer price index for things such as food 

and clothing and shelter and transportation and recreation, many 

of the things that we have talked about and will talk about here 

this afternoon, the basic living items which are the things that 

directly affect social assistance recipients. 

 

Could you then . . . surely your department makes some 

assumptions when revising rates and tries to deal with the living 

realities for poor people who are required to live on social 

assistance. And could you simply advise me then, what your 

assessment is about the cost of living for those items that have 

been covered by social assistance over that three-year – well it’s 

a little longer than a three-year period; about a 39-month, 39-, 

40-month period – for things such as food and shelter and 

clothing and transportation, those sorts of things, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: I don’t have the exact breakdown for that 

period, but from 1984 to 1985, cost of living in Saskatchewan 

up 4.5 per cent. The ’86 figure I don’t have; I believe it was 

lower than that. 

 

As you know, we are now in a period where inflation is the 

lowest it has been in about 20 years, so the cost of living and 

inflation has been not so much in people’s mind as some other 

factors. And the question is, how much really is the cost? 

 

As you know, people on welfare pay a greater percentage of 

their income on food, on rent, and clothing. On clothing, this 

government removed the 5 per cent sales tax on clothing, so the 

cost of clothing actually went down. 

 

You have to take into account federal tax initiatives like the 

child tax credit which puts actually a lump sum of money into 

people’s pockets all at once. So all in all, the poor people in 

Saskatchewan, while they are still poor, are better off than they 

were two years ago, five years ago, and ten years ago. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I understand what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, I 

think, but that still doesn’t answer my question. It would seem 

to me inconceivable that your department, in arriving at 

appropriate rates to provide a basic security income to the 

poorest in our province, social assistance rates would have an 

indication as to how much costs had increased since those rates 

were last revised in May of 1984 in that 39- or 40-month period 

of time. 

 

And my assumption is that that’s a factor that is taken into 

consideration. I’m telling you, Mr. Minister, that my 

calculations are somewhere between 15 and 20 per cent, 

perhaps closer to the 15 than the 20. And I simply ask you to 

give me a figure. Maybe you don’t have a firm one; maybe you 

have a range. But I don’t think we’re talking about 1 or 2 per 

cent increase in the cost of living for food and shelter and 

clothing and transportation and recreation over the past 40 

months. I don’t think that’s the figure we’re looking at. My 

opinion is it’s somewhere around 15 per cent, maybe slightly 

higher. And I’m simply asking you what the department’s view 

is of the increasing cost. 

 

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2497 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well our view is that for everyone costs 

are going up, and we’ll try to keep up with those as much as 

possible. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, what is the purpose for 

avoiding this question? This is not a difficult question. I mean, 

we’ll try and keep up with . . . that only makes sense if you 

know what you’re trying to keep up with. Now there were some 

changes in 1984; you’ve announced some changes in 1987. I 

would assume from what you’ve said that you’re trying to keep 

up with the costs. How much have those costs increased that 

you’re trying to keep up with, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, one of the 

reasons we’re trying to simplify the welfare system is because 

it’s so complicated you can’t even get a comparison. As it 

stands today, by the national calculation, we would be a close 

third, closer to second, in rates for people with families – 

families with children. 

 

Last year the special needs paid out by the department were 

nearly $20 million. They run at about 10 per cent of the budget 

at Social Services, in the welfare section of it. If you add that 10 

per cent that was paid out in special needs to the welfare 

statistics across the country, we will then be, because we’re not 

given credit right now for that 10 per cent, we will then be 

number one in Canada in the amount we pay out. And so that 

also has to be taken into account – that extra 10 per cent that 

doesn’t show up in welfare rates at all. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I really am not certain why 

we’re having such a hard time coming up with a figure from 

you here, but I’m not going to belabour the point. We’ll let it 

rest that I think it’s something in excess of 15 per cent cost of 

living increase for basic items for Saskatchewan people since 

the last revision, and we’ll leave it that you think it’s something 

different, but I’m not sure what, and we’ll move along to some 

specifics. 

 

But let’s talk about, first of all, Mr. Minister, the item that 

would be of most pleasure to you, I think, and that’s about your 

increases. You announced that there would be an increase in 

social assistance rates, effective January 1, 1988, I believe. And 

I ask you to confirm the date that it’s effective, the increase, in 

the amounts of $17 per adult and $13 per child in families. 

 

(1545) 

 

And I ask, Mr. Minister – you may want to just simply confirm 

those; I think those are accurate – I ask you a specific question: 

will those increases of 17 and $13 respectively be assigned to 

the portion of assistance that’s allocated to food expenditure? 

 

Let me anticipate your answer in saying, well we just have the 

basic benefit and we don’t break it down and so on. But as a 

matter of fact that’s not entirely true, because some people are 

not eligible for things such as clothing allowance or 

transportation allowance. And so it becomes a very significant 

factor to social assistance recipients as to whether that whole 17 

and $13 are assigned specifically to food expenditure or 

whether they’re prorated across the basic allowance. This may 

not  

make a great deal of difference to you, 4 or $3 a month, but 

there are many, many people in Saskatchewan for whom that’s 

a very important factor. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, can you confirm that those increases are in 

effect January 1, 1988? And would you please advise as to 

whether they are assigned to food expenditure or some other 

prorated form? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the increases are 

on January 1, 1988. They are $17 for an adult, $13 per child per 

month, plus a rent allocation of 4 to 5 per cent, depending on 

the costs. They’re not assigned to any particular expenditure. 

Assuming that there might be some children hungry in Regina, I 

would hope that all of that $13 would go towards their food. 

 

In addition, we have the rent situation where some families will 

be receiving 20 or $30 a month extra for rent. So in the case of 

some families, if you add on $17 per adult; two adults, $34; two 

children, $26 — $60; and 20 to $30 for their rent; you’re 

looking at about an increase per family there, on January 1, of 

about $85 per month. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, let’s not complicate a simple 

item. As I pointed out, not everyone in Saskatchewan who 

receives assistance receives approval for all categories. 

 

Will you please give me a clear indication, because this is a real 

question for people who . . . And they very clearly do not have 

an answer to this. Will every individual in Saskatchewan have 

an increase to their benefits, effective January 1, 1988, to the 

amount of $17 per adult and $13 per child, regardless of 

whatever benefit categories they may not be entitled to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, this 

money is a basic allowance increase. The recipient can spend it 

wherever they think they need it spent, except with the rent 

portion which has to be spent on the actual rent if it has 

increased. The balance of the money goes to whatever they 

think it’s for. It’s not considered part of the special needs; it’s 

not a special need. 

 

Everyone who gets a basic allowance will receive the increase. 

I’m advised that there are very few cases where some people 

receive only food assistance from Social Services. This is the 

first I’ve come across them; it still exists in the old regulations. 

I doubt very much if it will be a major factor there. They will 

receive whatever they need according to their needs up to that 

maximum level. 

 

But we will be trying to get the system under a comprehensive 

system where you are given assistance based on your need. And 

if your need is calculated after you’ve already paid your own 

rent and all the other kinds of things, or you live in free housing 

of a relative or whatever and you still have need, then that will 

be taken into account. 

 

So that sum will be passed on to all people who are on the basic 

allowance which would be 99-point-some- per cent of them; 

and in addition, to those people who are in need of food will get 

up to the maximum increase. 

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2498 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, can we please simplify this and 

translate it into reality? And this is not a hypothetical question; 

it’s a real one, an important one to poor people. 

 

Mr. Minister, you and I both know that if . . . Let me use myself 

as an example. If I found myself in dire straits and approach the 

Department of Social Services to apply for assistance for my 

family, there is a different amount that I’m eligible for in the 

first three months than the period of time after that. 

 

Now that’s a regulation of your department. And the reason for 

that is because there are some forms of assistance I’m eligible 

for after three months that we simply don’t get in the first three 

months. For example, we don’t get any entitlement to purchase 

clothing. 

 

What I’m simply asking then is if this first-time applicant 

comes to your department, an individual or family, and are 

applying for assistance because this is the end of the line for 

them, will they be entitled, will every applicant receive that full 

$17 increase because it will be assigned to everybody? Or is 

there a variation depending on whether it’s the first three 

months or later on, or other complications that enter into the 

entitlement calculation? 

 

And I raise this with you. Obviously we’re talking here dollar, 

$2, maybe $3 a month, and that may not seem in this Assembly 

like a lot of money for individuals. But believe me, for people 

who are dependent on social assistance, it is a large amount of 

money. And I’d like a clear answer. Will that $17 per adult 

increase and $13 per child increase apply completely to every 

applicant, regardless of circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: Mr. Deputy Chairman, the answer is yes, 

and I will qualify it to say that it’s an across the board increase. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well if the answer is clearly yes, I’m not sure 

what the qualification is necessary for. But I understand you, 

Mr. Minister, to be saying it applies to everyone. And I concur. 

I would hope that that is the way that that increase is being 

applied. 

 

You’re made reference to the 4 to 5 per cent shelter increase 

allowance in possible shelter expenditures. And that’s the first 

adjustment since 1984, and I recognize that. 

 

Mr. Minister, another change that was made was in the laundry 

allowance. And if I can just outline for you the changes that 

occurred as a result of your announced welfare reform. The 

laundry allowance to my understanding is for people who 

require coin-operated machines. 

 

And I ask you two questions. One is, what date are the changes 

effective? My understanding is that they’re October 1; and 

please confirm that or correct me. Also my understanding, Mr. 

Minister, is this, that the changes are spelled out this way. Prior 

to and after your most recent welfare reform, one person was 

previously eligible for up to $12 for laundry; that’s now 10, 

standard 10. Two people in a family unit eligible previously up 

to $24 per month; that’s now 15. Three people in the family unit 

or  

more, up to $35 per month; three people is now 20 that they’re 

eligible for, and four or more is eligible for $25 for laundry. 

That represents as a matter of fact, if I’m correct, Mr. Minister, 

a reduction for every family unit in the amount that they’re 

allocated to spend on their laundry. 

 

And so could you confirm for me those figures, Mr. Minister, 

and please justify them for me if they are correct; and secondly, 

what date these cuts will come into effect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, laundry up until 

now has been a special need. It’s been calculated differently in 

every district according to whatever they felt like the 

calculation should be in that area. And the practices and the 

amounts paid varied throughout the province. We’ve decided to 

standardize those rates at $10 for single, $15 dollars for two, 

$20 for a family of three, and $25 for a family of four. Those 

rates will be standard across the province, and all people will be 

entitled to them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Minister, then two qualifications 

again. You didn’t tell me when those are effective, and you 

didn’t tell me why it was decided to reduce the amounts 

available to families who require assistance in order to wash 

their clothes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I didn’t get the last part of your question 

there. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — When are they effective, and why was it decided 

to reduce the amounts that families are eligible for to wash their 

clothes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — They’re effective October 1 and the 

amounts have not been reduced. There were no set amounts 

before. They’ve now set the amounts. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would debate that point 

with you because I just finished outlining what people were 

eligible for before and now, and I saw you concur that those are 

as a matter of fact true. And that means that a family that was 

receiving assistance for laundry before and now, is getting less. 

I don’t know how you describe that as anything other than a 

reduction. And would you like to justify that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’ve advised that 

we’ve standardized the sum, and the regional offices will now 

not set the sum as they see fit in the regional offices, but they 

will pay the standardized amount. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, if I may encourage you to 

rethink that in terms of the hardships it imposes on families who 

were receiving that allowance before, and will after your 

changes as well. 
 

Mr. Minister, you announced as well that there would be an 

elimination of travel allowances in some cases, with the 

exceptions, I believe, of medical reasons, those attending 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council programs; perhaps all sheltered 

employment. If you would you please confirm that. And 

secondary school students will still be eligible to receive 

assistance for transportation. But all adults, with the exception 

of those who are  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2499 

 

attending for those reasons, will now be denied travel allowance 

across the board. 

 

That would would have an impact here in the city of Regina, for 

example, by reduction in per adult allowance in a family, of $27 

per month. Mr. Minister, would you please tell me effective 

what date those travel allowances are being eliminated, the ones 

you’re eliminating; and again, the justification. 

 

And I ask that in the context of assisting people to get out and 

look for employment so as to be less dependent on social 

assistance. I would see, and I guess I’m making it very clear 

here, I have a problem accepting that change. Because I would 

have thought, in terms of carrying out family responsibilities in 

seeking employment, it would have been an incentive to get 

employment to provide the transportation allowance. 

 

So what date are those effective; and can you please justify that 

for me, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the effective 

date is October 1. There will be a change for some people in the 

cities because for some reason they were receiving travel 

allowance; the people in rural Saskatchewan, they were not 

receiving a travel allowance. And it seems to me that it’s a lot 

easier to get around the city of Regina than it is around rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So if there is any change, it will be for single, employable 

people, or healthy people in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 

Prince Albert – the larger cities. I feel that for a period of time 

here, until the increases go through, these people should be able 

to, if they don’t have a vehicle – and by the way, a lot of them 

do have vehicles – they should be able to scratch up enough gas 

if they just drive their vehicle to job interviews, that they should 

be able to operate their vehicle. And if they don’t have a 

vehicle, they should be able to walk within the city; the city is 

not that large. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I find that reasoning a bit difficult 

to understand and accept. It would seem to me that if 

transportation is a problem . . . and it’s certainly been reported 

to me a number of times as being a problem in the rural areas 

because people were not eligible to get it. 

 

I have a difficult time understanding, if your objective is to 

provide people assistance to become independent of the 

department, then why would you bring everybody down to the 

lowest common denominator? Would it not make more sense, 

Mr. Minister, to provide the necessary transportation assistance 

to meet their needs? You know and I know that if there is a 

social assistance recipient who has a vehicle, then they still 

have to operate that vehicle. If they don’t have a vehicle they’ve 

still got to get around. 

 

There are some cities – granted this is not Toronto or Montreal 

here in Saskatchewan – but we do have some cities in which it’s 

a little bit difficult to be hoofing it around the city looking for 

employment, and also extremely difficult to be getting the 

shopping done and  

getting the groceries and attending to other needs that families 

may have, Mr. Minister. 

 

(1600) 

 

I simply find it difficult to understand the rationale for saying, 

well they’re not generally getting anything out in the rural area, 

and in the city they are getting a bus pass, in many cases, so 

we’ll cut them all off and treat them the same. That seems to me 

to be a run in the face, slightly, Mr. Minister, of a sense of 

fairness and equality of treatment. Clearly what you’re 

suggesting is equality of treatment – we cut them all off. But 

that flies in the face of incentives to work and being realistic in 

our understanding of the needs of poor people. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I would ask that you please reconsider that 

policy decision to eliminate the transportation allowance. And 

in reconsidering that, if you would please consider providing 

realistic transportation amounts to those who live in the rural 

areas. Their needs for looking for employment are just the same 

as those who live in cities. They are expressed differently, but 

they are just the same. They may have access to a vehicle, but 

that vehicle takes gas and requires insurance and has to operate 

on tires, and so on, to get out and look for work. So I would ask 

that you would reconsider that Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, first of all, from 

what I know of the city of Regina, food is always within 

walking distance. With respect to people on welfare who need 

transportation for school, we cover that; for medical reasons we 

cover that. We cover all of those things, as you indicated earlier. 

 

The situation is also that you have to take into account that 

there are 2,350 employables who have part-time or full-time 

earnings in addition to what they show as . . . in addition to 

what they receive from the Department of Social Services. 

 

There are another 2,500 people who are employable, who are on 

training, and they’ve received an increase in their training 

allowance to transportation money. So those people who are in 

training and are getting an education, need the training 

allowance money, if it’s on the job or educational, have got an 

increase. 

 

What you’re talking about here is single employables, and 

you’re talking about bus passes or whether they have gas to 

drive their cars or not. You know, surely they can get a little 

help if . . . If one of my relatives had a job interview in 

Saskatoon and was on welfare, I would make sure that that 

relative got there, and I wouldn’t ask the government for any 

money. 

 

Surely everybody that’s a single employable does not have 

parents or relatives or friends. There must be someone who will 

help someone. And if, in a most difficult case, somebody has a 

job interview in Prince Albert and they happen to be in Regina, 

we will buy them the bus pass to go there for the job interview. 

But as far as whether people should be given transportation 

money so that they can ride to the grocery store rather than 

walk to the grocery store, we do not believe that’s essential. 

 

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2500 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I won’t stand and argue with 

you here. We’ve obviously both outlined our views, and I 

simply ask you to reconsider that., to reconsider that in the 

context of providing incentive and opportunity for people to get 

off social assistance, to find themselves employment, and to 

have a chance here in Saskatchewan to live with a sense of hope 

and dignity that often, unfortunately, is not possible when living 

on social assistance. 

 

You and I will both know as well . . . You say food is often 

within walking distance, and that may be. But you and I will 

also both know that in many cases, if it’s within walking 

distance, it’s at a corner store that has much higher prices. And 

so that explanation simply doesn’t wash, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to take a look at the bigger picture with 

you. You’ve announced some changes effective August . . . 

Well you announced them in August, and it seems that the 

increases are going to be in January; the decreases are going to 

occur this fall. And assuming, Mr. Minister . . . Let me be 

kinder than many and assume that increases and decreases will 

occur at the same time, which is simply not the case, because 

the decreases happened before increases. In the context, Mr. 

Minister, of about 15 per cent inflation increase since May of 

1984, when we look at the amount of entitlement to 

Saskatchewan people, the poorest of the poor, and we look at 

Saskatchewan families, Mr. Minister, would you . . . I simply 

ask if you would confirm or deny, and give me an explanation. 

 

Up until welfare reform, it would seem to me that a family is 

eligible for . . . a family of one person, partially employable, so 

a single individual: shelter up to $348 a month; their basic 

allowance up to $178; travel up to 27; laundry up to 12; utilities 

up to 22, for a grant total of up to $587. And under the changes, 

that same person, now, with the new regulations, would have at 

most an increase of $3 – a $3 increase from 587 with 15 per 

cent inflation over the past 40 months, Mr. Minister. 

 

Two adults, using the same criteria, their maximum shelter 

available – being fair and comparing apples to apples on one 

column and on the other – could, as a matter of fact – would, as 

a matter of fact, be eligible for even less. Previously $844 a 

month; under your changes, at best a reduction, a reduction in 

their family income for two adults of at least $11.25. 

 

One adult and one child, $801 up to a maximum of $812.75; at 

most an $11.75 increase on $801 maximum eligibility over the 

last 40 months. Two adults, one child, 1,007; at best two adults 

and one child in Saskatchewan under welfare reform, at best, 

will receive $3.25 less, $3.25 less, than they were receiving 

before reform in spite of inflation. One adult and two children, 

one adult and two children, this is a little better. They will 

benefit to the maximum amount – and I’m being kind in all my 

numbers, Mr. Minister – a maximum amount of $19.75 on a 

previously 962 assessed income – an increase of about 2 per 

cent, to be a bit kind, about 2 per cent over the past 40 months. 

 

Two adults and two children, two adults and two  

children, Mr. Minister, under your welfare reform, at best, at 

best, will benefit to the degree of $16.75 – about a 1 per cent 

increase over the last 40 months, Mr. Minister. And those are 

the cold, hard numbers, and I invite you to have your officials 

calculate them out. I’m sure they have them handy, as do I. 

 

That’s the reality of welfare reform, Mr. Minister. When you 

take it all and you shake it together and you see how it comes 

out, that in Saskatchewan families, particularly in the context of 

40 months since the last reform, at best, one adult and two 

children will be better off by $19.75 a month, and that’s by far 

the best picture. Everybody else is worse than that, and some of 

them, as a matter of fact, actually have an income of less. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would ask if you could just . . . first of all, are 

you aware of those numbers? And can you justify for me why it 

makes sense to be giving Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan 

families, the poorest of the poor less to live on now than they 

had before your reform, in many cases, and clearly less in terms 

of real dollars from the last reform in 1984? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, if I could have 

the page come over here, I will send over the documents you 

had asked for earlier on Saskatchewan Social Services aircraft 

charters, which I have available now. And they seem to be 

mostly trips in the two northern constituencies servicing the 

welfare clientele in that area. The total is $35,784.34 for 

charters. I haven’t gone through the entire list, but they seem to 

be mostly in Athabasca and Cumberland where these charter 

flights were taking place. There’s no scheduled airlines in a lot 

of the locations or most of them. I’ll ask the page to send those 

over. 

 

The calculations you’ve just done don’t take into account a lot 

of factors. As I indicated earlier, the social services system is 

complicated. We’re trying to simplify it, for example, you 

didn’t take into account the actual utilities and many other 

factors. 

 

But what you should note here, and what the public should note, 

is that Saskatchewan is now, with this reform, going to an 

earnings exemption based on a percentage of earnings rather 

than the earnings exemption based on need. We will now be in 

phase with other parts of Canada, and this will be more 

incentive for people at most income levels to be able to go out 

and earn additional funds. So these exemptions that we’re 

introducing now are conducive to people working part time or 

casually while they’re on welfare, trying to do their best to 

work their way out of the cycle. So that should be taken into 

account. 

 

But your calculations – because the system is very complicated, 

we could dispute statistics for days and days and never reach 

any kind of a logical conclusion. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I gladly make my figures 

public, and I welcome your comment on them. I would take it 

that the lack of specific response to my question implies that 

you don’t feel confident that your numbers wash, that as a 

matter of fact, people, the poorest of the poor, families 

depending on social assistance in  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2501 

 

Saskatchewan today, are better off. 

 

I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, particularly when we’re realistic 

about inflation, there is not a single individual or a single family 

in Saskatchewan today that is better off as a result of your 

welfare reform – to a person. They are worse off as a result of 

your reform when we’re being realistic and comparing apples to 

apples. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, you talk about income exemptions, so let’s 

deal with income exemption, because you changed the rules 

there. The rules there were before as an incentive to work, that 

families or an applicant who was receiving assistance was 

allowed to retain a quarter of their basic income and were able 

to keep that, that whole amount. And after that, the amounts 

earned were deducted dollar for dollar. 

 

You’ve not brought in a new system where they’re allowed to 

keep the first $25. They then, after their 26th dollar, they 

retained 20 cents on the dollar earned and have the other 80 

cents returned to your department, in effect, and they also have 

caps, their maximum amount that they’re allowed to earn. And 

that varies. 

 

Let me give you some figures, Mr. Minister, and ask you to 

confirm or deny them, because this is really the crux of the 

matter. We’re talking about providing people the opportunity to 

work and the incentive to work to get off social assistance; and, 

Mr. Minister, we’ve taken a long stride back. I’m not sure what 

the intentions of your changes were, but they’re not providing 

increased incentive to work. 

 

Let me give you some examples. Before welfare reform, your 

version of August, a single adult employable was allowed – and 

I’m using a maximum amount here – an exemption of $89.25. 

So that person could earn $89.25 and keep every penny of it, 

Mr. Minister. Under your new rules, in order to retain $75, in 

order to retain $75, that person would have to go out and earn 

an income, a take-home income, of $275 to keep 75. 

 

Now using your new allowances, the net effect, Mr. Minister – 

and I’ll just give you a summary here; and I’d be happy to 

provide my figures, but here they are. What that means is: at 

best, a single employable person, before reform and after, is 

worse off in terms of their ability to earn outside income by at 

least $20. An adult unemployable is worse off by $71.75 a 

month, what they can retain through earned income. A family 

with two adults is worse off by at least $72.30. An adult and 

one child, that family make-up is worse off by at least $77.30. 

Two adults and one child, at best their take-home exemptions 

allow them to be worse off, at best, by $75.20. One adult and 

two children, worse off by at least $69.70 in terms of their 

opportunity to keep that outside income, that part-time 

employment. Two adults and two children is worse off by at 

least $72.90. 

 

And let me give you another example, Mr. Minister. Let’s look 

at it a different way instead of looking at the maximums that 

they’re allowed to retain through outside income. Let’s say 

we’re dealing with an individual who’s a social assistance 

recipient. They’ve gone out and they’ve earned take-home pay 

of $200 net, and so they’re  

working about 50 hours at minimum wage – and we’re talking 

in that neck of the woods. They’re able . . . they bring home 

$200. 

 

What’s the difference when we apply the new rules? The single 

employable adult before would have kept all but $110.75, under 

the new rules they lose 140. An adult unemployable would have 

kept all but 60; under the new rules they lose 140. Two adults in 

the family – they would have lost 102.50 before; now they lose 

120 with that $200. One adult, one child – before it would have 

lost only $6.50; now they lose $120. Two adults, one child – 

before they would have kept that whole amount; now under the 

new rules they lose $100, returned directly to your department. 

One adult, two children – before, would have kept it all; now 

they have to return $100 to your department. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Minister, finally, two adults and two children, under the old 

rules before your welfare reform, would have kept that full 

$200 take-home income; now they have to return $80 to your 

department. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I ask you, where is the incentive to work? 

These are dollars and cents realities that affect real 

Saskatchewan families who more than anything else would like 

to get off of assistance. Your regulations have made it tougher. 

Your regulations have given them a disincentive to go out and 

work. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you not, as a matter of 

fact, admit that those are disincentives? Will you not, as a 

matter of fact then, make a commitment to this House to review 

them, to eliminate those policy changes that at least, at least, 

Mr. Minister, allow poor Saskatchewan families to retain the 

outside income that they were able to retain before your welfare 

reform? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the member 

from Moose Jaw North is playing statistical games with average 

figures. I will give you some specific examples. These reforms 

really cut to the basic philosophy of the NDP or the 

Conservatives. Somewhere I detected just a glimmer that the 

member from Moose Jaw North was suggesting that there 

should be incentive for people to get off welfare. And we 

believe that people, if they are able, will try to support 

themselves rather than try to figure out the easiest way of 

collecting welfare. 

 

What we’ve done here is that we’ve given people an incentive 

to support themselves, and if they can, to the extent they can, 

they are rewarded. I’ll give you two examples. A single mother 

with two children living in subsidized housing, on assistance for 

more than three months. Under the old formula, she has an 

income of $500 to support herself and the two children, and 

then she comes to Social Services for her additional needs. 

 

Now under the old formula, when you take that $500 income 

into account, the basic allowance is 472, shelter allowance $60 

because of the subsidy, utility $15, for a total of $547. You take 

25 per cent of that is $136. Under  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2502 

 

the old formula she would keep, of the $500 that she earned, 

she would keep $136. Under the new formula she will keep 

$160. This single mother with two children, earning $500 per 

month and relying on welfare to provide the balance of her 

needs, under our new system will have the difference between 

160 and $136.75, which is $23.75 more take-home pay, more 

money to spend on her family under the reform than under the 

old formula. 

 

Two adults with two children on assistance for more than three 

months, living in subsidized housing, they have an income of 

$600 per month. Their needs are assessed at 620, their shelter 

allowance is $65, their utility allowance is $22, for a total of 

707 on needs. That family now that has two adults, two 

children, partially employed – $600 a month, either part-time 

work or a part-time job, under the old formula this family 

would keep 176.75 of their earned income. Under the new 

formula it would be $200 per month. Again, that family is 

$23.25 better off under the welfare reform than under the old 

formula. 

 

So therefore, in the old system there was a disincentive. Once 

you made more than $200 a month there was no incentive to 

make more than $200 a month. If you worked for $200 a 

month, you could keep some of it. If you made more than the 

$200 a month in these situations, you would be deducted dollar 

for dollar. We are now putting some incentive into the system. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, that simply doesn’t wash; it 

simply doesn’t wash. You know that there are maximums 

allowed now to families. There are caps; you forget about the 

caps. There are caps as to what they can keep when they earn 

income outside the home. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, if I provide for you the numbers as I 

have in this House this afternoon, and they’re on public record 

now, if I provide for you these numbers, and you can allow 

your officials to take these numbers and review them – I simply 

ask you for this commitment, Mr. Minister. In those where the 

new regulations provide a disincentive to work because the 

amount that people are able to retain is less under the new rules 

than the old, will you make a commitment to me, and more 

importantly, Mr. Minister, will you make a commitment to the 

people of Saskatchewan who are affected by these changes in 

regulations that you will revise those regulations so that in no 

case, when they’re going out of the home to work, that they will 

be worse off in what they’re able to retain under your new rules 

than they were under the old? Will you at least make that kind 

of a basic commitment? 

 

I am prepared to work with you. I am prepared to work with 

your officials. I am prepared to accept that you may have 

arrived at some conclusions here that you didn’t anticipate. You 

thought you were doing some good and you’re not. And I ask 

you to simply make a commitment to review those. I’m 

prepared to work with you. Will you, Mr. Minister, give me that 

assurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we couldn’t ever do 

enough good to satisfy the NDP. So how could I give a 

commitment to satisfy the NDP who would find evil in any 

good that anyone ever did, unless it was done by the  

NDP? 

 

So you should really look at . . . The member opposite now 

criticizes that there’s a cap on how much you can earn before 

you are no longer on welfare. That is very, very logical. I 

submit that a certain stage, if you work and your income 

increases, at a certain stage you should drop off the welfare 

rolls, and that you are then self-sufficient. And surely you have 

to have a balance between those people working and not 

applying for welfare and those people who work and increase 

their income to a certain stage that they come off welfare. You 

can’t have people out there working, making less money than 

people on welfare. And therefore there has to be incentive for 

those people who are working to keep working; and there has to 

be an incentive for those people on welfare to earn more income 

as they work more and as they obtain better positions in the 

work-force. But at a certain stage you have to drop off welfare 

and be self-sufficient, and therefore there’s a cap. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, there was a cap before. There’s a 

cap now. The cap now is lower. You tell me, Mr. Minister, how 

it is evil, you tell me how it is evil to provide for people the 

opportunity, the opportunity to make more by retained income 

when they get out of their homes and work when they’re on 

social assistance, rather than less. You tell me how that is evil. 

That simply does not wash. 

 

Every one of your revisions to the earnings exemption means 

that poor people who go out and get a job to try and get 

themselves off welfare are harder done by. That’s a disincentive 

to work. It’s a disgrace to poor people in Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Minister, if you’re looking for evil, I say that is where the 

evil is. That’s where it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, let’s take a look at another 

income security program of yours, and that’s the family income 

plan that was introduced many years ago. It’s an income plan, 

Mr. Minister, that provides for the working poor in 

Saskatchewan. It provides for the possibility of people who are 

not receiving assistance to receive income benefits related to the 

number of children in their family, Mr. Minister. 

 

What it means is that if I have a family that lives in poverty, and 

whether I’m on assistance or not, or if I’m working, I’m among 

the working poor, that the province of Saskatchewan will make 

available for me and my family to help make our ends meet, to 

help put bread on the table and get the kids off to school and 

provide some clothes and the opportunity to take part in their 

community to my children, a maximum of up to $100 for each 

of my first two children, perhaps three – I may be mistaken – 

and then $90 thereafter, Mr. Minister. It’s a good program, a 

program that provides some basic income security to 

Saskatchewan’s working poor, those who may not qualify for 

assistance, but certainly don’t live in splendour by any stretch 

of the imagination. 

 

Mr. Minister, in Saskatchewan today . . . In Saskatchewan in 

1986 and the last year that I have figures for there were 38,480 

families in Saskatchewan eligible to receive family income plan 

assistance to meet the costs of raising  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2503 

 

their children. As a matter of fact, there were only 8,000 – 

8,000 in ’84 in Saskatchewan who took advantage of that plan. 

 

And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: out of those 8,000 

who took advantage of the family income plan, how many of 

those are receiving social assistance and having that benefit 

deducted dollar for dollar from their social assistance benefits? 

Thirty-eight thousand families in Saskatchewan eligible, only 

8,000 who took advantage of it. How many of those are on 

social assistance and lost every dollar advantage that they 

should have received under family income, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I don’t 

accept the 38,000 family figure that the member opposite 

quotes. I would have to have better evidence of that figure. It 

may be based on family income levels. 

 

But as you know, the NDP rules that existed – and we haven’t 

changed them and I’ll tell you why we haven’t changed them – 

for the most part exclude farm families. And probably if we 

changed the rules so that they would be considered on a similar 

basis on income rather than assets, every farm family in 

Saskatchewan probably could qualify for FIP (family income 

plan). But we have seen no need to make any major changes 

there because, first of all, within the rules the price of land is 

not over valued as it once was, so some of the neediest farm 

families do now qualify. In addition, the rural farm families do 

not seek assistance from the government when it comes to 

receiving money from the Department of Social Services, but 

are very self-sufficient in that regard. 

 

The statistics we have is that there are 4,193 straight family 

income plan cases. There are 3,849 combined family income 

plan and Saskatchewan assistance plan cases. In those 

combined cases the families would have to have some earned 

income. So that all of the 8,042 cases would be what you would 

classify as the working poor families where they work to some 

extent. Either they earn enough income that they don’t qualify 

for social services or they don’t earn enough income so that 

they still qualify for social services and family income. But all 

of those 8,042 would be employed families in one way or 

another. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, 38,000 families in 

Saskatchewan are eligible for some amount of assistance under 

family income plan. Of the 8,000 who receive it, approximately 

half are receiving social assistance, and are having that benefit 

deducted dollar for dollar. 

 

I ask you two questions, Mr. Minister. One is: will you consider 

changing the regulations to allow social assistance recipients to 

retain the family income plan benefit? It was a benefit that was 

introduced with the intention of providing some increase in 

income for the poorest in Saskatchewan, including the working 

poor. So will you consider policy change to allow social 

assistance families to maintain their family income benefit? 

 

And secondly, Mr. Minister, will you consider, with the 

mail-out of the health cards next year, putting information that 

can be very abbreviated but information about the family 

income plan? As an enclosure it won’t cost the  

provincial government a single penny in postage because those 

health cards are going out anyhow. Would you make that 

commitment to advise Saskatchewan families of their 

opportunity to receive benefit from the family income plan by 

including some basic information about it with the health card 

mail-outs when they go out next time? 

 

So both of those questions, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, if we 

followed the member from Moose Jaw North’s suggestion, 

families on welfare would receive more money than families 

who are working. And that would seem to be that the welfare 

benefits would then exceed what the poorest families can earn. 

And you have to, as I indicated, have some division between 

earning income and welfare income. And that’s how it works 

out, that if you are a low-income family and your income is so 

low that you qualify for welfare, you do get welfare and you get 

family income plan. But if you earn an income that does not 

qualify you for welfare, you still get some family income plan. 

 

(1630) 

 

So we could not simply add on the benefits on a welfare system 

to the extent that then those families on straight family income 

plan supporting themselves, except they get some assistance 

from the family income plan, but then receive less money than 

those families that are on welfare and are not supporting 

themselves in any way. So it’s not fair and it’s not practical. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Will you provide information to all 

Saskatchewan families about the family income plan? I suggest 

a very easy way of doing it is enclosing that in the mail-out of 

the health card that goes to all Saskatchewan families. Mr. 

Minister, would you undertake a commitment to provide that 

information to Saskatchewan families, that way or some other 

way, I make what I think is a very practical and reasonable 

suggestion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we print over 

11,000 application forms per year, and we don’t get anywhere 

near that number of new applicants each year, so those 

application forms are out there. They don’t necessarily come 

back. So people have either decided that they don’t qualify, or 

that they don’t wish to receive money from the government, 

will support their own families. And we make this as available 

as possible. 

 

We’re not going to go on a massive advertising campaign. It’s 

common knowledge out there that you can get assistance from 

the government under the family income plan. And I’m not 

going to put out an advertisement that says, the government is 

looking for you to give you more money because you may not 

have noticed yet that you are poor. People know if they are 

poor; they know what their budgets are; they’re living within 

their budgets. 

 

And those people who qualify for family income plan and wish 

to receive family income plan can get one of those 11,000 

application kits that we’ve got out there printed each year and 

can apply, and, if they qualify, will receive  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2504 

 

benefits. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, let me share with you: the fact of 

the matter is, many Saskatchewan families do not know the 

existence of the family income plan. And I simply ask, and you 

will ultimately make your decision – the means are there to 

make Saskatchewan families aware of the family income plan 

so that if they’re eligible, they can apply and get some 

assistance from their government – from their government – to 

meet their needs in the raising of their children. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you planning . . . Is your department planning 

to make any changes over the coming year with the family 

income plan, and if so, what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we are looking 

at separating the Saskatchewan income plan benefits from the 

family income plan benefits. We haven’t worked out the details 

yet, but we believe that the family income plan should deal with 

the working poor, and that the Saskatchewan assistance plan, as 

part of the Canada assistance plan, should deal with those 

people who are not what you might call fully employed. 

 

So we would like to have the family income plan for those 

parents who are fully employed; Saskatchewan income plan for 

those parents who are not fully employed, maybe employable or 

maybe partially employed or maybe employable and are 

unemployed and their benefits have run out. So we’re looking at 

a separation of those two plans so that the Saskatchewan 

assistance plan is based strictly on need and the qualification 

figure for qualifying for social services, and that the family 

income plan is a subsidy to assist the working poor families. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, one final question and then I’ll 

beg . . . or I will defer to one of my colleagues. I simply ask, 

Mr. Minister: then in your changes to the family income plan, 

will you be making changes that will make it less readily 

available to families, or reduce the benefit available to families, 

or increase the eligibility in the same way that it’s increased 

according to inflation so far? 

 

And let me also ask: you were using the term Saskatchewan 

income plan when I think you meant the Saskatchewan 

assistance plan. And the minister indicates Saskatchewan 

assistance plan is what you meant. But let me also ask you then 

at the same time, and you may respond to both at the same time 

if you wish, Mr. Minister: regarding the Saskatchewan income 

plan for seniors – same question –are you planning any changes 

in the coming year, and if so, will they affect eligibility benefits 

or access to seniors who are the lowest income in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, we are not 

planning any major revisions, either upwards or downwards, in 

any of those plans – merely a separation between the welfare 

plan and the family assistance plan. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Yes, thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I 

want to raise an issue with you, and it’s the issue of the food 

banks. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if the presence of these 

institutions does not suggest to you that there is something 

radically wrong with the welfare  

system. 

 

Mr. Minister, the welfare reform which was brought in by this 

government, 1985 I think it may have been . . . 1984, I believe, 

produced, Mr. Minister, widespread hunger – no other way to 

describe it. Mr. Minister, it exists among young people, old 

people, males, females. It’s one of the cruel ironies of 

Saskatchewan that within walking distance of the city limits 

you find granaries stuffed with grain that can’t be sold, and a 

scant stone’s throw from those granaries, you find people going 

hungry. 

 

Mr. Minister, the food banks are unable to meet the need. They 

say as much. They turn people away; they all do. Mr. Minister, 

I wonder if the presence of these institutions doesn’t suggest to 

you there’s something drastically wrong with your welfare 

system. I find the institutions themselves appalling. The Regina 

food bank is in my riding. I have every respect and indeed every 

gratitude for those who operate the food banks. They are 

performing a vital service. But, Mr. Minister, their presence 

should make us ashamed, particularly so when we live in a land 

which has food we cannot sell, dispose of, or even dispose of. 

 

I know the minister’s response, and that is: if they’d give up 

cigarettes, they’d have a lot to eat. Well, Mr. Minister, your 

comment is as appalling as the food banks themselves. If you 

honestly believe that, Mr. Minister, then you should get to know 

some of the people who frequent the food banks. A goodly 

number of them, Mr. Minister, don’t smoke, don’t drink, don’t 

drive new automobiles, or commit any of the other sins which I 

hear you accusing them of. They have no phone. One of my 

colleagues suggests they are simply unable to make ends meet. 

 

Within a few months, Mr. Minister, of the time your 

predecessor brought in welfare reform, there was a dramatic 

increase in property crimes. City police tell me of thefts when 

there’s nothing stolen but food – walk right by a stereo, 

television and microwave, things that are easily fenced, and 

take food. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just leave the question at that. Does the presence 

of these institutions not suggest to you that there’s something 

very wrong with your welfare system, and does it not make you 

ashamed to live in a society which has at the one and the same 

time surplus food it can’t dispose of, and hungry children in the 

city centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I don’t 

believe that the member from Regina Centre, who represents 

the centre of Regina, understands his constituency very well or 

the social problems that exist in his constituency. And I believe 

that that member doesn’t really know what the major problems 

are in his constituency in downtown Regina. Now I don’t live 

there, and he probably doesn’t live there, either. I don’t know. 

He can correct me if I’m wrong, if he lives in downtown 

Regina, and I will accept that correction. But if he does live 

there, he should open his eyes and see what’s going on around 

him – see the social problems that are there. 

 

I have nothing against food banks. I think food banks are  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2505 

 

useful in society. I have nothing against people helping each 

other, but anyone that raises food banks in a political 

discussion, and tries to make political mileage out of food 

banks, does a discredit to the people in our society who are 

helping each other. 

 

I ask this question, Mr. Deputy Chairman, why is it that 85 per 

cent of the food banks in Canada, on the last statistics we have, 

are in the three western provinces, Alberta, British Columbia, 

and Saskatchewan, that have Conservative governments, and 

Saskatchewan and Alberta have traditionally paid the highest 

welfare rates? Why do the provinces with the highest welfare 

rates, Conservative governments, have the most food banks? 

And then the NDP raise them as a political issue. I think food 

banks are useful. I believe that food banks should continue, that 

people should help each other, but I don’t believe that the NDP 

should raise up food banks as some kind of an example of 

politics. They are using food in their political discussions. And 

that member should go into his constituency and see why the 

food isn’t getting to the children. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well I thank the minister from the bottom 

of my heart for the advice that I need to got to know my riding a 

little better. He’s undoubtedly right; no one can know one’s 

riding well enough. I say tot the minister though that I have 

lived there since I was . . . I have lived there for 17 years. Mr. 

Minister, I have been on every doorstep once in every election 

that I’ve run in, so I have some passing acquaintance with some 

of the people who live in my riding. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Minister, if you don’t think that hunger stalks the 

city of Regina, then I can easily prove to you otherwise. I 

challenged your predecessor, the hon. Gordon Dirks, to come 

on a walking tour of my riding with me. He had enough 

integrity not to take me up. I don’t issue that challenge to you, 

Mr. Minister. It would just be a pointless exercise with this 

particular minister because you’d find some idiotic reason why 

they were hungry, other than the fact that we’re not providing 

enough assistance for them. 

 

I don’t intend to waste my time, Mr. Minister, taking you on a 

tour of my riding, because you don’t have either the brains or 

the integrity to benefit from it. But I say to you, Mr. Minister, 

that is not unparliamentary; that is not unparliamentary, and I 

think I’m quite entitled to describe the minister accurately, if I 

may say so. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to caution the member from Regina 

Centre that it is verging on the personal integrity of the 

minister, and I don’t think that that is something that you would 

want to happen. I caution you on your language there. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I say to you that, as I say, 

I’ve some passing acquaintance with the riding which I 

represent. I say to you, Mr. Minister, that there is hunger in 

large parts of that riding. 

 

I recall, Mr. Minister, debating in the spring of 1984 the welfare 

reforms. I remember debating with the member from Regina . . . 

the then member from Regina Rosemont, the former member 

from Regina Rosemont, Mr. Minister;  

I remember debating him. And the debate came to an end, and 

the legislature adjourned – unlike this one which seems to be in 

permanent session – that legislature adjourned. Then a federal 

election was called, and I was appalled at what I saw, because it 

left the realm of an academic debate, and I began to see what 

was actually happening in the city of Regina, and it was 

devastating. I spent the summer in the federal election going 

door to door and actually meeting those people who were 

hungry, and them having . . . and them asking me what they 

should do, and I having no answer, except to hope that these 

people get defeated in two years. It didn’t happen. 

 

I’m not sure what you’re saying, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure 

whether you’re saying that there isn’t any hunger in my riding, 

and or that it’s all caused by cigarettes, or all caused by them 

buying new cars. I’m not sure what . . . I must say I don’t 

follow what the minister is saying to me. But I tell you that 

there is hunger in the city of Regina, some of . . . in all cities in 

the province. I do not have . . . 

 

I have got to know some of those people. I don’t know what 

they would do differently. I know the minister is going to come 

up with some suggestions such as planting cabbages, but some 

of these people don’t have access to a couple of acres of land to 

plant gardens in. Some of them have no way of planting 

gardens, and indeed the lack of proper nutrition has made them 

ill enough they probably don’t have the strength to do it in any 

event. 

 

(1645) 

 

I heard the minister, a moment ago, suggest that people don’t 

need transportation because they can walk around the city of 

Regina. I tell you, Mr. Minister, it’s 10 miles across this city; 

that’s a fair hike for a healthy adult. It’s impossible . . . I ask 

you the last time you walked 10 miles. You at least have the 

benefit of proper nutrition. Many of these people don’t, and the 

lack of nutrition makes them physically ill. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you ought to be ashamed – when 

you drive by that food bank, you ought to be ashamed, because 

that food bank is something you created and it’s a symbol of 

your callousness and your insensitivity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, this is an example of the 

NDP with their heads in the sand. The hunger problems in the 

member from Regina Centre’s constituency are connected to 

social problems. Now if we were to go out and start solving the 

social problems, what would he say? What would he say if we 

went out tomorrow and took 100 hungry children from his 

constituency who were probably being neglected, and took 

them and put them into foster homes instantly and fed them, 

what would he say to that? 

 

We should come up with some solutions to the social problems 

that are not related to the NDP’s posturing on politics. If he 

wants to solve social problems, I will come with him into his 

constituency personally and we will find the hungry and we will 

find out why they’re hungry. If  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2506 

 

they are hungry because of social problems and because their 

parents don’t feed them, then we will find them homes where 

they will be fed. Is he prepared to go and do that? That is the 

question. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if you’re suggesting that the 

only reason there’s hunger in the city of Regina is because of 

social problems, I’m not sure what you mean. If you mean that 

they drink and smoke their money away, that, Mr. Minister, 

does not describe anywhere near all of the cases. There are 

many cases where the cheque simply isn’t enough to live on. 

 

Mr. Minister, I remind you that single unemployeds, who are 

really the tragic case – the single employables I think is the 

description – their cheque often doesn’t cover their rent, much 

less anything which comes anywhere near being enough for 

food, much less the clothing, much less the other things which 

people need. I say to you, Mr. Minister, that the allowances 

which they get are simply not enough; it just simply isn’t 

enough money. And there aren’t any social problems and they 

aren’t drinking and they aren’t smoking and they aren’t 

gambling, or whatever else you think they’re doing. I wish 

you’d be a little more specific. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, I can show you examples of people, 

I’ll show you examples of people who just simply don’t have 

enough money. And that’s true at virtually any election. I’m 

sure any one of my colleagues could stand up and could 

describe individuals who are trying valiantly to feed themselves 

and perhaps dependants and just simply can’t do it. I’ll venture 

to say you can pick any one of these people and they can 

describe such a person to you, Mr. Minister. They exist. They 

exist in every riding, and they exist in yours. And if you don’t 

know that, Mr. Minister, you might try spending some more 

time in your riding if you want some advice as to where some 

time should be spent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I can tell you this, Mr. Chairman, that if 

I get a report of hungry children in my riding. I will take action 

and something will be done about it. Either those children will 

be given the assistance from the point of view of counselling to 

the parents, or else those children will be put in homes where 

they will be fed. And if it gets really bad, I will personally go 

down with food in my riding and make sure that they get some 

food but I wouldn’t do it for a long-term period because I’m not 

going to feed other people’s children on a long-term basis if the 

parents won’t do anything to feed them themselves. So we have 

to look at the parents and what the situation is. 

 

I can tell you this, that single employables the member opposite 

is talking about, do not have dependants. I can tell you this, that 

in my constituency right now if some of those single 

employables were to apply for jobs, they would have jobs 

instantly. I’ve got farmers who run large hog operations who 

can’t get employees at $8 an hour. And I’m sure that if we 

drove out to my constituency with one of the member for 

Regina Centre’s constituents in our car, that we could have 

them hired before the sun goes down. There has to be a little 

effort put into finding a job. 

And it seems to me that there is a large congregation of single 

employables in Regina and Saskatoon. I believe that that is 

related more to social problems than it is to the economy of 

Regina or Saskatoon. And I think there are a lot of people in 

this province who agree with me. And therefore, there are jobs 

out there if people want to work at them, and they’re not all 

minimum wage jobs. They are not all desk jobs either, I can tell 

you, but people have to be prepared to do an honest day’s work 

for their dollar. And that is not common in Regina Centre. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I wasn’t going to get into this debate at this time, but having 

listened to this minister, I can’t help but have to say a few 

words. I have never in all of my life, Mr. Chairman, heard any 

minister of Social Services in Saskatchewan who has sounded 

and has been as cruel and as insensitive as this one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Anyone who would try to use the kind of 

logic which we have heard here this afternoon, Mr. Chairman, 

is playing politics – cheap, sleazy politics – with the lives of 

thousands of people out there, who through no fault of their 

own, through no fault of their own are living under very serious 

and difficult circumstances. 

 

As soon as you call them to order, Mr. Chairman, I’ll . . . 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Let’s have some order and let 

the member have his say. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. It is interesting when one 

comments on what the minister has been saying, the kind of a 

reaction you get from the members opposite, Mr. Chairman, 

because they know, they know that what this minister is saying 

here today is wrong. And they know that because their 

constituents are telling them that. 

 

And if only they would get off their ivory towers and the 

comfort of their $90,000 homes and the comfort of their 

$60,000 cabinet minister salaries, and consider the fact that 

there are people today not only for social reasons, but many of 

them, Mr. Chairman, for financial reasons are unable to provide 

adequately the necessities of life that they and their children 

ought to be able to have. 

 

Now this minister says that all of the problems are social 

problems. But I say that he is the minister in charge of the 

setting of the minimum wage in Saskatchewan. These are not 

people who are on social assistance, or Saskatchewan assistance 

plan, Mr. Chairman. These people are people who are out there 

working very hard and trying to raise their families on a 

minimum wage of $4.50 an hour. 

 

And do you know, Mr. Chairman, that that minimum wage, in a 

total of five whole years, has increased by 25 cents an hour. 

And the minister opposite stands up and boasts about the great 

job that he and his government have done in providing people 

the financial opportunity to provide the needs of themselves and 

their children. 

 

It is hard to understand, sir, it is hard to understand how  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

2507 

 

anyone in such a responsible position can be so blinkered – can 

be so blinkered when it comes to the needs of the people who 

are going hungry. 

 

I ask the minister to tell this House, when he gets his 

opportunity, how does he expect people living on minimum 

wage, if they are working full time, and are earning therefore a 

grand total of about 700 or $750 a month, how they are 

expected to feed their families if in some cases, some of them 

now, with this new prescription drug plan that the government 

announced, are having drug bills of 100 and 200 and $300 a 

month? 

 

Those are the priorities that are so wrong, Mr. Chairman, which 

have been established by this government. Those are the kind of 

examples which show that this government is so uncaring and 

unfair in the priorities that it is setting. 

 

Now I know the minister will be getting a note and it’ll be 

helping him to say, well you can’t say that people on 

Saskatchewan assistance are having to pay the prescription drug 

increases. I didn’t use the SAP (Saskatchewan assistance plan) 

rates and the example of SAP clients for that particular reason. I 

used people who are not on Saskatchewan assistance. I am 

using people who are on the minimum wage but are working. 

They don’t have the kind of assistance that the minister might 

try to pretend they do. They have to pay that bill. 

 

And although that Minister of Health who sits there and laughs 

in his chair, although he announces some fuzzy program that he 

says will assist people who are caught with excessive and large 

bills for their prescription drugs because of the new plan, 

although he announces it, the effect is that most of the people 

who have been applying are being refused any assistance at all. 

There was a political pressure generated by public opinion, and 

the government responded by a statement which was a 

ministerial statement in the House and then they left it at that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I say to you that the Minister of Social Services, 

he’s the one who has his head in the sand. He’s the one who 

refuses to understand what the problems out there are. I’m not 

sure and so I will not accuse him. I will let the public be the 

judge. I’m not sure whether, Mr. Chairman, he is the tool of the 

Premier, and the Minister of Finance, who are expecting him to 

go out and make these kinds of insane and ridiculous 

statements, so that when the session is over he can be dropped 

from the cabinet and the government can be saying to the 

people, our problem is gone. 

 

I’m not sure whether that’s the reason. I’m not sure whether 

that’s the reason, or whether this minister, Mr. Chairman, really 

believes the things that he has been recorded as having said. 

Either one, Mr. Chairman, it’s wrong. Whether the minister is 

dispensable, in the view of the government, or whether he 

sincerely believes what he says – either one is wrong. 

 

Now members on my side of the House have given specific 

examples of children who are going hungry in Saskatchewan, 

who are having to use the food banks when they didn’t have to 

use food banks before 1982.  

And the minister gets up and he boasts about food banks, and 

saying what a great thing they are. Well I say to you, Mr. 

Chairman, food banks only exist, food banks only exist when 

there isn’t enough provided to certain people in our society. 

 

Food banks aren’t a deliberate tool or a deliberate creation by 

people because they are an important thing to have. They are a 

symptom of a society in which people are going without. They 

are a symptom in a society in which people are going hungry, 

because financially they do not have enough to provide for 

themselves and their children the food that is necessary to feed 

them adequately. 

 

And so as a result of those kind of conditions, there are people 

in our society, fortunately, who will dedicate time and food and 

financial resources to set up something like a food bank to help 

these people. That doesn’t make them right. That doesn’t make 

them an important vehicle or important mechanism of 

government to meet people’s needs. That’s the reality that the 

minister opposite, and the members opposite who giggle and 

laugh and chirp in their seats, fail to understand. They fail to 

understand, Mr. Chairman, that under the policies of this 

government, more and more people in this province are living 

in difficult situations. More and more children in this province 

are going to bed hungry at night. More and more people who 

insist that they’re going to work, even if they have to hold down 

two part-time jobs on the minimum wage, are not able to make 

enough to feed their families because this government does not 

care about those kinds of priorities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Oh, it’s an important priority to spend 

$30 million on government advertising, which is strictly 

political. That’s an important priority. But to look after the 

needs of people in need somehow is not important. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. It being 5 o’clock, I now leave the 

Chair until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


