


















































June 19, 1987 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 19, 1987 
 

555 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I 
would like to take the opportunity this morning to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, three 
groups of school children that are here from the Indian 
Head-Wolseley constituency. 
 
Firstly a group that I’ve just met with from Grenfell — grade 4 
students are here. There are 35 of them in number. They are 
accompanied by Mr. Keith Biesenthol, who is one of their 
teachers; Mr. Gordon Warman; Mrs. Carol Piller; Mrs. Haugen 
is their chaperon and Mr. Gary Cole is their bus driver. I 
welcome them here. I welcome Mr. Biesenthol who’s on the 
floor with one of the students, Leslie Smith. I hope they have a 
very enjoyable day here in Regina, and certainly have good 
results in their exams and a very pleasurable summer. 
 
Also with us today are another grade 4 class, numbering 24 
students, and they’re from Montmartre. They’re situated in the 
west gallery and they’re accompanied by their teacher, Sandi 
Brown. The chaperons are: Monique McIntosh, Cathy Waller, 
Bob and Gary Jury, and Patsy Fisher. I welcome the students 
from Montmartre here and look forward to meeting them a little 
after for discussions and drinks. 
 
And also with us today, in the Speaker’s gallery, are 38 grade 6 
students from Indian Head. They’re accompanied by their 
teachers, Michelle Krueger and Tony Colley, and also have 
chaperons of: Mrs. Hindle, Mrs. Hammond, Mrs. Chambers, 
Mrs. Skinner, Mrs. Taylor, and Mrs. MacMillan. 
 
I see that we’re going out on the lawn for drinks and questions 
today, which I think is a very appropriate thing to do, and I 
congratulate the guide service for this new initiative . I look 
forward to meeting you all and will see you later for 
discussions. Thank you for coming here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you, and through you to this Assembly, 32 grade 8 students 
in your gallery, and they’re from the Ituna school in Ituna, 
Saskatchewan. The Ituna school comes every year that I can 
recall, and I’m getting quite used to having them here, and I get 
comments that they learn a lot from this trip. I certainly hope 
that they have an educational stay here today. 
 
I will be meeting with them at 11, and we will be meeting in the 
building. I guess we have to follow tradition in our 
constituency. And I would ask the members to welcome these 
students and their teacher Bill Hudema, Ann Buchko, their bus 
driver Walter Petrowski. I’d ask you to welcome them to this 
Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Election Promise and Gasoline Tax 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Minister of Finance, and it deals with his betrayal and his 
government’s betrayal of their election promise never to 
reimpose the gasoline tax in Saskatchewan as long as there was 
a Conservative government in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In spite of that commitment, Mr. 
Speaker, we now have a gasoline tax of 32 cents a gallon which 
is higher than the previous gasoline tax prior to 1982 of 28 
cents a gallon. Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister 
of Finance is: do you propose to issue receipts for people to fill 
out the claim for this gas tax rebate? And if so, Mr. Minister, 
are those receipts already in the hands of the filling station 
dealers so that they can have the appropriate information to be 
ready for the tax which they have to look after, on your behalf, 
starting next Monday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I might advise the hon. 
member that if the gas tax as imposed by the New Democratic 
Party was still in place, it today would be 8.9 cents per litre, 
considerably higher than the rebateable gas tax imposed in the 
budget. 
 
I would advise the hon. member that receipts, a special form of 
receipt, will not be necessary; that the government will allow 
credit card receipts, for example, as long as it’s specifically 
indicated that it be for fuel. Obviously, not the other services — 
oil, repairs, and things of that nature — and standard receipts 
that any garage or service station would utilize if an individual 
asks for a receipt for gasoline purchases. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I hear your answer and yet 
I hear your officials were quoted as saying that to claim your 
tax rebate, people are going to have to turn in receipts which 
contain not only their name and the date of the purchase, but the 
volume of the purchase and the location of the purchase. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, will you clarify the statement of your 
officials when they made that comment on the media yesterday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t know whether the hon. member’s 
allowed to have a credit card or not, Mr. Speaker. But on most 
credit cards, one can simply indicate the forms that the service 
stations use. They put down the list of what it’s for — fuel or 
for oil or repairs or whatever. And it’s a standard form that they 
all use. It’s dated; it has the name of the service station on it 
because they run the card through and the customer signs. I’m 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

556 
 

assuming that they’re honest and they’ll sign their own names. 
So given that, and with the name on the card, I think the hon. 
member is making a mountain out of a molehill and that people 
will not see it operate any differently. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to remind the minister that my credit rating in 1982 was a 
lot better than his is in 1987. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I also think the minister should take note 
that there is a lot of people in this province who don’t have 
credit cards and choose not to have them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Particularly because of the kind of rip-off 
that credit card agencies take in interest charges, as we all 
know. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my supplementary question to you: this 
kind of red tape which you have brought forward in your 
proposals for this taxation is going to discourage a lot of people 
from ever claiming your tax rebate. A lot of people who will 
lose those receipts of theirs and will not be able to claim or 
forget where they are. 
 
Is it not true, Mr. Minister, that even in your own budget 
documents you are counting on at least one-third of the people 
who will fill their tanks up, costing $6 a tank more every time 
they fill it, not ever claiming their rebate, and therefore further 
exacerbating your tax grab on the public of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can’t believe the questions of the hon. 
member. I am not aware of a service station, if people want a 
receipt for the services — be it for repairs or oil or windshield 
washer fluid or whatever — that the garage or the service 
station wouldn’t give them a receipt. They’ve been doing that 
for many years. If any member gets their car repaired, they get a 
receipt from the garage. They carry receipts, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
part of the normal course of business. And if they don’t have 
the credit card receipt, then they can use . . . all they have to do 
is ask for a receipt. Now can I, Mr. Speaker, or should it be any 
government’s obligation to make it mandatory for people to 
keep their receipts? That’s obviously a different situation than 
envisaged by the members opposite. 
 
I will assure the hon. member that the informational material 
going out to the people of this province will be encouraging 
them to keep their receipts. They don’t have to. They do not 
have to keep their receipts. We will not make them keep their 
receipts, but we will encourage them to keep their receipts, Mr. 
Speaker, and the informational material will make that 
abundantly clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Eligibility for Gas Tax Rebate 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you a very simple and 

direct question. Mr. Minister, I want to know who will qualify 
for this PC tax increase for the rebate. Do the school bus 
operators and urban transit systems qualify for any rebate from 
this 32-cents-a-gallon or 7-cents-a-litre PC tax increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I really didn’t expect anything other than a 
simple question from the hon. member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals of course. We’ve made it clear. 
Certainly local governments will pay; businesses will pay the 
tax. 
 
There was an adjustment, as the hon. member probably knows, 
with regard to rural school transportation cost which adjusted 
the formula so that the amount adjusted into that formula is over 
and above what they would pay as a result of the fuel tax. So as 
it applies to rural school transportation cost, the grant formula 
certainly took into account the increase in fuel cost. So 
obviously city governments, as we’ve and certainly the mayor 
of Regina has indicated, will pay the tax. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, in determining my question I 
made it simple because I considered the source of the answer 
that I would be asking . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, we do know that the school 
formulas did not take into consideration because there have 
been huge increases, but I will let that be, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I want to know, I want to know from you: do you not 
recognize what a great impact that this will have on property tax 
increases in this province? 
 
In speaking to the bus drivers of this province, they indicate to 
us they expect an increase, a $1.9 million increase this year. 
That will mean an increase in property tax. Last night the city of 
Regina indicated that they will pay an additional half a million 
dollars. Saskatoon will be similar. That will mean increase in 
property taxes. Mr. Minister, I’m asking you again today: do 
you not agree that the rebate that the individual drivers will be 
receiving will be offset by the increase in property tax 
increases? Do you not admit that we will pay higher property 
tax increases because of the PC tax increase of 32 cents a litre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The increase in property tax will be up to 
each local government to decide whether they are going to pass 
it on. Some have chosen not to. Some have not raised their mill 
rates this year. Some fully recognize that constraint is necessary 
and have made their internal adjustments; other civic 
governments, local governments, have had mill rates. I think it 
fair to say that they’ve been extremely modest across the 
province this year. And they will certainly have an additional 
cost, I’m not denying that, nor have I ever denied that. I’ve 
made it specifically clear in the budget that the rebate would 
apply to individuals. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

557 
 

 
So certainly they will have an increased cost. How they manage 
that will be up to local governments. Some will find their 
efficiencies. Some will recognize that their mill rate levels are, 
perhaps, as high as they can be and don’t intend to increase 
them, and look at other efficiencies. So for you to say that they 
will all raise their mill rates, I think, is not accurate, and it’s not 
been accurate as a result of the budgetary process to date. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, 
notwithstanding improved efficiencies, notwithstanding cuts in 
service, urban transit systems will have to increase fares to 
offset the increased costs that are posed by your gas tax. This 
means increased costs for the poor, the elderly, and students — 
the primary users of urban transit. 
 
You are prepared to provide refunds for other individuals who 
are hit by your gas tax. Will you not concede that your gas tax 
is unfair, that it hits at the poor and the elderly . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Would the member 
please put the question. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I put the question, Mr. Minister, will 
you consider, Mr. Minister, a program which will also provide 
rebates for those individuals who must rely on urban transit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would like the hon. member to recognize 
that not every citizen of Saskatchewan has the privilege of an 
urban transportation system. And some that do have urban 
transportation busy systems, obviously will have a higher cost. 
Whether they chose to pass that on to the riders of the transit 
system is a decision of the local governments. But some, I 
suspect, will choose to do so; others may not. Whether you 
want to interpret that they’re all going to have massive 
increases, I can’t say that. You’ve obviously had experience in 
civic government in Regina, and we know the tax situation in 
the city of Regina and the legacy you’ve left behind. 
 
So all I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that civic governments will be 
able to make those decisions. Whether the city of Regina wants 
to raise its bus fares to get another 500,000, or look for other 
efficiencies, I think should be within the purview of the civic 
government itself. 
 

Cut-backs at Saskatchewan Technical Institutes 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Premier, my question is directed to the Minister of Education. 
In 1982, Mr. Minister, you promised that a PC government 
would provide new jobs and new opportunities to 
Saskatchewan’s young people. I believe you used the phrase 
“let’s bring home the children.” That was one of your campaign 
commitments. 
 
Now in light of that commitment, how can you justify 
abolishing 1,100 student positions at Saskatchewan’s technical 
institutes, knowing full well that your actions will destroy the 
hopes for an education for hundreds of Saskatchewan young 
people? How can you justify firing 

142 technical institute instructors and staff unfairly, and cutting 
dozens of programs at our technical institutes, programs with 
long waiting lists for entry? Can the minister explain how those 
kinds of cuts in educational opportunities are supposed to 
encourage young people to stay at home in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, certainly it is our 
commitment to provide more opportunities for our young 
people as we approach the 21st century. And if one looks at the 
record and the record of this government from 1982 forward, as 
the hon. member referred to, despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’ve had to make changes this year — despite that fact, Mr. 
Speaker — the record is still this. There are today in this 
province 1,700 more spaces, more training spaces, in our 
institutes than there were in 1982-83. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is in part because of decisions like the one to 
build the Prince Albert campus, Mr. Speaker. But it doesn’t stop 
there; it doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. As part of this new and 
very exciting initiative in post-secondary education to set up the 
new Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
we will be delivering more and more programming, not just in 
Saskatoon and not just in Moose Jaw and not just in Prince 
Albert and not just in Regina, but as the member so rightly 
referred to, to this entire province for the people and to the new 
regional college network. 
 
And I will be offering those programs in the institute centres 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, at these new campuses, but in fact 
through the entire province through our new regional college 
network. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Mr. 
Minister, you may say that you’ve created more spaces in 
technical institutes, but you won’t have by fall after you’ve cut 
1,100 positions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — You may say that you’re creating new courses 
in rural Saskatchewan, but look at Meadow Lake where 55 
special interests are being cut and special interests courses are 
being cut in the community colleges, and two new university 
courses are being offered. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: can you explain to 
this Assembly and to the young people of Saskatchewan how 
you can justify creating a situation in which only one out of 
every four students that applies to our technical institutes will 
now gain admission as a result of your cuts? And how you can, 
at the same time as you reduce accessibility to education, force 
the students that are admitted to pay more, to have to travel 
further and, in many cases, to have their lives badly disrupted 
by being forced to move from one city where they’re studying 
to another where they’ll have to continue their studies? How 
can you justify that? 
 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

558 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks 
about the changes that we have made in our programming. 
Changes had to be made, Mr. Speaker. There was no point in 
continuing on with some courses that were out of date. There 
was no point in continuing with the duplication that we had in 
the system, Mr. Speaker. There was no point in continuing on 
with a system that didn’t allow itself to build on its strength, 
that reduces duplication. We needed a more unified system, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What students, what young adults are we doing a favour when 
you were faced with information like this, Mr. Speaker, where 
you had 14 available training spaces and only eight applied? 
Why have 14 if there was only eight wanting to take a course 
that in many people’s minds has already become outdated? Are 
we not better to take those spaces and put them somewhere else, 
whether it be in the tourism industry, or the hospitality industry, 
or the high-tech area, or the technological, the new 
technologies, and have those training spaces available there? 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that we’re talking about change here. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are not talking about change just for 
change’s sake. We’re talking about doing things differently and 
doing them better. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the point that he raises about the increased 
cost of our young people have to travel further to take these 
courses because now they are being offered maybe in only the 
one centre of excellence as opposed to three or four— that 
point, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why. And I urge the member to 
look at this regional college concept. That is exactly why we 
want to offer more programming throughout this entire 
province because, Mr. Speaker, much as the headlines always 
are the cost of tuition fee, the big cost in the Meadow Lakes and 
the Weyburns and the Swift Currents and the Nipawins of the 
world are not the tuition fee, is the $6,000 that they spend on 
room and board when they go to Saskatoon or Regina. And by 
allowing, Mr. Speaker, in the future, first and second year Arts 
and Science throughout this entire province, at home, is that 
not, Mr. Speaker, what this province is all about? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would just like to use as an 
example what happened now. We had a supplementary with a 
long preamble, and we had an answer that was much too long 
for the supplementary. And so I would like the questioners to 
tighten up the preambles. Supplementaries should have very 
short preambles; that’s what supplementaries should have. And 
answers should be as short as possible as well. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, you claim that there is not 
demand for the courses that students are taking. In fact, as I 
mentioned before, only one out of four students that applies to a 
technical institute is going to be admitted. 
 
My question to you is, Mr. Minister: is it not true that in fact the 
reason why courses in the technical institutes in areas like 
dental assistants, dental therapists and nurses were cut, is 
because your government had already made 

a conscious decision to cut back on health care and hire fewer 
nurses in this province; to cut, to completely eliminate the 
program for dental therapists, and therefore there was no need 
to hire and to train dental therapists in this province? Isn’t that 
the reason why those cuts took place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As it relates to the dental auxiliaries, 
Mr. Speaker, we have had for the last year or two at least, I’m 
advised by my officials, some imbalance insofar as the 
therapists, the hygienists, and the assistants. And in fact many 
of the therapists . . . there were not a lot of employment 
opportunities, not just as a result of this year’s changes, but 
certainly over the past couple of years. 
 
The examples the member uses, Mr. Speaker, as correct as they 
may be to the degree that they are correct, I guess I would point 
out to him that on the other hand, who are we doing a favour to 
when we had courses? And I could give examples — for 
example, in the refrigeration, air-conditioning area, when for 
the last five years, only one out of four were getting jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. Now is that doing anybody a favour by putting them 
into courses that were outdated, where there weren’t 
employment opportunities? And we ought not stand here and 
decry the jobs of the past, and we will not continue to maintain 
some of those outdated courses. What we’ve got to think about 
is the future and make sure we’ve got the courses for the future 
in place because that’s where the jobs are going to be for our 
young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, everyone was shocked when you fired 142 technical 
institute instructors without any consultation whatsoever. Those 
firings and disruptions are literally destroying the technical 
institutes. 
 
I ask you — my question to you is, Mr. Minister: before the 
damage to our educational system becomes impossible to 
repair, will you admit that you’ve been unfair to students and to 
institute instructors, and will you therefore commit your 
government to hiring back the 142 technical institute instructors 
that you fired, to reinstating the programs that you cut, and 
promise not to make future changes to institute programs 
without full consultation with the institutes affected. Will you 
make that commitment, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, no, I will not reverse my 
decision to remove out of date courses. I will not reverse my 
decision to eliminate duplication in the system. I will not 
reverse my decision to build centres of excellence in the four 
urban centres in this province. We are going to provide the jobs 
of the future and the training that those jobs will require for our 
young adults in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

559 
 

Employment of Former MLA as Consultant 
 

Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the Deputy Premier in 
the absence of the Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, will you 
confirm for the Assembly, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that 
the former PC member for Moosomin, one Larry Birkbeck, is 
now working for the government as a consultant; and will you 
confirm that he’s being paid at the rate of $300 per day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Not only will I not confirm that, Mr. 
Speaker, but I do not believe it to be true. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I’m not terribly interested in what 
the minister believes to be true; I’m interested in the facts. If 
you’re unaware of the facts, would you, at an early date, get the 
information and bring it back to this Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I will undertake to provide the member 
with that information, MR. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I’ve asked the 
minister to bring the response back at an early date. The Deputy 
Premier will know that this is not the first time a former PC 
MLA has done much better in defeat than he did in victory. The 
former member from Saskatoon is making far more than he was 
when he was a cabinet minister. I ask you, Mr. Premier, how 
you can preach restraint to everyone else and pay defeated 
MLAs such exorbitant salaries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what he’s 
asking me to confirm. I’ve said I don’t know if the guy is . . . I 
don’t believe that the individual he’s talking about is in the 
position that he’s alluded to. I told him I would undertake to get 
him that information, and I don’t know what more he wants at 
this point. 
 
I might just reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that I have given him the 
undertaking that I will look into the matter and provide him 
with that information, and beyond that I really don’t know what 
I can do. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask you 
specifically to comment on the salary paid to Mr. Schoenhals. I 
ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, how you can preach restraint to 
everyone else, cut dental programs, cut grants to the women’s 
Transition House, cut the grants to the Mental Health 
Association, and how you can, in light of that, pay a defeated 
MLA some tens of thousands of dollars more in defeat than 
they made in victory? How do you justify that kind of a double 
standard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said that I 
don’t accept what he has alluded to as being fact. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan’s Response to Federal Tax Reform 
 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I have a response with regard 
to the federal Finance Minister’s statements last night on tax 
reform. I will forward a copy, if I may, if the pages would . . . a 
copy, I assume to the Finance critic and also to the Leader of 
the Liberal Party, please. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will apologize as this will be, I believe, slightly 
longer than usual, but it deals with . . . It’s not overly long, but 
it will deal with Saskatchewan’s approach and response. 
 
These changes announced last night by the federal Finance 
Minister will affect all Saskatchewan residents. Our 
government has been a strong proponent of comprehensive tax 
reform for some time, and in 1984 we spoke of the need to 
move towards a tax system that would foster a positive 
economic climate, while insuring that the tax system is fair in 
its treatment of individuals and businesses. We view the white 
paper on tax reform as a positive first step, but only the first 
step in a long public process. 
 
The federal government has been co-operative in keeping the 
provinces advised of its initiatives, and we appreciate Mr. 
Wilson’s comment s that the province’s views will be sought, 
and Saskatchewan intends to participate fully in the reform 
process. To insure that the people of Saskatchewan are also 
involved, we will establish a committee within the Department 
of Finance with the mandate to consult with Saskatchewan 
people affected by, and interested in, the tax reform process. 
 
With regard to the personal income tax system, that system has 
long required a major overhaul. It has become overly 
complicated with tax preferences, and burdened by tax rates 
which undermine incentives to work, to save, and to invest. The 
federal government proposes to replace numerous exemptions 
and deductions with tax credits. Inequitable tax preferences will 
be eliminated or significantly altered. These changes will 
substantially reduce tax-avoidance schemes and will enhance 
the progressivity of the person income tax. 
 
Broadening the income tax base will allow the federal 
government to lower tax rates and reduce the number of tax 
brackets. The current system contains 10 rates, with a top rate 
of 34 per cent. When federal and provincial taxes are combined 
to produce top marginal tax rates in excess of 50 per cent, 
strong disincentives to increase productivity exist. 
 
The federal government proposes to introduce a marginal tax 
rate structure for 1988 which will consist of three rates, with a 
top orate of 29 per cent. This will mean lower taxes for many 
Canadians and should encourage competitiveness, growth, and 
jobs. 
 
We will be closely examining the impact of tax reform on the 
residents of this province. Our initial review indicates that 
employees and senior citizens will experience substantial tax 
savings. The proposals acknowledge the problems facing the 
country’s farms and provide much needed clarification of the 
treatment of farm losses. 
 
Further, we are pleased that the federal government has 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

560 
 

heeded our advice to continue the $500,000 capital gains 
exemption on the sale of farm land. We will be seeking the 
input of farm leaders on several farm-related issues, including 
revisions to capital cost allowances for agricultural property and 
equipment, to ensure that the interests of our farm community 
are protected. 
 
Our government will be closely examining the impact of the 
federal initiatives on the province’s taxing authority and ability 
to generate revenues. We will be considering the federal 
proposals and the structure of provincial taxes in the context of 
the fact that, as they now stand, the federal proposals will mean 
a potential loss of $30 million in revenue to the province in 
1988-89. 
 
With regard to corporate tax reform, I support the view that 
Canada must remain competitive with other nations, 
particularly the United States. The fiscal and economic 
implications of not reacting to the U.S. tax reform could be 
disastrous for all concerned. I am hopeful that the federal 
proposals will be able to stem the potential outflow of both 
people and tax revenues from Canada. 
 
Most Saskatchewan businesses will not be materially affected 
by corporate tax reform, as base-broadening measures will be 
largely offset by lower corporate rates. On balance, the 
measures proposed by Mr. Wilson will result in increased 
revenues to the province in the order of $12 million 1988089. 
We are pleased that the federal government is proposing to 
reduce the general small business tax rate and that the $500,000 
lifetime capital gains exemption for small business is retained. 
 
We are, however, cautiously reviewing the proposed increase in 
the manufacturing and processing small business tax rate from 
10 to 12 per cent, since the zero rate in Saskatchewan on these 
businesses may well be lost. 
 
Our government is concerned about the impact of the proposals 
on our resource sector which will face the loss of earned 
depletion allowances, the Canadian exploration and 
development incentive program, and the reduction of capital 
cost allowances. While we recognize that corporate tax rates 
can only be decreased if the tax base is broadened, we must 
carefully consider the effect of the changes on our resource 
sector before we endorse the federal proposals. 
 
With regard to sales tax, the current manufacturers’ sales tax is 
antiquated and inefficient. It suffers from a complex web of 
exemptions and tax rates; a bias against domestic production in 
favour of import-export production, distortions in consumer 
behaviors resulting in economic inefficiency, and an 
administrative burden for the business community. 
 
Michael Wilson has identified several creative alternatives for 
restructuring and rejuvenating the sales tax. Each of these 
alternatives has its own attractive features. I see merit in the 
proposal for a federal-provincial multi-stage sales tax since it 
would serve to reduce economic distortions, improve our export 
competitiveness, and minimize taxpayer compliance costs; in 
conjunction with the refundable sales tax credit, provide a great 
degree of progressivity to the tax system. 
 

However, before such proposal can be realized, there are a 
number of issues that must be addressed. The province would 
have to agree to significantly alter its tax base to match the 
more comprehensive base proposed by the federal government. 
Provincial flexibility to achieve social and economic objectives 
would be reduced. The issue of allocating sales activity among 
provinces would have to be resolved, and administrative 
structures designed to minimize the paper burden on the 
business community would have to be established. 
 
Saskatchewan’s suggestion for a commission for businesses 
collecting the proposed sales tax is a positive first step in 
developing solutions for these issues. As we work with the 
federal government to resolve these and other important issues, 
we will be better able to judge which of the federal alternatives, 
if any, is best for Saskatchewan residents. We will only endorse 
changes to the tax structure if and when we are fully confident 
that they are in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In conclusion, I commend Mr. Wilson for undertaking this 
complex issue of tax reform. As I indicated at the outset, this is 
only a first step in a long public process. Saskatchewan will 
continue to work aggressively to protect the interests of 
Saskatchewan people and businesses. We will ensure that 
Saskatchewan people are involved in the development of our 
positions. The objectiveness of fairness and efficiency must be 
served by the tax system now, and into the next century. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
listened with care to what the minister had to say, and I can 
only conclude that hearing, once again we have heard another 
example of this provincial Conservative government defending 
the federal Conservative government and Conservative Party at 
any cost, even though it costs Saskatchewan people a great deal. 
The Minister of finance would put up such a great fight with the 
federal government with regard to established program funding, 
transfer payments for post-secondary education, and health 
care, that in his budget he now shows tens of millions of dollars 
less this year than we received last year from the federal 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that what 
we’re going to see is that whatever Brian says, Grant will do. 
Even though there are some positive aspects to the white paper 
proposals which the Minister of Finance in Ottawa mentioned 
yesterday, such as the approach to tax credits, such as going in 
the right direction on capital gains, the one way one can 
describe this so-called tax reform, is not tax reform — it can 
only be described as tax fraud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a hoax — it’s a hoax; 
it’s a shell game. If it is a tax reform, it is a tax reform 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

561 
 

for the rich; clearly it’s a tax reform for the rich. Well the 
members shake their heads. Well they should listen to this. 
People who are earning between $15,000 and $30,000 a year 
are going to get a tax reduction of $320. People who are earning 
over $100,000 a year are going to get a reduction of $11.365. 
This is a tax reform for the rich, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What Mr. Wilson did not say, and this 
Minister of Finance does not recognize, is that over the last 
three years the federal government has increased taxes on every 
Canadian citizen on the average of $1,300 a year. 
 
Now they are saying they’re going to reduce taxes by $320 a 
year, and at the same time Mr. Wilson states clearly that he’s 
broadening the sales tax base so that all of that small saving that 
these people are going to get is going to get taxed back by the 
federal government. 
 
And the Minister of Finance in Saskatchewan helps them out by 
imposing, again, a massive tax increase in his budget the day 
before Mr. Wilson made his tax proposals. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, I caution the people of 
Saskatchewan and Canada to think of this — don’t get too 
optimistic about what Mr. Wilson says, because with all of what 
he has done, he also has positioned himself after the next 
federal election, through the new sales tax, to bring about the 
biggest tax grab that this country has ever seen. 
 
The minister boasts about the federal minister’s reform of the 
corporate tax system. Well it’s true that there are some 
loopholes that may be closed, and we welcome that. But here 
are the corporations who have been paying less and less than 
their proportional share of the tax base in Canada, getting 
another decrease in the corporate tax rate. 
 
I have a few more things that I want to say about this in my 
remarks when we get into the budget speech debate, but I 
wanted to rise and make these points, Mr. Speaker, because I 
think they clearly show that we once again have a shell game. 
We have the same kind of approach being taken by the federal 
government, a Conservative government, as we have had in 
Saskatchewan: raise expectations, make a lot of promises, and 
then when you get the chance, when they’re least suspecting it, 
break every single one of those promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member from 
Assinibioa-Gravelbourg on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted the opportunity 
available to respond to the minister’s statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — According to the practice of the House, that 
has not been the tradition in this Assembly. And I will quote 
from a point of order which was raised in this House, and ruled 
on, on April 29, 985, which said this: before orders of the day 
the member for Regina North 

West in his point of order, sought the right to reply to the 
ministerial statement. Mr. Deputy Speaker, rules that it is the 
practice of this Assembly to allow only recognized parties the 
right to reply to ministerial statements. 
 
Based on that ruling, and on the previous tradition of this 
House, I must deny the hon. member the right to reply to the 
ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, then may 
I, in the interests of fairness, beg leave of the Assembly to . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
(1045) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
be able to continue my remarks which I began on the day that 
the minister presented his budget. There is a number of things 
which I want to yet say, and I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that 
my colleagues on this side of the House have a lot of things that 
they want to say on behalf of their constituents, and on behalf of 
the hundreds and thousands of people who have been so cruelly 
abused by this budget which the minister presented the other 
day. 
 
When I began my response to the budget on Wednesday, I 
called it a budget of betrayal. I have gone to several places 
throughout Saskatchewan since that day, and I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is exactly what the citizens of Saskatchewan 
are saying as well. And the more I study the budget now that 
we’ve had it for a couple of days, and the more I look at the 
government’s detailed spending estimates, the more convinced I 
am that betrayal is the only description for it. This budget 
betrays the trust the people of Saskatchewan placed in the 
Premier and his government. It betrays their trust by breaking 
every major campaign commitment that this Conservative Party 
on the other side of this House has ever made. 
 
The promise to cut everyone’s income taxes by 10 per cent was 
first broken in 1985 with the introduction of the unfair 
Conservative flat tax. This budget increases the flat tax by 50 
per cent. And it even fails to revise the tax to ease its impact on 
low and middle income people. The promise to cut income 
taxes has been betrayed. 
 
The campaign promise, Mr. Speaker, to eliminate the provincial 
sales tax has been broken. The budget increases this tax instead 
— the most regressive of all taxes from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. 
And the promise to eliminate the sales tax has been betrayed as 
well. 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

562 
 

 
The campaign commitment which many people believe won the 
Conservatives the election in 1982, the elimination of the 
gasoline tax, has been tossed aside. Starting next Monday, the 
price of gasoline and the diesel fuel increases 7 cents a litre, and 
today in question period the minister yet cannot clearly explain 
how it’s all going to work. Between him and some other 
statements that his officials have made, there is a total 
contradiction, causing confusion and frustration. The promise 
never to introduce a gas tax has been betrayed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The campaign guarantee that the Conservatives would never 
undermine medicare has been forgotten. Our health care system 
is under attack with this budget as never before — even more 
than in 1968 under the government of the former independent 
member who sits in this House, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, this is the 
greatest betrayal of all because it hurts those least able to fight 
back. It punishes the sick for this Conservative government’s 
mismanagement. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the betrayal — and the word “betrayal” is the 
right word, and perhaps it’s the kindest word that one can use to 
describe this budget plan. 
 
I watched the minister with some care and listened with equal 
care to what he had to say. And normally the Minister of 
Finance stands in his place behind his desk and he reads his 
budget speech. For all of the years I have sat in this House, this 
is probably the only time that I’ve watched a Minister of 
Finance who wished he could be under his desk and make his 
budget speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — He certainly had nothing to be proud of 
on Wednesday. For months, he and his colleagues have hidden 
from the public, and they’ve hidden from this legislature. 
They’ve written the budget speech piece by piece in scrums in 
the hallways of this building, or press releases. They avoided 
the debate and the questions of this Assembly. They sat, and 
they waited in ambush, and pounced on those who have no or 
little voice or who have no means of protecting themselves — 
such as the Voice of the Handicapped, such as students who 
receive all this devastating news at a time when they’re writing 
their final examinations. It reminds me of the same tactic that is 
used in the guerrilla warfare, where you attack and you destroy 
anything you want, and whoever gets hurt in the process doesn’t 
matter. That’s the process that we have seen brought forward in 
this budget-making by this Minister of Finance and by this 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, earlier we had some brief comments on the 
federal government’s white paper on tax reform — and when I 
say tax reform in the context of that white paper, somehow it 
doesn’t sound right. 
 
The Conservative government here in Regina has misled the 
people of Saskatchewan time and time again. It has broken 
every major commitment it ever made to the people of this 
province. And Saskatchewan people have been deceived so 
often by this government that I doubt 

they will believe anything that they ever have to say again. 
 
Last evening in Ottawa we found out that this conservative 
tendency to mislead the public is not restricted to 
Saskatchewan. When it comes to misleading the people, Mr. 
Speaker, a Tory is a Tory is a Tory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now Finance minister Michael Wilson 
introduced a package of changes which he called “meaningful 
tax reform.” As I said in my response to the minister, it may be 
a tax reform, but it’s a tax reform of the rich. And I repeat 
again, for the record, what’s happened: under Mr. Wilson’s 
proposal, the person income tax bill for families with incomes 
between $15,000 and $30,000 will decrease by $320, but he 
personal income tax bill for families with annual income over 
$100,000 will decrease by $4,365. 
 
And along with that, Mr. Speaker, there was so much talk in 
this white paper about doing away with exemptions and 
deductions and providing tax credits. Well those exemptions 
and deductions are gone for you, Mr. Speaker, and they are 
gone for me and people like us all over Saskatchewan. But the 
$15,500 RRSP (Registered Retirement Savings Plan), the 
maximum of which only the wealthiest can contribute to, was 
left as an exemption for the rich. That’s tax reform? And the 
Minister of Finance for this province stands up and he praises 
that kind of tax reform. 
 
As usual with a Conservative announcement, the personal 
income tax changes are only part of the story. Mr. Wilson is 
also proposing a number of ideas for a new federal sales tax, 
each of which would more than offset any personal income tax 
cuts for low and middle income earners. They will indeed have 
to pay more. 
 
You might think of it this way: the Mulroney Tories are going 
to take less out of your pocket with the hand they know you see 
— income taxes — but at the same time they’ll be taking much 
more out of your pocket with the other hand, the one that you 
don’t see — a new federal sales tax. And as I said earlier, they 
say they will give low and middle income earners a $320 tax 
reduction, but they’re going to take it away with the sales tax. 
 
In typical Conservative style the government is proposing to 
introduce the income tax cuts just before the next federal 
election, but it proposes to wait to introduce the new federal 
sales tax system until after the next federal election. 
 
As much as Mr. Wilson will try to paint his changes as an effort 
to close tax loopholes for corporations, the facts are that under 
his plan 60,000 profitable corporations will continue to pay no 
tax at all. And the corporate tax rate has been reduced. 
Although he has closed a few tax loopholes — and we 
congratulate him for that; he’s closed some of them for big 
business — the great majority in fact remain in place. And as 
far as I am concerned, I’m not holding my breath just yet, 
because what he says may change very greatly after the 
lobbying and the funders of the Conservative party have taken 
the time to tell Mr. 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

563 
 

Wilson what may happen to his political funds if he doesn’t 
move back on some of those loopholes which he now says he’s 
going to close. 
 
If the Mulroney government had closed all the tax loopholes 
available to large corporations and really gone after all of the 
tax breaks and gimmicks which are available to wealthy 
investors, Ottawa could have collected billions of dollars a year 
in new revenues and substantially cut the tax burden for 
ordinary people. 
 
And that’s important for Saskatchewan because Saskatchewan’s 
share of that new tax revenue would have been $500 million a 
year. Instead, Mr. Wilson’s own documents show that the 
Saskatchewan treasury will actually lose $1 million over the 
next three years, thanks to this conservative version of tax 
reform. And I didn’t hear the Minister of Finance of this 
province saying anything about that in his remarks. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, it is true that this tax reform, although it 
has some positive aspects in the tax credits, depending how 
they’re applied, and in the direction that it seems to be taking on 
capital gains. It is a hoax. This tax reform is a hoax, because 
after taxing people with increased taxes on the average of 
$1,300 over the last three years, the Minister of Finance in 
Ottawa is now saying he’s going to reduce their taxes by $320. 
They have had a major net tax increase and they still have to 
have it. And he will take all of that $320 reduction back by 
sales tax because of the way it is now going to be applied on 
many other commodities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the Minister of Finance in Saskatchewan, 
and Mr. Wilson, the federal minister, to go back to the drawing 
boards again. I urge him to introduce real tax reform which will 
ease the tax burden for ordinary people and close all of the 
loopholes for big business and the rich. And I say to the 
Minister of Finance, in all sincerity, he shouldn’t pass up this 
historic opportunity because it may not come again from some 
time — unless, of course, there is a New Democratic 
government in Ottawa after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a government is judged not 
only by the things that it does; a government is also judged by 
the way it does them, both here in the province, in the 
provincial scene, and also in Ottawa as well. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan will not soon forget that this 
legislature was recalled and this budget was presented only after 
the threat of legal action from the New Democratic Party 
caucus. The government’s budget year began on April 1, some 
two and a half months ago, but the Premier refused to recall the 
legislature or present a budget plan until this week. 
 
That decision created confusion and concern for school boards, 
and hospital boards, municipal councils, and R.M. councils, and 
others who depend on provincial government funding, but the 
government arrogantly refused to reveal its budget plan. 
Instead, it financed government operations with cabinet orders 
called special 

warrants. 
 
Do you know Mr. Speaker, that between April 1 of this year 
and the resumption of this legislature, the provincial 
government spent $928 million by cabinet order? Sometimes 
tens of millions of dollars, signed by one minister who signed 
as the acting minister because the minister who was really 
responsible wasn’t there, then signed as the acting minister of 
finance because the Minister of Finance wasn’t there, and then 
signed on behalf of the Premier because the Premier wasn’t 
there. What kind of irresponsible action is this when one 
minister can take it upon himself to sign a special warrant on 
behalf of all of those people without the appropriate kind of 
scrutiny? 
 
(1100) 
 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, of having a session, and having a budget, 
timely in this House, the government chose to do it in secret and 
avoid the democratic process. Nearly $1 billion spent without 
public discussion or the prior approval of the people’s elected 
representatives in this legislature. Nearly $1 billion spent in the 
closed door seclusion of the cabinet chamber with the public 
informed only after the fact. This arrogance, Mr. Speaker, and 
irresponsible act is wrong. They think that the public’s money is 
the cabinet’s money; they’re to do as they wish. 
 
Now at our request, the Legislative Counsel, the independent 
officer of this Assembly, produced a written legal opinion of the 
government’s actions and she wrote that they appear to be 
illegal. This government is so arrogant that at first it refused to 
even consider this legal opinion and instead chose to publicly 
attack the Legislative Counsel — unheard of in this province 
before. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, under threat of legal action from our 
caucus, and even more so, I might say, from strong public 
pressure, the legislature was recalled. And I think that the 
Saskatchewan people should know that from this example, by 
joining together, they can put a stop to this government — if not 
this month, if not this year, then certainly at the time of the next 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — But, Mr. Speaker, in spite of this the 
arrogance continues. We saw it yesterday in this Assembly. 
New Democratic caucus members have had more than 500 
written requests for information sitting on the order papers since 
last December. That’s more than six months. And these written 
questions cannot be answered until this Assembly has passed a 
motion ordering them answered. 
 
Yesterday afternoon, we asked the Conservative government to 
deal with these requests for information so that the various 
departments and agencies of the government could be told to 
get on with the job of compiling the information. And what was 
their response, Mr. Speaker? It was no. Second day into the 
session and they want not to sit and do the work of the people. 
The government just didn’t feel like doing it. On only the 
second day after a six-month adjournment the 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

564 
 

government didn’t have any legislative work of its own to 
present, but it still refused to deal with our requests. And so 
what did the government do? Well rather than debate these 
requests for information which the public has a right to know, it 
moved adjournment for the day, after the legislature had been 
sitting for only one hour and ten minutes. And Mr. Speaker, 
that’s arrogance. But I think it’s important for the people who 
watch these proceedings, and this morning, to know what kind 
of information New Democratic MLAs were asking for. We ask 
the government to make public basic information like some of 
the following: how much money is it spending on 
out-of-province travel, such as the Premier’s exotic trip to 
Japan? That one we will yet ask. 
 
How much public money is this government spending on 
advertising, most of it political? How much it is paying 
high-priced, patronage appointments like George Hill, the 
former president of the Conservative Party, and Paul 
Schoenhals the former Conservative cabinet minister? How 
much money is it spending on outside consultants, Mr. 
Speaker? There are 528 requests for information in all. The 
government has refused to answer or even deal with any of 
them for more than six months. 
 
The ministers, Mr. Speaker, obviously have something to hide, 
and want to do so for as long as they can, and even the 
Provincial Auditor doing his job has indicated that information 
must be provided in a timely way in order that it remains 
important. The same government which pleads poverty and says 
that taxes will have to increase and public services will have to 
be cut, won’t tell taxpayers how it’s spending their money. 
 
This government says public expenditures . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Arm River 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce some students. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure 
that I would like to introduce to you and the members of the 
legislature 38 students from Hanley Composite School from 
Hanley, Saskatchewan. They are grades 4, 5 and 6. They are 
sitting in the Speakers’ gallery. They are accompanied by 
teachers Ian Obrodovich, Evelyn Roden and Janet Akre; bus 
driver Hank Petkau. I would like to thank them for coming to 
the Assembly today, and I will be meeting with them for drinks 
and questions. And I would like all members of the Assembly 
to join with me in welcoming them here and wishing them a 
good summer and a safe trip home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

too extend my welcome and the welcome on behalf of the 
caucus of this side of the House to the students who are here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — As I said before the member interrupted 
to introduce the students, Mr. Speaker, this government chooses 
to make public expenditures in the secrecy of the cabinet and 
then tells the public, who they are supposedly representing, that 
it’s none of their business what they do. And I want to close my 
remarks on this topic by simply saying that this attitude is 
wrong at any time. But it’s especially abhorrent at a time when 
the government is raising taxes and cutting services and 
preaching restraint. The government — any government — has 
an obligation to prove to the public that it is practising the 
restraint that it is preaching. Instead, this government has 
chosen on to be accountable. 
 
Now I want to talk for a few moments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
about the government’s refusal to account for the public for its 
actions, because the true essence of any democratic system is 
accountability. That refusal to be accountable to the public was 
underlined the day of the budget speech by a second document 
which was tabled in this Assembly — the annual report of the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Provincial Auditor, as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
an independent officer of the Assembly. His job is to report to 
all MLAs about whether or not the government of the day is 
spending public money with proper authorization, and to report 
to the legislature when there are deficiencies in the way the 
government has administered public funds. 
 
And the first thing I want to note is the lateness of the 
Provincial Auditors’ report. This report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
for the budget year which ended March 31, 1986 — some 14 
and a half months ago. Why was the Provincial Auditors’ report 
so late? 
 
Well first, the provincial government’s financial statements are 
in such a mess, and he says so, that it took longer than usual to 
try and review them. And second, as part of its attempt to 
muzzle the Provincial Auditor and avoid public accountability, 
the government has cut his budget and his staff. But yet, in spite 
of these difficulties, the Provincial Auditor has given taxpayers 
a thorough report which was one of the most critical in decades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — From cover to cover — from cover 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

565 
 

to cover you see that the provincial government has taken steps 
to avoid public accountability. In January, without consultation 
with the Provincial Auditor, this government instructed Crown 
corporations to hire private accounting firms to audit their 
books. And it informed the Provincial Auditor that his 
responsibilities with respect to review of Crown corporation 
finances would be limited from now on. 
 
This, the Conservative government has done once again by 
cabinet order, even before it has introduced the required 
amendments to The Provincial Auditor Act. This is an obvious 
attempt by the government to avoid public accountability for its 
extravagant and wasteful spending in the Crown corporation. 
 
The Provincial Auditor was also extremely critical of the 
government’s delay in the release of the public accounts. The 
public accounts, as you will know and most of the public will 
know, are the detailed dollar-by-dollar accounting of how the 
government spent the public’s money in a given budget year. 
And normally those public accounts are released about six 
months following the close of a budget year. However, the 
public accounts for the 1985-86 budget year, which ended more 
than 14 months ago, still haven’t been made public. There is no 
legitimate reason for this kind of delay, and I submit to you that 
the only reason we haven’t seen the public accounts is that the 
Conservative government opposite is afraid to show the public 
how it has been wasting their hard-earned tax dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I raise these 
examples, and I remind you and the members of this House that 
that is only the tip of the iceberg of what is in this Provincial 
Auditor’s annual report. 
 
I’ll give you one more example. The auditor reports that the 
government, without proper authorization, signed a lease for its 
new Hong Kong trade office, worth more than $500,000. And 
on top of that, again without proper authorization, the 
government spent more than $31,000 on furniture and fittings 
for the place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me put that kind of spending in 
perspective. This government, which preaches a restraint with 
unbridled passion, spent more than $31,000 to furnish its Hong 
Kong trade office and then it cancelled $34,000 of annual grant 
to the Voice of the Handicapped, pleading poverty. Double 
standard. Double standard, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Where is the 
fairness and the justice in that kind of spending? 
 
And I think I’ll give you another example. There is the example 
in the Provincial Auditor’s report which shows how 
incompetent and careless this government is with the public’s 
hard-earned tax dollars. On December 5, 1986, just a few days 
after the Conservatives lost the Regina North East by-election, 
the government issued a purchase order for more than one and 
one-half million dollars U.S. to buy a used aircraft from an 
American company. The government spent $25,000 in a deposit 
along with the purchase order. By then somebody looked at the 
big loss the government had suffered in the Regina 

North East by-election and decided that it might not be the right 
time for the cabinet to be seen purchasing yet another executive 
aircraft. Remember that this was . . . I bring to your attention 
this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this was just a few days after Jim 
Garner had resigned from cabinet for misleading the Assembly 
about his misuse of the government aircraft. 
 
And so the government cancelled this order and lost its 
$25,000. It lost the taxpayers $25,000 — $25,000 U.S. gone. 
That’s more than a lot of Saskatchewan people make in a year, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this government threw it all away 
because the right hand didn’t know what the left hand was 
doing. Not only are they arrogant and insensitive, they’re also 
incompetent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — There will be many more of these 
examples, which will be pursued, I’m sure, when the Public 
Accounts Committee discusses the auditor’s report. 
 
I just simply want to say this: that the government which 
preaches restraint to everyone else, and demands more 
accountability from people like hospital patients and those in 
need of prescription drugs, refuses to account for how it spent 
$3 billion of public funds, and that’s not fair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now you know, as one studies the 
budget speech and documents, it becomes really painfully 
obvious that this government and this minister just don’t seem 
to know when to stop. People are being forced to pay more and 
more, but they’re getting in return less and less in services. 
 
And this budget continues that record of deception which I 
spoke about earlier. It’s a chock-a-block with what Orwell 
called New-speak. 
 
And let me give you a couple of examples from what I heard 
the minister given in his speech the other day. The Minister of 
Finance said on Wednesday that the Conservative government 
— and this will be particularly interesting to my member from 
university, Saskatoon University, who asked the questions — 
but the minister said that this Conservative government has 
improved the quality of education at Saskatchewan’s technical 
institutes. And I quote from page 15 of the budget, when he 
said: 
 

To reduce administrative duplication, develop areas of 
excellence and focus on skills that are in demand by 
employers, we have amalgamated the four technical 
institutes and four urban community colleges into a 
new Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology; 
 

You know how that translates, Mr. Speaker, and what the 
minister really should have said. He should have said we have 
fired 146 technical institute instructors; we have reduced the 
number of students’ training spaces by 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

566 
 

1,100, and we have wiped out dozens of training courses which 
had excellent graduate employment records. That’s the 
doublespeak, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The reality is simply not . . . and has 
nothing to do with what the words of the budget speech say, but 
that doesn’t seem to bother this government. 
 
There’s another comment from the minister that I could almost 
not believe when I heard him say it, but I heard him say it, and 
it can be found on page 16 if you’re interested. And it states, I 
quote: 
 

I am pleased to announce that this Government is 
continuing its commitment to a high quality 
elementary and secondary school system by allotting 
$14.5 million to the Education Development Fund this 
year. 
 

And the minister stood with a straight face and praised this as a 
major move. What does it really say, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Here 
is the translation and what it should have said: we are cutting 
the education and development fund by more than half, because 
last year it contained $35 million, not $14 and a half million. 
 
And there was another example when this minister talked about 
the rising cost of medicare and used the sharply rising cost as an 
excuse to cut health care programs like the prescription drug 
plan. And I ask the minister to be honest with the public: how 
will cutting the prescription drug plan reduce drug prices? Of 
course it won’t reduce rising drug prices one single penny. All 
that it will do is shift the rising cost of prescription drugs from 
the provincial government to the sick. And if the minister is 
honestly concerned about rising drug prices, why did he and his 
government support the Mulroney government’s drug patent 
law changes which will make low-cost generic drugs harder to 
develop and will thereby drive up the cost of prescription drugs 
even more? 
 
Throughout this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government is 
trying it mislead and to deceive the people of Saskatchewan. It 
is trying to paper over the financial mess it has created, trying to 
convince taxpayers that they should be paying more and getting 
less. Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to allow themselves to be deceived 
again. 
 
Now as I ponder the events of the next several days, I’m 
thinking that it’s going to be very interesting to see who votes 
for the government’s budget plan or cuts in public services and 
unfair tax increases. Interesting, not only for who on the 
government’s side will vote for this destructive budget, but 
interesting also on this side of the House where the lone Liberal 
member or the independent member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg sits. 
 
I say interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this budget is 
basically the Ralph Goodale election platform. He was the 
politician who travelled the province last fall shouting a 
simplistic, single-minded strategy of cut, cut, cut. And this 
independent member is the one who said the deficit was 
Saskatchewan’s only problem and had to be reduced 

at any cost. Now these Conservatives are doing what the Liberal 
member preached last fall, and I’m wondering, is he going to 
vote for his own election platform? It will be quite interesting to 
see. 
 
Today this independent member, Mr. Speaker, sheds crocodile 
tears and he talks of the need to fight budget cuts and tax 
increases, and ten months ago he proposed them. So I ask the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg if he doesn’t find it a 
little uncomfortable sitting on the fence and keeping his ear to 
the ground all at the same time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Some might call his stance hypocritical, 
but since that is not parliamentary language, I will simply call it 
less than honest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a Liberal budget as well as a 
Conservative budget. It’s introduced by a Conservative cabinet 
Minister of Finance who is himself a former Liberal. It is the 
same formula that was tried by Saskatchewan’s last Liberal 
government in 1968, and even that minister of Finance is 
quoted in the newspaper how this is the blackest Wednesday 
and the blackest budget ever in the history of Saskatchewan. He 
learned, but he Minister of Finance didn’t learn. And so I 
simply conclude by saying, it’s true what people say; you can’t 
tell right wing parties apart without a program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that I was 
curious about where the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
will be voting on this. I want to find out, and I’ll be interested in 
trying to find out where the members on the opposite side are 
going to vote on this budget. 
 
Let me remind them of something, and the public of 
Saskatchewan well knows. Let me give them some examples 
from the PC Members’ Service Bureau which was provided to 
all Conservative members prior to the last election, to all their 
candidates, so that they could explain to the voters all of the 
great things that the Conservative Party has done. This is the 
Conservative gospel. 
 
First of all, right at the top of the list, it said, under the heading 
“Progressive Conservative Government Accomplishments”, it 
said: 
 

Removed the gasoline tax, creating the lowest 
gasoline prices in Canada, at a saving of 
approximately $250 a year to Saskatchewan families. 
Total savings since 1982 is $621 million. 
 

Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that the political party is judged by the 
promises it makes and how it keeps them. Well I’m wondering 
how some of the members opposite are going to vote for that 
provision in the budget in light of what they said in 1982, in this 
House, during the throne speech debate. 
 
What did the member from Maple Creek say? Well the 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

567 
 

member from Maple Creek stood in this House, solemnly said, 
and I quote: 
 

Within seconds of taking office, we implemented the 
largest tax cut in the history of this province. We 
eliminated 20 per cent road tax on fuel. 
 

And then she went on further, and she said: 
 

We feel that if people are able to have more money in 
their pockets they will go out and spend that money. 
That in itself will generate jobs and economic activity 
in our province. 
 

And I ask that member, and other members, what happened to 
jobs and economic activity in the province? Are they not as 
important any more? 
 
Now the member for Yorkton, he also had some words of 
wisdom. He also had some words of wisdom. He said: 
 

. . . before you can build on a muskeg, you must find 
the solid base before you can sink your foundation 
piles into it, and that is what we are doing. 
 

And then he said, Mr. Speaker, and then he said: 
 

But in spite of the muskeg, we have removed the sales 
tax on gasoline, which we had promised, on the first 
day we were in government. I don’t know how much 
faster you can react than that. 
 

And I think that the member from Yorkton should take note 
because I’m sure he will be getting a lot of people reminding 
him about what he said next. He said that: 
 

. . . the removal of that tax did much to ease the 
anxiety of our people about their future and their 
financial security. (He said) A young man who had 
recently started a trucking operation in Yorkton 
advised me the day after the election that the removal 
of that tax made the difference between his either 
breaking even or going in the hole, and his making 
some profit this year. 
 

Why, Mr. Member from Yorkton, have you forgotten this 
young man in this budget? Are you going to really forget him 
and people like him or are you going to vote against this budget, 
which you should? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Your Minister of Finance maybe didn’t 
tell you in caucus, but he told you today in question period that 
those people are now going to have to pay this gas tax. Now 
there’s the member from Morse; he’s always right. The member 
from Morse had a deep and passionate concern in 1982 about 
how the gas tax was affecting municipalities and school boards. 
And he said, and I quote: 
 

. . . looking at some of the budgets that the school 
units have proposed during the past few months, I 
discovered that the rural division in Morse 
constituency will get a major benefit of almost two 

mills. It’s a transportation grant they don’t have to 
apply for; it’s a grant directly from the people to their 
own school system, or a saving on the taxes collected. 
 

And he concluded by saying: 
 

The rural municipalities will also have a cost saving in 
their budgets because of a reduction in the costs of 
energy of also nearly two mills. 
 

Well, what has your Minister of Finance done, Mr. Member 
from Morse? He has betrayed your commitment to your rural 
municipalities and your school boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And are you going to vote for this budget 
in light of that betrayal? Are you going to vote for this budget 
and betray . . . you and the member from Yorkton, the people 
that you represent, to whom you made all of these promises 
when you ran for election in both 1982 and 1983. If you do, all 
of those members who said these things, you will not be back in 
this House after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, probably the most 
significant comment that was made was one that was made 
from the member from Kelvington-Wadena. In his praise of the 
actions of the government in 1982, he said very clearly that this 
gasoline tax which the government had removed was an 
insidious tax. An insidious tax. Well, I simply ask him, when it 
comes to the day when we’re voting on this budget, will that 
member change his mind and vote for the budget and vote for 
this insidious tax being reimplemented again? I say to him his 
constituents, if he does that, will not forget his actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I want to raise another example, Mr. 
Speaker, to indicate the betrayal that’s taking place. One of the 
major actions of this government in its last term was the 
introduction of the Public Utilities Review Commission. And 
they introduced it because they said that the public has a right to 
control their government. It was their creation, it was their 
child, and members spoke about it in great praise. This Minister 
of Finance now has decided, and this Premier has decided, that 
that control of government is no longer important and that they 
want to rule according to the way they wish, behind cabinet 
doors, without ever consulting the people of Saskatchewan 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people even eat their young. They destroy 
the things that they create when it becomes inconvenient for 
them to have them around. And I want to say that the people to 
whom they made the most solemn promises, the farm 
populations of Saskatchewan, the people in rural Saskatchewan, 
have been betrayed more than anyone else. In this election 
booklet, it said under Conservative accomplishments that they 
have established the farm purchase program which has helped 
over 5,000 young farmers start up or expand their 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

568 
 

operations. The minister stands up in the House on Wednesday 
and he says, at a time when probably the farm economy is as 
bad as it ever has been since 1982, says it’s no longer important 
to provide an opportunity for people to be able to have 
generational land transfers, and this program is gone. That is a 
betrayal. 
 
(1130) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a few more things to 
say and, as I started to say earlier, the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden has some students to introduce and I will 
give him some time to do that. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The hon. 
member, I appreciate the courtesy being extended. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to the Assembly some grade 4 and 5 
students from Stuart Nicks School in Grand Coulee. They are 
18 in number and are presently in the Speaker’s gallery. I will 
be meeting with them a little later for question and 
refreshments. I hope very much that they enjoy the day, enjoy 
the rest of their day, and again I ask all members to join with 
me in both welcoming them to the Assembly and wishing them 
a very, very safe summer vacation. Thank you for joining us. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
again our welcome to the students, and we hope that they enjoy 
their stay here and have indeed a good summer. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — If I may continue my remarks, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. If there is any area in which the insensitivity 
of this budget is more clearly displayed, it’s in the area of our 
social programs, and particularly health care. This destruction 
that we see of our health care program by these false defenders 
of medicare, more than anything else underlines the dishonesty 
of this budget. This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has 
driven a stake into the heart of medicare, because they have 
always believed that it was a monster. 
 
It’s dishonest because its stated purposes and objective to deal 
with the deficit is not the true purpose and objective of this 
government at all. The budget and all of the announcements 
leading up to it since March are deliberate attempts by this 
government to impose a radical Conservative philosophy on 
this province. This is a radical and a dangerous agenda. It is 
being put forth by a 

Premier and Minister of Finance who live in the past, who want 
to turn the clock back 30 years. It is a minority using its power 
to tear down and destroy the very foundations of those 
institutions which have made this province strong and a leader 
throughout North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The people who settled here and worked 
to build a strong and a sharing and a caring society, they built it 
together, sharing their shills and their dreams and their energies 
to make this province a leader and a beacon for others to follow. 
But this radical Conservative government, living in the past, has 
set out to destroy all of that. Somehow, somehow they believe 
that it’s better for Saskatchewan people to depend on outside 
corporate interests to do it for us than it is for us to do it 
ourselves. And that’s why the pulp mill was given away to 
Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington, of the United States. 
 
And that’s why Saskoil was sold away resulting in — and I 
want you to note this — resulting in 75 per cent of the privately 
owned shares being owned by people not resident in this 
province of Saskatchewan. And what have been results? 
They’ve been costly; they’ve been very costly, and they’ve been 
swift. One-quarter of the Saskoil staff were laid off soon after 
the sale, and most of Saskoil’s new activity is not in 
Saskatchewan. Jobs and opportunities are being created in 
Alberta, not here in the province of Saskatchewan. The people 
of Saskatchewan built it, they took the risk, and they made it 
succeed. And this Conservative government, in the name of 
ideology, sold it away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let there be no mistake about it. The minister 
speaks of deficit reduction, but that’s not really what this budget 
is all about. It’s not a budget of deficit reduction, in their minds. 
This budget is about betrayal by this government, of its 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. This budget is 
using a deficit, some of which is fabricated, as an excuse to 
force on this province an ideology that people do not want. 
They are using the deficit as an excuse to dismantle important 
public services that, politically, the Conservatives have been 
afraid to do to this point. 
 
So one has to ask: where is democracy? Where is democracy 
when a government, which received fewer votes than the 
official opposition, forces it destructive ideology upon a people 
whom they have betrayed. Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the 
promise of balanced budgets; the promise to never reimpose the 
gas tax; the promise to eliminate the provincial sales tax; the 
promise to cut income taxes 10 per cent; or the promise of the 
farm purchase program, this provincial government has broken 
that promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — They seem to have this approach that a 
small number of individuals have the right to great economic 
wealth and power, and those with places of power, of influence, 
or those with connections have the right to lead lives of security 
and comfort and others do not. The Conservative philosophy, 
which we see in this 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

569 
 

budget, accepts the idea of poverty amidst plenty. 
 
We, in the New Democratic Party, reject that approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, poverty robs individuals of 
not only a decent standard of living but of their dignity as well. 
Somehow this government chooses to blame poverty on the 
poor. The blame for poverty is the fault of an economic system 
which is being forced on Saskatchewan people by this 
government. No one should have to live in fear of economic 
hardship because of a lot of things, including sickness. The 
trauma of ill health is enough without adding to it an expensive 
bill which many people can’t afford to pay. 
 
I ask: where is the justice, where is the fairness when this 
government gives a three-year tax holiday to the oil companies, 
and then taxes the sick and our children through cuts to dental 
programs, and does it in order that they can give this gift to 
their friends in the corporate sector? 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that government has a meaningful 
role to play in the betterment of the human condition. By 
design, Saskatchewan has enabled its people to live in small 
cities and in towns and on its farms in some comfort, by the 
provision of grid roads and by public transportation and power 
and highways. 
 
We see the wisdom and the strong need to continue to develop 
provincial systems with universal access and to put our 
technology and resources to use for the benefit of all common 
good. The resources of this province belong to the people, and 
the benefits from their development should be used to improve 
social and economic conditions. The tax structure should be 
based on ability to pay and used as a tool to redistribute wealth, 
and to provide equality of opportunity, and to provide basic 
services, and to enhance the quality of life for everyone and not 
just a few. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, as I approach my 
conclusion I just want to take a few moments and add to some 
of those comments, which is somewhat philosophical. And I 
want to talk about the government’s philosophy. It’s very 
important for people to understand the clear difference in 
philosophy between the New Democratic Party and this 
Conservative Party. Why do each of us do what we do? Why do 
we propose the ideas and make the decisions that we do? Well, 
as a New Democrat, I believe that what Tommy Douglas and 
other pioneers of the CCF New Democratic Party believed — 
that we should measure the success of our lives not by what we 
get, but by what we give. And what is true for each of us is true 
for society. We should measure the success of a province, or a 
nation, not only by its economic accomplishments but also by 
the quality of life that each of its citizens enjoys, from the 
richest to the poorest. 
 
And government is an important tool to help achieve a better 
quality of life for our citizens. Government is 

simply the community at large. It is the instrument by which we 
do for ourselves co-operatively what we cannot do individually. 
Saskatchewan people join forces through this government to 
provide them with public insurance to overcome the gouging by 
the private insurance companies. The Conservatives are 
threatening to turn it back. 
 
They joined forces through their government to provide 
transportation from rural Saskatchewan through the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company because the private bus 
companies refuse to serve rural communities. This government 
is threatening to turn it back. Saskatchewan people joined 
forces to take control of important natural resources like oil and 
potash through public companies like Saskoil and the potash 
corporation. This government is threatening to give it back to 
the corporate sector, out of this province. The oil and potash 
below our fields doesn’t belong to Exxon or to IMC. It belongs 
to the people of this province. And we as citizens of 
Saskatchewan are allowing these companies to develop our 
resources in return for a fair share of the benefit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now this government — and we’ve seen 
the evidence since their election in ’82 — they say that these 
resources should benefit the corporations who develop them 
and we should be happy with the spin-off benefits from their 
development. This is a major example of how our two parties 
differ. 
 
Since 1982 the Conservatives have provided the oil companies 
with tax holidays and other breaks which have cost our 
province more than $1 billion in lost revenues. That was $1 
billion less to build hospitals or nursing homes or schools and 
highways. One billion dollars less for our technical institutes or 
our health care system. 
 
We gave up $1 billion in exchange for long-term jobs in the oil 
patch — they said. But as soon as the oil prices fell last year, 
the oil companies left and the jobs disappeared. So what do we 
have? The oil companies have our $1 billion, but where are the 
jobs? The $1 billion is gone, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The oil is 
gone — a non-renewable resource and the jobs are gone as well. 
 
That’s the legacy of the policies of this Conservative 
government. And my point, Mr. Speaker, is this: if 
Saskatchewan had continued to collect a fair share of revenues 
from the oil companies, that money could have been used to 
generate new economic activity throughout Saskatchewan 
which would have been lasting economic activity. 
 
And I say that now that the oil prices have recovered, there is 
even less reason to provide them with the new tax holidays, 
especially at a time when the provincial government is pleading 
poverty and picking the pockets of ordinary people of this 
province as never before in our history. And resource policy is 
just one example of the Conservative philosophy which panders 
to the privileged at the expense of the many. I believe that 
philosophy is wrong — both morally and economically. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

570 
 

 
There is a positive important role for government to play in our 
economy, especially an economy as isolated from major 
markets as Saskatchewan. We can’t rely on outside interests to 
do it for us. New opportunities will only come if government 
and co-operatives and small business and working people can 
together decide on the priorities and work together to make it 
happen. The Conservatives say it can’t be done. New 
Democrats have more faith in the skills and the ability and the 
determination of Saskatchewan and its people than that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I say that together we can 
build a better Saskatchewan in which everyone can share the 
prosperity, and not just the privileged few who might contribute 
financially to the Conservative party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have taken some time to say some of the 
things that I’ve said. There are many more things that I will 
want to say when we get into the estimates, and when we get 
into other debates, and so will my colleagues. 
 
But in conclusion I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying that this is a bad budget. For all the 
reasons that I have cited, it is a budget of betrayal. Over the 
course of the next week each member of this Assembly will 
have the opportunity to speak to this budget and to vote on this 
budget. And the position, Mr. Speaker, of the New Democratic 
Party members is clear. We oppose this budget of betrayal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We oppose this budget of betrayal, and 
we will watch with great interest the comments and the vote of 
the Conservative members opposite. We will see if every one of 
the cabinet ministers vigorously and enthusiastically defends 
Mr. Lane’s budget, the member from Qu’Appelle’s budget. 
 
We will note the vigour and the enthusiasm with which the 
back-benchers defend this budget. And, Mr. Speaker, we will 
see how they vote. Will the member from Regina Wascana vote 
for this budget which has eliminated the children’s dental plan 
and fired hundreds of his constituents. We’ll see. Will the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview speak out in favour of this 
budget that cuts funding for science and technology in half, and 
raises the sales tax to 7 per cent, and destroys Kelsey Institute 
and the Saskatoon community college. We will be interested to 
find out, and so will his constituents. Will the government 
back-benchers vigorously defend this budget that destroys the 
prescription drug plan, and attacks medicare, and raises the flat 
tax, and reimposes the Conservative gas tax. Will they vote for 
this minister’s budget, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I invite every single one of them to enter this debate. I invite 
them to consider very carefully the impact of this budget on 
their constituents; to understand that we will be telling their 
constituents how they voted. I invite them to vote for this 
minister’s budget of betrayal, if they dare. 

Mr. Speaker, for the reasons that I have mentioned I cannot 
support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I cannot support this budget, and 
accordingly I wish to move an amendment. I move, seconded 
by my colleague, the member for Riversdale: 
 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
That this Assembly condemns and rejects the Budget 
because it is a betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan, 
and a betrayal of the caring, sharing, and co-operative 
Saskatchewan way of life, and further, because: 
 
(1) It betrays medicare in Saskatchewan by arbitrarily 
limiting insured medical services, destroying the 
children’s dental plan and the prescription drug plan, 
and attacking many other health care services; 
 
(2) It betrays the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
attacking a wide range of needed services; 
 
(3) It betrays Saskatchewan young people by attacking 
the education system and by providing totally 
inadequate job creation measures; 
 
(4) It betrays Saskatchewan Senior Citizens, the 
pioneers who co-operated to develop this province, by 
undermining services they need and their security; 
 
(5) It continues this government’s betrayal of Indian, 
Metis, and of northern people. 
 
(6) It betrays the working men and women of 
Saskatchewan by eroding the rights, security, and 
opportunities; 
 
(7) It betrays all the people of Saskatchewan because 
it misrepresents the size of the deficit, and fails to 
acknowledge that this deficit has been caused by the 
government’s failure to collect corporate and resource 
revenues and by patronage to the government’s 
friends. 
 
(8) It betrays the government’s election promises to 
improve services and cut taxes, and instead imposes 
the largest tax increase in Saskatchewan history, thus 
demonstrating the government’s policy of deliberate 
deceit. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The debate continues on the main motion and 
the amendment. 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to take part in this debate on the 1987-88 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

571 
 

budget. I first want to say what an excellent job the Minister of 
Finance did in presenting this budget to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a fine speech that clearly outlined this 
government’s commitment to three priorities for Saskatchewan: 
to build, to protect, and to diversify. 
 
I feel that in this budget our government is addressing a major 
challenge to the future of our province. It’s an economic 
challenge, Mr. Speaker, a challenge that is forcing us to make 
difficult decisions. But there can be no question but that we 
must face these decisions, that we must change, or risk losing 
what we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that our government is making those 
hard decisions, facing the economic realities . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order please. The member is hollering 
from his desk and certainly we don’t want that to be going on in 
this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Sauder: — In the past our province has been able to rely 
on the agriculture and resource sectors to provide revenue when 
we needed it. One or the other was always doing well enough 
that government could expect to have the resources it needed to 
provide for an ever increasing number of social programs. Over 
the time, the people of Saskatchewan have come to expect that 
the government will always be there whenever they need help. 
And indeed, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is the duty of any 
responsible government to help its citizens when they do truly 
need it. The key word here is “responsible.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the prosperous mid-1970s the government 
of the day liked people to believe that the prosperity that we 
enjoyed was the result of their management ability, and that as 
long as they managed the economy, everything would be all 
right. The farm economy was strong. The resource sector were 
enjoying high prices. Indeed, the government of the day seemed 
to be doing all right. But were they really? No, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t believe they were. They’d failed to plan. Somehow they 
liked to think that they were good at that, but they’d failed to 
plan for that day when the people needed their help. 
 
Oh, they managed to spend a billion dollars of taxpayers’ 
money buying resources that were already here — potash 
mines, uranium mines — but they didn’t put anything away for 
a rainy day. And that rainy day came, Mr. Speaker. When 
interest rates went over 20 per cent and farmers were hit with 
droughts, they sat on their hands. When interest rates were over 
20 per cent and people were losing their homes, did they help? 
No. They sat on their hands again. They said they couldn’t help. 
They fought with the federal government and they yelled at the 
banks, but they did nothing to help the people of Saskatchewan. 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because they weren’t prepared to stand 
behind the real people when they really needed it. They didn’t 
mind borrowing money to spend on potash mines and buying 
paper pulp mills and uranium mines, but they couldn’t help the 
real people in Saskatchewan. They couldn’t help the farmers. 
They couldn’t help the home owners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan had had 

enough of that kind of treatment, and in 1982 they elected a 
province of Saskatchewan government to set things right. I was 
proud to be a part of that government, Mr. Speaker, a 
government that has shown its commitment to protect and serve 
the people of Saskatchewan like no other. 
 
We introduced the interest rate protection for home owners, 
small businesses, and farmers. We began the long task of 
rebuilding our hospitals and special care homes system that had 
suffered neglect under the former administration. We 
introduced progressive social programs like the seniors’ 
heritage program, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan for 
Saskatchewan citizens, a plan that gave them the opportunity to 
plan for their future and to put money away to help themselves 
when they needed it. And when droughts and flooding hit the 
farmers of this province, we responded and we protected them, 
Mr. Speaker. There was a cost to this, but it’s a duty of a 
responsible government to do this if the situation warrants it, 
and I believe it definitely did. 
 
At the same time that our government was working to protect 
the people of Saskatchewan, revenues were declining, 
continuing low revenues brought about by declining world 
prices for oil, potash, and other resources that we relied upon. 
Our government’s options to control the deficit were limited 
indeed. However, with an economic situation as unstable as it 
was, tax increases on the scale of Manitoba’s recent tax 
increases were not the answer. We did not feel that the people 
could afford to foot the bill through major increases in taxes 
such as they’ve had in our neighbouring province. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, our government has decided to continue 
and intensify the processes of streamlining and consolidating 
government departments and to exercise increased fiscal 
responsibility. We cannot ask others to sacrifice until we get our 
house in order. That means making tough decisions like 
reducing the size of the civil service and reorganizing some of 
the Crown corporations and the departments of government. 
Laying people off and moving them around is never an easy or 
pleasant thing to do, but we must continue to make government 
more efficient and effective if we are to bring costs down. 
 
As the Minister of Finance has stated, these civil service 
reductions will save the taxpayers of Saskatchewan some $200 
million over the next five years. Along with these internal 
changes, our government has also been reviewing its funding to 
third parties, which represent approximately two-thirds of our 
provincial budget. Our review has been thorough and fair. 
Many institutions and programs were examined to see if they 
could be streamlined or if they represented a duplication of 
services. Most grants were left at 1986-87 levels, while some 
were reduced, and most notably others, particularly in the field 
of health, were increased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a member of Premier Grant Devine’s 
Progressive Conservative government, I’m interested in all 
aspects of the budget and of the policies that they reflect. 
However, as legislative secretary to the Minister of Health, my 
colleague from Meadow Lake, I have a particular interest in 
sections of the budget dealing with our health care system. I’d 
like to talk about that for a few moments. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

572 
 

I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see that once again health 
care has been given a priority position within overall 
government expenditures. This year’s health care budget is over 
$1.2 billion, the highest amount in our province’s history. 
Interesting to note that the members opposite think that’s 
insignificant. Far more than they ever spent in their 
administration to provide the services in the health care field to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listen with interest as some of those members 
opposite try to portray this government as one that doesn’t care 
about health. They talk about dismantling medicare. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if $1.2 billion represents dismantling medicare, that’s 
one of the strangest definitions I’ve ever heard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Strange, but understandable, considering where 
it comes from. The opposition would have us believe there’ll be 
no dental plan. But check the facts. There will be a 
comprehensive, high quality program of dental care for all 
children age 5 to 13 in this province — up to 140,000 children. 
And this quality dental care will be provided at absolutely no 
cost to the parents. I call that a commitment to health care. 
 
Take the drug plan. We have the most generous program of 
drug coverage of any province in Canada. We’ve modified the 
program in a way that recognizes the special needs of some 
groups in our society. The deductible for seniors is substantially 
less than that for other individuals and families, for those on 
social assistance, for special care home residents; and for people 
with long-term, disease-related drug requirements, there will be 
no change at all in the existing level of protection. 
 
(1200) 
 
As the Minister of Finance noted, Mr. Speaker, the cost of the 
drug plan has been rising drastically, by over 400 per cent since 
the program begin in 1975. The changes we are implementing 
will provide a much greater measure of cost control, while still 
providing a high level of coverage to Saskatchewan people. 
And I call that a fair and responsible approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ever since taking office in 1982, this government has stated its 
commitment to health care. And it has done more than state it. 
It has consistently backed up that commitment with numerous 
initiatives to expand and improve health care services. I’m 
talking about initiatives such as the Wascana Rehabilitation 
Centre in Regina, the new cancer clinic in Saskatoon, the new 
chiropody program for seniors, special care homes in 
communities throughout our province, to name just a number of 
the many positive measures we’ve taken. Those initiatives have 
been reflected in the health care budgets which our government 
has presented. Over the past five years, health care expenditures 
have risen by 63 per cent. But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 
the initiatives are reflected in better quality service and better 
access to services for Saskatchewan people. 
 
I have had the pleasure of visiting many communities around 
our province, and I know they appreciate what 

this government has done for them after years of neglect by the 
previous administration. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are 
realists as well as optimists. They know as well that our 
province is caught up in world-wide economic factors beyond 
our control, and they know that a responsible government must 
respond to changing circumstances in a fair but decisive way. 
 
Our province was built by people who weren’t afraid to face 
challenges, who weren’t afraid to make changes when the need 
for those changes were obvious. Mr. Speaker, I believe that’s 
demonstrated by this budget, by our Minister of Finance, and by 
our Premier — people who have the challenge to make the 
changes when they need to be changed, not to just live in the 
past, but to look to the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care in our province has never been a static 
thing. It was developed in response to changing needs and 
circumstances, to better serve Saskatchewan residents. We have 
reached a point where the system has become very large and 
very expensive. That in itself is not the cause for concern. On 
the contrary, our government is very proud of our substantial 
contribution to improving the system. 
 
But the fact remains that we must critically examine some of 
the ways in which services are organized and administered. We 
must ensure that all our health care facilities are being 
effectively utilized. We must look for ways to build greater 
accountability into the system to encourage efficiency and 
appropriate service utilization. Mr. Speaker, this government 
makes no apologies for identifying these issues in plain terms 
and for indicating our intention to address all of them in a 
concrete way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite seem to have the strange 
notion that changing things automatically makes them worse. 
And they attempt to impute some sort of diabolical motives to 
our plans. If they wish to live in the past, that is their future, and 
I, for one, am quite happy to leave them here. I am proud to be 
a government that sees change as an inevitable, ongoing 
process, and that approaches it in a positive and dynamic way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget provides tangible evidence of 
this government’s responsible and forward-looking attitude. Let 
me just cite one major example, once again, in the field of 
health. Among Saskatchewan’s parents, and among our young 
people themselves, the problem of substance abuse is a growing 
and major concern. This government recognizes that our young 
people are the future of our province, and we’re determined to 
provide the programs and facilities to help them avoid and 
overcome their health problems. 
 
I am very pleased to see in this budget that this year the 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission will be 
receiving $13.2 million, an increase of 69 per cent over the 
previous year. This will include over $3 million for programs to 
deal with substance abuse in adults and youth. This is 
something that has been brought forward to me on many 
occasions as I’ve visited the schools and visited with students 
throughout our province, and they’ve expressed the concern that 
they have. Last week I had the occasion to attend the opening of 
a new alcohol 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

573 
 

and drug abuse centre in one of our northern communities, and 
it was impressed further again on me the need for these types of 
programs. 
 
What was particularly encouraging to me, at that specific 
opening, was the fact that on the board, in Creighton Alcohol 
and Drug Abuse Committee, they had three youth representing 
the high school students of that community who are active 
participants on the board and active supporters of it in the 
community, people who have a concern for their peers, for their 
fellow students, for the other young people in their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also provides $1.5 million for another 
unique and innovative project. I’m referring to the Whitespruce 
Youth Treatment Centre near Yorkton, the first specialized 
youth treatment centre for substance abuse in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by these few remarks that I’ve made I think you’ll 
see that this is a substantial increase in funding, and the 
expansion of service is clear evidence that this government is 
indeed committed to health care and that we are responsible to 
changing priorities among the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a budget that has been presented by the Minister of 
Finance, that is effectively designed to meet the objectives that I 
stated earlier — of building for our province, of protecting our 
people, and of diversifying our economy and our base — 
diversifying so that we’ll have the resources to provide for the 
programs that are needed for the people, to protect them, to 
provide the educational facilities, the health care facilities and 
the other programs that are needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after listening to the members opposite as they 
presented their arguments against, and as they took away from 
what this budget had, it became very clear to me that we are on 
the right course. We are working for the people of 
Saskatchewan; we are looking to the future. Mr. Speaker, based 
on my remarks, I’m sure you will see that I will be voting 
against the amendment and am pleased to be able to support this 
budget address. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I did 
not have an opportunity to join in the debate in the throne 
speech. It’s the first time I’ve had an opportunity to speak in a 
general way in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I want to therefore thank the electors of Regina Centre for 
returning me for another session, another term of the legislature. 
I want to, as well, congratulate both opponents who, by and 
large, ran a reasonably fair campaign. I did have one complaint 
with respect to the Conservative candidate. I told him during the 
election I was going to raise it publicly if I was elected, and I 
am going to do so now. I do so because it involves complicity 
on the part of certain government departments. 
 
My Conservative opponent handed out government pins, which 
must have cost a dollar, a dollar and a half each, to electors. He 
seemed to have an endless supply of Government of 
Saskatchewan pins which were handed 

out on the doorstep. That’s clearly inappropriate. I believe it’s a 
violation of The Election Act. I think had anyone had taken him 
seriously we might have raised it, but no one did. He was 
clearly, however, getting very large supplies of pins from the 
department, I suppose, of Parks and Recreation. It was 
inappropriate for him to be using them; it was equally 
inappropriate for this government to be giving them to him. I 
want to register in a public way, Mr. Speaker, my complaint, 
not so much about my Conservative opponent, about the 
government departments which gave him an endless supply of 
pins. It was clearly wrong. 
 
The English language is almost inadequate to describe the 
growing sense of outrage which Saskatchewan people have felt 
since the October election. I’ve seen some crass governments in 
my time, but this government really takes the cake. Since the 
day it has been elected, it has flaunted public opinion. Election 
promises were based around a promise to build Saskatchewan. 
We had expensive and irresponsible programs brought in on the 
eve of the election — the housing program. As soon as the 
election was over this government began to cut in the . . . And 
since the December election, one of the main goals of this 
government seems to be to avoid any kind of legislative 
scrutiny. That lay behind the reorganization Bill which we 
opposed in December. That lay behind this government’s desire 
to avoid any kind of legislative scrutiny or any kind of 
accountability; lay behind the failure to call a legislative session 
in March. It’s the first time in the province’s history that we 
have not had a legislative session in the four months — or, for 
that matter, the five months — following January 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I believe the member for Yorkton wishes to 
introduce some students. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
this afternoon to introduce some students, and this is rather 
unique because they are not from the province of Saskatchewan. 
They are a group of students, grade 6, from the Major Pratt 
School in Russell, Manitoba. And I would like to introduce 
through you, Mr. Speaker, to all members of the Assembly 
these students that are visiting our Assembly today. And of 
course the fact that they are from outside our province there’s 
an extra warm welcome for them to be here. 
 
I would ask that . . . Well actually the teachers that are with 
them today is Wayne Dunham and Jan Shauer, and chaperons 
Linda Royal and Judy Preston, and their bus driver Alvin 
Fingas. So with that we appreciate very much you coming to 
our province to visit us. We hope you enjoy your stay in Regina 
and the tours that you will be taking this afternoon. So I would 
ask all members to please welcome these students to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

574 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the government has . . . the 
members opposite have sought to avoid both accountability and 
the force of public opinion since they’ve been elected. We have 
had no legislative session in the spring for the first time in the 
province’s history. For the first time I remember, we have had a 
budget announced, bit by bit, week by week, in a fashion 
designed to — clearly designed — to downplay the importance 
and the interest in the budget itself. 
 
The timing of the budget speech could not have been timed in a 
fashion designed more to avoid any sort of public interest. It 
came one day before the tax reform, about which I’ll say more 
later; two days before the NDP convention; and during that time 
of year when children are getting out of school, holidays are 
starting, and the public interest in their public affairs is at a low 
ebb. 
 
The desire to avoid any sort of public interest in what they’re 
doing certainly extended to the minister’s delivery, as my 
colleague from Regina North East so aptly illustrated. I have 
never seen . . . Finance speeches are traditionally a 
government’s opportunity to tell the public what it is doing to 
outline their program and to try and attract interest and support 
— normally done with as much fanfare as the government can 
justify. 
 
(1215) 
 
We had a minister who is capable on occasion of a decent 
delivery of a speech, read it in a monotone, read it, and literally 
read it in an apologetic tone as my colleague indicated, and 
done with a desire to avoid not only interest for the public but 
almost a desire to discourage any sort of applause from his own 
member. And in that he was very successful. I have never seen 
a budget speech delivered with as little applause or enthusiasm 
from government members as we saw on Wednesday. 
 
I say to the members opposite though, that you haven’t been 
entirely successful in avoiding public attention. You have 
attracted a good deal of public attention. Throughout this 
province there’s a sense of outrage which members, if they 
haven’t felt . . . If the member from Esterhazy isn’t aware of the 
outrage that your activities have attracted, then I say you’d 
better get back to your riding and spend some time there. 
 
The public of Saskatchewan are outraged at what you have 
done, and if you don’t know that now you’re going to learn that 
at the time of the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It is interesting to look at where the budget 
cuts have come, and where they aren’t. In the area of human 
resources — whatever that may encompass 

now — the area of human resources designed, as the Premier 
once said, to assist and develop the Saskatchewan families. The 
area of human resources has experienced a 27 per cent cut in 
funding. 
 
Virtually every subvote in the area of human resources is down, 
some of them very substantially. Women’s services — and I 
take these in no particular order — the funding is frozen, which 
represents a reduction. In real terms, the staff is reduced by 45 
per cent. 
 
Youth services. All the ballyhoo which the Premier and 
members opposite have said about the need to assist youth 
shows itself up in a staff cut of 66 per cent and a funding cut of 
38 per cent. That’s the assistance which this government lends, 
by and large, to youth who are experiencing difficulty. 
 
Not to leave the elderly aside, however, having hit the women 
and children, and not about to leave the elderly alone, senior 
services grants in the human resource department have been cut 
by 31 per cent. 
 
With respect to Labour, I won’t go through it item by item. I 
won’t go through the Labour item by item. Suffice it to say that 
every subvote which traditionally was in the Department of 
Labour, with one exception, is reduced very substantially. The 
one anomaly is workers’ advocates. If the Minister of Human 
Resources can tear himself away from charming such groups as 
the National Council of woman, if you think you can tear 
yourself away from bathing them in charm and good wit, 
perhaps you might prepare a speech and tell us what you think 
is going to be the future of this government’s services to 
working people after this budget. It was bad enough before. 
 
The one good thing that I said about the minister when he was 
appointed was he couldn't conceivably be as bad a minister of 
labour as his predecessor. I was wrong. He has actually been 
much worse. 
 
Another area that was cut was the arts and culture. And here the 
cuts are very substantial, and I think they’re going to be very 
damaging. 
 
Archives has had their funding cut by 24 per cent. That’s an 
area, Mr. Speaker, which we cannot make up. To the extent that 
we lose historical documents, they’re gone, and they’re gone for 
good. We may rebuild the roads, we may rebuild the buildings, 
but we cannot replace our history if we lose the tangible written 
evidence of our history. 
 
The arts board has had their funding reduced by 36 per cent. 
Indeed, in the area of Parks and Culture, all of the grants to 
third parties have been reduced. This department has 34 
subvotes; 14 of them are administrative in nature. They’re up — 
up by 11 per cent. The grants to third parties in Parks and 
Culture are down by an average of 41 per cent. 
 
And I think that shows the priority which this government has, 
and which it gives to groups which have in the past worked in 
partnership with the government which has provided funding, 
with the communities which have 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

575 
 

provided volunteer labour, to build a better Saskatchewan. 
 
I also want to register a note of complaint with respect to the 
cuts to the Provincial Auditor’s office. I was aghast yesterday 
when the pages began to deliver the Provincial Auditor’s report. 
That is about 10 times the size of any previous Provincial 
Auditor’s report. I couldn’t believe that that’s what it was until I 
got my copy. 
 
Clearly there is a very serious breakdown in this government’s 
ability to manage public affairs. Notwithstanding the Provincial 
Auditor’s complaints, and I’m not sure quite how the member 
from Kindersley is going to castigate this legislative officer, 
having described the Legislative Counsel as an NDP — I 
believe was your term — I’m not quite sure how you’re going 
to describe the Provincial Auditor. I suppose you may call him 
petty or cheap. That’s been some of your past comments with 
respect to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Provincial Auditor’s budget has been cut by 8 per cent. He 
is correct in saying he is not able to adequately do his job with 
his existing staff. An 8 per cent cut isn’t going to make it any 
easier. And this again is an intentional effort by the government 
opposite to avoid accountability and to avoid legislative 
scrutiny. 
 
Time doesn’t permit me to touch upon the subjects raised by the 
Provincial Auditor. I just want to mention one in passing. It was 
alluded to by the member from Regina North East and that’s the 
area of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
This corporation is going to make a vital area of government 
almost impossible for this legislature to scrutinize. 
 
The Crown corporation, as an intentional matter, has not 
functioned effectively since you people took office. You are 
now two and three years behind in your examination of Crown 
Corporations’ reports. It’s almost inconceivable, given your 
lack of interest, that that committee will ever do an adequate job 
until you’re voted out of office. The only opportunity which we 
now have to scrutinize government spending, a key area, 
government spending on personal property, is in that 
corporation. It will not come before the Legislative Assembly, 
as I understand it. The individual subvotes will, but I will bet 
we’re going to have some difficulty finding out from the 
individual ministers very much about the property management 
corporation. 
 
It is obvious that the funding of the property management 
corporation is being used to jack around the figures. I want to 
give you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Cooking the books is 
really too mild a term; creative accounting’s coming closer. Let 
me just give you an example of how the figures are doctored to 
achieve a given cosmetic result. 
 
The Provincial Secretary, which has long had a very narrow 
responsibility, now has some 17 positions, carries as its share of 
the cost of the property management corporation 1.4 million. 
On the very next page, Public Service Commission, which has 
99 employees, carries a third of that, 400,000. Clearly you are 
jacking around with the figures. Clearly you want to give the 
appearance 

of spending less on the public service, the administration, and 
you put it somewhere where you think that nobody is going to 
have any interest in what the Provincial Secretary spends. 
 
The results of the property management corporation, Mr. 
Speaker, are worse than what we feared they would be. It is 
going to be almost impossible to scrutinize this government’s 
expenditures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it might be worthwhile to look for a moment at 
what’s up. If these are some of the areas that are down — 
there’re only some — let’s look at what’s up. Well, I think to 
the surprise of no one who has watched this government operate 
over the last six years, Executive Council expenditures for 
program services are up by 12 per cent. I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government has attempted to hide that fact by 
taking out of the Executive Council vote the subvote which 
traditionally carried the cost of the ministers’ offices. You 
won’t’ find that in there now. You find it spread out in each 
single department. That, I think, is clearly an effort to avoid 
putting in one column what you’re spending on the ministers’ 
offices. 
 
This government, as was correctly stated by the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, pays the highest level of salaries to its 
ministerial staff and has the largest staff of any provincial 
government in Canada. He said that, and that’s correct. In an 
attempt to hide that, you take out of the Executive Council vote 
the expenditures on ministers’ offices. If you adjust the figure 
for that, the spending by the Executive Council is up 12 per 
cent. And clearly those needs are there. 
 
I recognize that the likes of Paul Schoenhals and Larry 
Birkbeck need a substantial increase in their living allowance 
— Gordon Dirks, another one — far more deserving, far more 
deserving than the women’s Transition House, which had its 
funding cut; the mental health club, which had its funding cut 
and had to partially close — a club for mental patients, for 
mental people; then the By Ourselves, which had its grants cut; 
the Voice of the Handicapped . . . I understand how much 
needier the like of Paul Schoenhals and Larry Birkbeck are than 
some of those NGOs (non-governmental organizations). 
 
The member from Nipawin gave us an interesting lecture on the 
history of health care in the province — spellbinding. He might 
have pointed out that the spending in MCIC is up 6 per cent. 
That’s by and large what the docs get. So you’ve taken care of 
the docs. You’ve given them a 6 per cent increase. Other areas, 
such as funding for the mental health association, is down. You 
may think that’s fair; members on this side do not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You can go through this budget item by 
item. The increases in spending are by and large to the affluent 
and the friends of the Conservative Party, and the cuts are to 
those who can least afford it. You have hit those who are least 
able to withstand it. 
 
Justice is an interesting department to look at. This is a 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

576 
 

department which has undergone a good deal of privatization. 
And indeed the rumours are it’s going to undergo a good deal 
more before it’s finished. Staffing is down by 24 per cent, but 
was there any saving? Ah, no. Spending is up by 17 per cent. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, it is going to cost more to have 
prosecutions done through the private bar than it will through 
Crown attorneys. The process of abolishing Crown attorneys’ 
positions, as you have abolished the entire office in Moose Jaw, 
is going to cost the province of Saskatchewan a lot more. No 
one pretends that you can hire prosecutors from the private bar 
as cheaply as you can hire the employees in the department. 
Every . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you are showing us. 
The figures are right here. The Minister of Finance says, we’ll 
show you. You’ve done that. Your staffing is down by 24 per 
cent; the cost of running this department is up by 17 per cent. 
That’s the benefit of privatization. 
 
Court services. If you want another example, court services 
have six fewer staff, but the spending’s up by 14 per cent. 
 
Another area that’s up . . . the award for the highest increase 
goes to, guess what? — servicing the debt. By far and away the 
highest increase is the servicing of debt. It’s up by a 
mind-boggling 43 per cent over last year. 
 
(1230) 
 
Indeed, there are only three departments which now spend more 
than the cost of servicing our debt: Health, Education, and 
Social Services. And by next year the debt will be in number 
two place, because it will exceed what we spend on social 
services. It’s just a little behind it this year. Next year we will 
be spending more on the banks and the bond dealers and the 
brokers than we are on the poor and the injured in this province. 
 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is up 94 per cent, and that’s 
almost entirely due to a wholly irresponsible election promise 
for which you have been rightly castigated. The program should 
have been targeted to those who need it. The sight of mental 
health clubs which are closing; women’s transition houses 
which are able to accept fewer battered women, on one hand, 
and Jacuzzis and saunas for the wealthy being paid for out of 
tax funds, on the other, is a sickening sight. 
 
I want to spend a moment talking about privatization. I listened 
with interest to the member from Regina North East describe 
the benefits of privatizing Saskoil. It came to my attention 
because I read an article in the Financial Times of about a 
month ago, describing the privatization of Rolls Royce. There 
were many people, some of them hard-line capitalists, who said 
at the time the shares in Rolls Royce were given to the benefit 
. . . to the public, that you can’t make capitalists out of people 
by giving them something. It’s not the process by which private 
wealth is acquired or managed. At any rate, that’s what was 
done. 
 
Now some 82 per cent of Rolls Royce is owned by foreigners. 
The process was that the assets were sold at less than their cost, 
then sold by the British public to pay 

for a vacation, or whatever; bought by shrewd Japanese and 
Germans. They now own Rolls Royce. The British no longer 
own the pride of the British transportation industry. 
 
And that’s happened in Saskatchewan. That’s precisely what 
happened with Saskoil. Saskoil was sold at a very substantial 
discount to its book value. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not what you said. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That is indeed exactly what we said: you’re 
selling those assets for a lot less than they’re worth. I know the 
quizzical looks of the ministers opposite because you have been 
embarrassed by what’s happened to the Saskoil shares. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The truth of the matter is that speculation 
is neither illegal, immoral, nor is it fattening for most peoples’ 
pocket books. Those who speculated on Saskoil shares got 
burnt, as they so often do. That doesn’t alter the fact that even at 
today’s reduced price, Saskoil’s shares are selling at a 30 per 
cent discount to that company’s book value. They are still a 
bargain, even at today’s price. 
 
What has happened, as my colleague so ably pointed out, is that 
that asset has been sold for far less than it was worth. 
Eighty-two per cent of that company was owned by 
Saskatchewan people. After the privatization 18 months ago, 
now the figure is down to 56 per cent. After the new issue of 
shares, that’ll be down to 43 per cent. 
 
I want to spend a moment as well on tax reform, and I will be 
brief on the matter of tax reform. But I want to spend a moment 
on tax reform. Listening to the minister today describe tax 
reform, one would assume that this is a tax cut. Anybody who 
believes that with the serious deficit problems the national 
government faces we’re actually going to have a tax cut, would 
believe anything. A tax cut with a budget almost one-third of 
which is borrowed, a tax cut is impossible. The only issue with 
respect to tax reform is not whether or not there’s a cut. There 
will be no such thing for some considerable period of time. All 
we might achieve is a greater degree of fairness. And that’s the 
issue — not, have we achieved tax cuts? It’s impossible. But 
have we achieved a greater degree of fairness? 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. What we have done is to 
reduce income taxes which, with many faults, and there are 
many, is progressive and based on ability to pay. We have taken 
a tax load off of that; we have put it on to sales tax, which is not 
based on ability to pay, which is a consumption tax, and which 
is borne inordinately by low income people. That’s not my idea 
of tax fairness or tax reform, to reduce income taxes, which are 
borne, by and large, by those able to pay and added to sales tax, 
which is borne inordinately by lower income people. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the tax reform is a regressive step. It is 
less fair than it used to. A greater percentage of taxes are going 
to be borne by people with lower incomes, and that’s not a 
particular measure, Mr. Speaker, which 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

577 
 

I intend to endorse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, it’s going 
to be endorsed by the Canadian public when it is understood. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, this government . . . there’s 
an endless amount one can say about this government, all of it 
critical. Unfortunately time is not limitless. Others want to get 
into this debate. I think it’s obvious. Mr. Speaker, that I will be 
voting for the amendment and against the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I again count it a privilege and an 
honour to rise and speak in this Assembly, this time to speak in 
support of the budget delivered on June 17, 1987 by the Hon. 
Minister of Finance. 
 
I want to begin my speech today by acknowledging the fact that 
these are not easy times for the individuals and the families of 
Saskatchewan. There are many actions being taken by your 
government that all of us would be more than happy to avoid. I 
have no doubt that in many cases it would be more politically 
expedient if we did. However Mr. Speaker, make no mistake 
that as the government elected on October 20 of last year, the 
people of this great province fully expect us to carry out their 
demands for a Saskatchewan that is ready to meet the future. 
The people of Saskatchewan are insisting that the government 
expenditures be reduced to manageable levels. They are also 
insisting that government must be responsive to the changing 
needs of society, and that priorities must be revised to meet 
those needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are also insisting that 
government must provide the opportunities for the 
diversification of our economy. As important, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people also want their government to continue 
providing the best health care and education in the country, and 
protection again difficulties over which they have no control. 
 
As I listened closely to the Hon. Minister of Finance as he 
delivered the budget speech, it was clearly evident to me that 
the direction our government has taken will undoubtedly meet 
the demands of Saskatchewan people. Throughout the 
restructuring processes that took place prior to the budget 
delivery, I am proud that our PC government has instituted 
great measures of fairness and compassion when dealing with 
the need for restraint. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said in my maiden speech to this Assembly, 
the leadership of Premier Grant Devine has been one of the 
main strengths of our government since its election in 1982. It 
is through his insistence that fairness and compassion have been 
considered regarding all aspects of the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is experiencing very difficult 
economic conditions. The people of my constituency, the 

Moosomin constituency, are fully aware of what it means to 
have their incomes slashed. Because of the protectionist 
attitudes of world powers, my neighbours and the neighbours of 
many of my colleagues have been forced to reassess their 
personal budgets and expectations. Because they have already 
faced this situation first hand, Mr. Speaker, they have 
encouraged and are supporting our government’s attempts to 
reduce the size of government and increase it efficiency. As 
difficult as it may be, there is no doubt that only an 
irresponsible and foolish government would entertain the idea 
that one could do otherwise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — As your government, Mr. Speaker, we have come 
to accept the fact that we can no longer totally rely on our 
agricultural sector and our resource base to provide an ever 
increasing number of social programs and services that give rise 
to ever increasing expectations. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Toth: — We all know, Mr. Speaker, that our resource 
revenues have dropped 350 million in the past fiscal year, due 
of course to the glut of oil and potash on the world markets. The 
Health minister has pointed out many times that revenues from 
sales tax and personal income taxes will not be enough to cover 
health care level expenses alone. 
 
For the next few minutes, Mr. Speaker, I want to concentrate on 
our health care system, one of the best systems there is in the 
world. Unfortunately, over the years our system has been 
allowed to evolve with a number of itinerant faults. Over the 
past five years these faults have become increasingly apparent 
as cost continued to escalate. The fact is, your PC government 
has increased spending on health care more over the past five 
years than any previous Saskatchewan government or any other 
western province. 
 
While we have been able to make a number of improvement 
such as in the areas of ambulance services and home care, the 
time has come for a more thorough overhaul that addresses 
those areas that create a particular drain on limited funds, 
simply because of cost effectiveness was never built in from the 
beginning. 
 
One such area is the prescription drug plan. The cost of the 
program would rise to 125 million by 1990, 7009 per cent more 
than in its initial year. Clearly, as your government, we feel a 
responsibility to bring the costs of the drug plan under control. 
In doing so, difficult choice shave had to be made, but 
controlling costs has not been our sole concern. Each decision 
regarding the drug plan has been made with consideration of 
our deepest concern, which is to protect those most in need 
without placing them under undue financial stress. 
 
The new Saskatchewan drug plan does require many more able 
consumers to accept a greater share of the cost of drugs through 
a system of deductible levels. But many exceptions have been 
made. For instance, in recognition of the special circumstances 
of many senior citizens, a 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

578 
 

significantly lower deductible level has been established for 
single seniors and senior families. Nor will there be any change 
in the drug plan for social assistance or residents of special care 
homes. Still other exemptions have been made for people 
registered under special programs such as those for renal 
disease, cystic fibrosis, and paraplegia. And special coverage 
for insulin and urine test agents for diabetics will also continue 
as before — special coverage that a constituent coming into my 
office the other day addressed and I was able to assure her that 
she would be covered and that she wouldn’t have to carry the 
extra burden. 
 
Although the changes to the drug plan are fundamental ones, 
Saskatchewan will still have an equitable and effective means 
of protection relating to the cost of prescription drugs. In fact, 
our drug plan is still equivalent to the most comprehensive plan 
in Canada. Only two other provinces, B.C. and Manitoba, have 
universal plans. In B.C., families pay a $275 deductible, as 
opposed to the $125 they will pay under Saskatchewan’s plan. 
In Manitoba, both senior families and single seniors pay a $75 
deductible, whereas in Saskatchewan, the greater need of single 
seniors is recognized and they will only pay a $50 deductible. 
 
(1245) 
 
Another area of health care in serious need of revision was the 
Saskatchewan dental plan. Studies indicate that people retain 
the good health habits they acquire as children, and statistics 
show that since the dental plan was introduced in ’77, the 
incidence of dental problems has markedly declined in children 
over 13 years of age. This adolescent group has therefore 
already received the most significant benefit of the plan, which 
is the establishment of lifelong dental health habits. Because we 
are in a time when difficult choices are necessary, if we are to 
remain able to meet our most pressing youth needs, your 
government chose to redirect resources to meet what has been 
described as the number one problem facing adolescents today 
— the threat of alcohol and drug abuse. 
 
Consequently, the dental plan will no longer be available for 
children over 14 years of age. However, we must remember that 
all children from the ages of 5 to 13 will continue to receive full 
coverage. The government is committed to ensuring that 
everyone in the province has reasonable access to good dental 
services. 
 
Without the competition from former school visit dental 
program, dentists will undoubtedly expand their services to 
meet the demand, especially in rural Saskatchewan, an area I 
represent. 
 
However due to the lack of alternate dental services available to 
northern residents, and in keeping with our goal of protecting 
those with the greatest need, the dental plan will continue to 
serve children who live in the northern health region as it has in 
the past. 
 
All such changes, and others in the planning stages, to the 
province’s health care system will be closely monitored to 
ensure that the health needs of the people of Saskatchewan 
continue to be met in the most efficient, 

effective manner possible. 
 
As a government we remain resolute to Saskatchewan’s 
interests, and the health of its citizens continues to be among 
our highest priorities and will remain so as we work toward the 
development of a health care system which is dynamic, 
compassionate, and in tune with the realities of the 1990s. 
 
Recently, the Government of Saskatchewan also announced 
significant changes to the province’s education system. Key 
among these changes were the amalgamation of the departments 
of Advanced Education and Education, and the combining of 
our four technical institutes and our regional community 
colleges under one umbrella, the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology. 
 
These changes are part of a larger plan to bring our education 
system up to date to meet the needs of a rapidly changing 
society that is currently undergoing a technological revolution 
the likes of which we have never seen. 
 
At the same time, our plan addresses the need to prepare people 
of all ages for the economic realities we face as we move from a 
vulnerable economic base, subject to the cyclical downturns of 
world prices of our resources and commodities, toward a more 
diversified, thus stabler, economy. 
 
The process of updating our education system began with a 
thorough review involving consultation with all participants of 
the province’s K to 12 system. In 1984 that review resulted in a 
visionary document called Directions, which lays out a 10-year 
plan to bring about necessary changes while maintaining the 
stability and previous growth and development of our system of 
elementary and secondary education. The establishment of the 
$150 million education development fund provides for the 
financial resources to carry out this strategy. These changes to 
our education system were long overdue. 
 
Although Saskatchewan has a good system of education, Mr. 
Speaker, there were many indications that the needs of students 
of all ages were not being met. Our children and young people 
were not being provided with the skills needed to adapt to a 
society which is engulfed in the most rapid social and 
technological changes the world has ever known. 
 
Children and adolescents were not being prepared to take their 
place in the constantly evolving labour force. And in the case of 
adult education, Mr. Speaker, our technical institutes whose 
purpose is to train people for employment, were not keeping 
pace with the demands of the information age and a 
knowledgeable-based rather than a resource-based economy. 
 
Our adult education system came into being 30 years ago 
during the post-war boom years, and many of its features and 
programs, were designed for the conditions of the time. The 
system of technical institutes and community 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

579 
 

colleges has burgeoned over the past 30 years to a point where 
it was replete with duplications in human and financial 
resources, resulting in a great deal of waste — waste 
Saskatchewan can ill afford, as we face some of the toughest 
economic and social challenges in this decade. 
 
The combining of the four technical institutes and the regional 
community colleges into one institution will not only eliminate 
obsolete aspects of the system, but it will allow for the areas of 
specialization and expertise so that we can build on our 
strengths at each campus, thus enabling Saskatchewan’s 
work-force and training to stay abreast of the new 
developments. 
 
A similar rationale, Mr. Speaker, applies to the amalgamation 
of the Departments of Education and Advanced Education into 
one department. This initiative allows for the sharing of 
resources between the two departments, as well as the 
continuous flow of information between them. With these 
improved conditions, communications, the people of 
Saskatchewan can be assured of a total education system — one 
that provides continuity from the early years through to 
maturity. While it is clear that these changes were necessary, 
and that immediate action was needed, our government has 
remained continually aware of its responsibility to protect our 
people, and their ability to take advantage of opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the belief of our government that strong social 
institutions provide the basis upon which the people of 
Saskatchewan can take advantage of economic opportunities to 
create new wealth. With that belief in mind, every effort is 
being made to ensure that for those students presently enrolled 
in courses at the four technical institutes and the regional 
community colleges, disruption in their studies will be minimal. 
 
We believe that these changes to our education system bode 
well for the future, allow us to change with changing times, 
provide for specialization in areas of growth and expertise, and 
speed up the decision-making process to keep pace with the 
demands that will be placed on the system, now and into the 
21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to make a few observations 
regarding the position of those who disagree with this budget. I 
say that they are entitled to their disagreement, and they have an 
obligation across the way to watch-dog our government and to 
ensure we are being as effective as possible. But, Mr. Speaker, 
hurled insults and nonsensical rhetoric is neither their obligation 
nor their right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — The other day we had the privilege of inviting a 
number of guests to attend the Assembly for the presentation of 
the budget. And as my guests were speaking as we left the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, they acknowledged the insults coming 
from the opposite side of the House and were thoroughly 
appalled at the actions of members of this House. 
 
If there is disagreement with our policies, there is an obligation 
to provide creative, realistic, and meaningful alternatives. I 
suggest that the members 

opposite have not done that. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they admit 
that they have not kept up. 
 
As an example, in a recent edition of the Commonwealth, the 
NDP admit that they have no agricultural policy. But the writer 
notes that if they develop one, it should be used to attack the 
government. Now there is a problem in that kind of thinking, 
Mr. Speaker, and I suggest it is the mark of an ineffective and 
perhaps irresponsible opposition. 
 
Without an agricultural policy, they have the audacity to stand 
in this House and condemn every effort to assist farm families. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re all aware of the efforts that have been 
put into assisting farm families of this province. 
 
As a member representing a constituency with a strong rural 
base, with a great farming economy, I am very aware of the 
needs that individuals have as young farmers, as small farmers, 
as large farmers, and even as business men in my community 
and in my constituency. They know what it is like to feel the 
pinch. They know what it is like to be in need. And over the 
past five years this government has endeavoured to the best of 
its ability to reach out and to meet those needs and to help 
during difficult times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — But I also acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that as a 
business person, as a farmer, that as an individual, we all have a 
responsibility — we all have a responsibility to do our part. 
And that’s what I find from most of the people I talk to, that 
people recognize that individuals have to carry out their 
responsibility and accept their responsibility. And that’s why I 
say today that this government is accepting its responsibility. 
It’s accepting the responsibility of reaching out and meeting the 
needs of individuals and looking ahead to the future, not just 
acting in the past, and not just living in the past. 
 
Many people want alternatives, and they want thoughtful 
approaches to these difficult questions. They also asked me 
many times: isn’t there a possibility that all parties could 
co-operate in resolving serious challenges? I challenge the 
members opposite that we, as a government, and as 
representatives of this province, could work together to better 
the conditions of this province — to better the government of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — And indeed to create a belief and an 
understanding in the individuals that have elected us that we are 
indeed doing our best. And I don’t think there is anyone out 
there doesn’t expect anything more than the best that we are 
willing to offer. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 
Finance has taken that thoughtful approach and delivered a 
budget that all members of this House will join in supporting. 
 
Today it is with great pleasure that I stand here in support of the 
budget, that I stand here and back the Minister of Finance in 
making the difficult decisions he had to make and we, as a 
government, had to make in downsizing and in making sure that 
we were being fiscally responsible. Because only good, 
common-sense people and people 
  



 
June 19, 1987 

580 
 

with a business sense will realize that you have to be fiscally 
responsible. Otherwise you don’t continue to operate as a 
business person, as a farmer, as an individual who is a 
responsible person. 
 
It is with real pleasure this afternoon, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order! Order! Order! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite really knew 
what fiscal responsibility was, they would realize that what we 
are doing, and the objectives we are trying to meet, is the right 
thing. We are doing the right thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — And so I say to you today, I am proud to 
represent the constituency of Moosomin, and to indeed work 
with this government and with my colleagues to reach and to 
look into the future and to build for the future so that we indeed 
can offer to the people of Saskatchewan, not only to my 
children — my children which are . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order, order, order! I’d 
like the member from . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, right after I ask leave to 
adjourn debate, I’d like to adjourn the House. I move this House 
do now adjourn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Point of 
order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, we seem 
to be having that problem of acoustics in here again. I believe 
the member from Moose Jaw has been recognized and has the 
floor, if you will support me in that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I was having a problem with acoustics 
as well. I was having a problem with acoustics as well. I don’t 
know how the member can be recognized when he’s not in his 
chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please! . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Your light isn’t on . . . I’m going to 
give you the opportunity to speak but your light isn’t on. I’m on 
my feet. Okay . . . Okay . . .I recognize the member for Regina 
North East. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — With all due respect, Mr. Speaker, you 
stood after the member from Moose Jaw North stood, and you 
recognized the member from Moose Jaw North. Then when you 
had recognized the member for Moose Jaw North, you turned to 
the House Leader from the government and you cut off the 
member from Moose Jaw North. I say he has the right to raise 
the point he wants to make, at this point, before that member 
could say what he could say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is well taken. I believe 

. . . the little problem we actually face is the clock; that’s about 
all that’s causing this. It’s not a big issue. It’s true, I did 
recognize the member for Regina North . . . So, if he would like 
to say two words, I suppose I’ll allow it. Go ahead. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, noting the time, I would beg leave 
to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:03 p.m. 


	ORAL QUESTIONS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS

