













































August 13, 1987 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 13, 1987 

 

1751 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure to 

introduce to you, and to the members of the Assembly, some 

citizens from the town of Davidson. They are in here today 

over matters pertaining to the town, and I’d like to introduce 

you to them. They are sitting up in the Speaker’s gallery: 

Mayor, Milan Puckett; councillor, Leon Al-Katib; 

administrator, Gary Edom; and a business man, Steve Gust. 

Would you stand. And I ask all members to welcome them to 

the legislature. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce, at 

least to all of the new members, and certainly the people in 

the viewing audience and the people in the gallery, our 

agent-general, Saskatchewan’s agent-general in London. 

 

He’s behind the bar at the back here, Mr. Paul Rousseau, and 

he’s back visiting us here in Saskatchewan for a few days. I 

would invite all members, and indeed all people who have an 

interest in those things that are going on in the U.K., to take 

the time to visit with him, and I would ask all members to 

join with me in saying “hi” to Paul. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

have the pleasure of introducing, in your gallery, sir, three 

young people from France who are spending the month of 

August in Canada, in Regina, with host families, as part of a 

series of visitations to the Assembly over the last little while. 

 

These three young people are among the more than 40 who 

are in Saskatchewan this summer on a visit organized and 

sponsored by Nacel. They are Benoit Levesque, Jean 

Christophe Bertin, Antoine Sicot. Perhaps they could just 

simply stand to get acknowledged. Are they there? There 

they are. Good. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And they are accompanied by their 

chaperons, Jeanine Millane and Vincent Cossan. If they 

would also stand; there they are. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — As well as several members of the host 

families. 

 

So, Monsieur le président, à tous de nos amis de la langue 

française, je vous souhaite bienvenue à Régina. 

 

How do you like that? 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Aid in Meeting Drug Needs 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, last Thursday in the 

legislature, the Premier of this province promised a plan to 

help people facing catastrophic drug costs. The Premier, and 

I quote, told the House that: 

 

. . . that will be announced, I would expect, in the next two or 

three days, or surely within a week. 

 

this morning a medical doctor from Ile-a-la-Crosse says the 

fact that one of his patients had stopped taking medication 

for a heart condition, because he couldn’t afford the $130 a 

month for drugs, may have contributed to his death. 

 

Mr. Minister of Health, why can’t you keep your 

commitments to the people of our province? And when are 

you finally going to understand the seriousness of this 

problem, and act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Minister, we clearly do 

understand the seriousness of the circumstances surrounding 

when someone has a particular circumstance in drug costs, or 

any other problems that can come forward in their health, in 

their public health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member makes reference to the 

circumstance around the death of an individual in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse recently, and suggests, I believe, as did the 

CBC, that that death was a direct result of the new drug plan, 

I believe is what the member’s saying. And what I . . . Mr. 

Speaker, let’s suffice it to say that when a person . . . you 

know when there’s a death in the family, whatever, there can 

be statements, you know, born of grief, let’s say, that can 

come out that are unfortunate. 

 

But I will say to the House today, Mr. Speaker, that the death 

of this gentleman, Mr. Speaker - I’ll say to the House and all 

members of the public - was not related to the changes in the 

drug plan. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Health Minister, how long are sick 

people going to have to wait in this province for you to get 

your act together? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — We’ve heard about the death of a man in 

northern Saskatchewan, which came after he stopped taking 

his medication. And I want to talk to you about another 

example. A man by the name of Ross Reaney from 

Saskatoon has a serious heart condition. He has diabetes and 

requires nine medications a day, and he’s run out of a 

number of his prescription drugs. Are you aware that the 

situation is so serious that his church, the Westgate Alliance 

Church, ahs now started paying for those prescriptions? 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1752 

 

The churches have already been forced into the good bank 

business because of your cuts to social assistance. And are 

you now saying and now expecting churches to help finance 

the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan? Is that what you’re 

up to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have an 

example. The member once again brings forward individual 

cases and takes particular glee, sort of thing, in raising cases 

like that to prove a political point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the facts surrounding the case in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, the facts surrounding the case in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse are the following. Since May 7 of 1987, Mr. 

Morin has been receiving supplementary health services 

based on a nomination for benefits made by the Department 

of Social Services. He was provided with plan I drug 

coverage, which means that all of his prescription needs are 

covered at a cost of $2 per prescription. 

 

Thus the first point of clarification that needs to be made is 

that Mr. Morin had been eligible since May 7 to receive all 

of his prescriptions at $2 per prescription. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on July 3 Mr. Morin’s physician wrote to the 

prescription drug plan requesting that Mr. Morin be 

approved for plan II drug coverage, which would mean that 

he would be eligible to receive drugs covered by the drug 

plan at no charge whatever. 

 

Mr. Morin was not eligible for plan II coverage, since this 

particular benefit has been designed to assist individuals with 

long-term social assistance needs, and Mr. Morin’s 

nomination was for less than four months. 

 

On July 13 we advised the attending physician, with a copy 

to Mr. Morin, that while he was not presently eligible for 

Plan II benefits, his Plan I coverage remained effective, and 

he was eligible to receive his drugs at $2 per prescription. 

 

On July 20 the attending physician wrote again outlining the 

list of drugs required by Mr. Morin, of which there were five. 

On July 28 the drug plan again advised the attending 

physician and Mr. Morin, by copy of the letter, that all of his 

drugs were listed in the formulary and, therefore, available at 

$2 per prescription. No further correspondence has been 

received since that date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In summary, Mr. Morin has been eligible since May 7 to 

receive all of his drug needs at a cost of $2 per prescription. 

The changes to the prescription drug plan on July 1 had no 

impact on this. Since Plan I and Plan II benefits were not 

affected in any way by the change in the drug plan, which 

came into effect on July 1, all of the drugs needed by Mr. 

Morin have been available to him at a maximum cost of $10 

per month. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’re 

confident enough of the facts you just gave us to table the 

document you read from. I ask you: will you table that? 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, what I have in front of 

me is a briefing note with scribblings on it. I’m very 

confident, Mr. Speaker, in the facts as I presented them here, 

and they’ll be recorded in Hansard, as the member well 

knows, and he’ll have access to them and whatever. But the 

facts as I have presented them here, I am confident in. Mr. 

Speaker, those are the facts surrounding this case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s one other point that must be made here. 

And the point is the following: this was clearly an 

unsubstantiated case, unsubstantiated - which a particular 

media outlet decided to carry on the air waves of the 

province without substantiation, and further, which a 

member of this Legislative Assembly decided should carry 

as well - based on unsubstantiated facts. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Health Minister, people in this 

province have been waiting for months for you to bring in a 

program for people who have to deal with catastrophic drug 

problems, and you haven’t yet answered the question on 

when that program’s going to be introduced. 

 

I have another example here. Last weekend I met with a 

senior citizen couple who have had to borrow over $200 

from their son to pay for their prescription drugs. Acts of 

charity from churches, and loans from relatives - that’s all 

people are left with with these cuts, Mr. Health Minister. 

When are you going to stop throwing money at the Peter 

Pocklingtons and your political hacks, and restore the 

prescription drug plan to this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

circumstances surrounding some unique cases - and we have 

said that there will be, and there are, people being contacted 

as it relates to about 25 cases, Mr. Speaker . . . So I can make 

it very clear that these thousands of people that these 

members talk about - that these thousands of members - there 

are about 25 cases which have been deemed to be unique and 

would have onerous circumstances, a couple of which have 

been mentioned in the House prior by members opposite, one 

of which was brought to me, or maybe two of which were 

brought to me by the member from Saltcoats, from this side 

of the House. Those . . . There are about 25 who are being 

contacted today. Some may have been contacted yesterday, 

but certainly in these days right now, during this week, will 

be contacted as to their particular circumstance and what 

they may do to have their problem looked after. And that’s 

being looked after just now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary to the Minister of Health. I 

would appreciate it, and thousands of people of this province 

would appreciate it, Mr. Minister, if you would table your 

criteria in the legislature, or at least give us the plan. What 

are the criteria? People need to know. You shouldn’t be 

deciding 25 people are deserving of some sort of care when 

there may be hundreds of other examples. Table the criteria, 

and when can we have the information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member once again  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1753 

 

uses the term “thousands of people” in this kind of 

circumstance. I heard her say thousands of people. Despite 

. . . Even with the publicity surrounding the implementation 

of the new drug plan, and the invitation by the Premier and 

by myself on many occasions, and by the publicity 

surrounding the questions raised - legitimately raised by the 

members opposite - even with that, there have been, I 

believe, less than 200 requests that have come forward. 

Okay. 

 

There are about 25 of those, I’m informed, that are deemed 

to be serious circumstances - serious circumstances. Mr. 

Speaker, there are many variables involved in this. The cost 

of drugs, the very definition, the very definition of the term 

“unique” would suggest that no two cases are alike. The 

members opposite would say, well is it more than $100, 

more than $400, more than $200 per month? Is it the income 

of the person, or the family . . . all of those things. All of 

those kinds of things can be looked at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I will say to the House, as we have said to 

the House before, and as is the case in the province of 

Manitoba to the east of us, no one, no one will be . . . no one 

will suffer as a result of the new drug plan. Mr. Speaker, no 

one will suffer as a result of the new drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 

question to the Minister of Health. The Minister of Health 

disputes the statement made by the Health critic on our side 

of the House that hundreds of Saskatchewan people are 

waiting for the criteria with respect . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Read Hansard. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Hundreds or thousands - Hansard will 

show which it is; for the purposes of my question it doesn’t 

matter - to which the Minister of Health seeks to diminish 

that to 25. I want to tell the Hon. Minister of Health, I don’t 

care if it’s 25 or one; it’s one or 25 too many who have their 

. . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And my question to you, sir, is . . . as if 

one life was less important than a thousand, my question is 

this, to the Minister of Health. On August 6 your Premier 

told the House this: 

 

Finally, with respect to the specific announcement on 

the comprehensive program for people who have 

long-run or chronic drug needs, that will be announced, 

I would expect, in the next two or three days, or surely 

within a week. 

 

Dated August 6. That’s a week - right on. Why will you not 

table a written statement of guide-lines so that the Ross 

Reaneys of the world, and the many others like them - one or 

thousands - know exactly where they stand? How about 

doing that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, when I say 25, and the 

member says one or 25, when the determination is made . . . 

and you must understand, and the members must understand, 

the new plan came into effect July 1. Over the period of time, 

a very short period of time relatively speaking, a very short 

period of time, we have been looking at what might 

constitute a unique case - what will constitute a unique case; 

what is coming forward. Not thousands, Mr. Speaker, not 

thousands as they say, not thousands - tens, tens are seen to 

be a serious problem. Okay - tens. 

 

I have said, about 25 of those which have come forward to 

this point. There must be the flexibility. There must be for 

new circumstances which can arise in a family, new 

circumstances which can arise in terms of new drugs coming 

on, new drugs coming on to the scene. All of those kinds of 

criteria must be taken into consideration, as they are in the 

province of Manitoba; will be in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

I repeat once again. No one, no one will suffer as a result of 

the implementation of this new plan. Mr. Speaker, one more 

point. Mr. Speaker, one more point . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I believe the 

minister has made his point. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. The hon. 

member says that there are few numbers - few numbers of 

people which are affected. My question to the Minister of 

Health is very simple. Who is telling the House the absolute 

truth on the question of a detailed policy statement to look 

after these people? Is it the Premier who told the House one 

week ago that there would be a statement in writing? Or is it 

you, sir, who, by implication, is telling us that there will be 

no statement in writing and that whether people live or die 

will depend upon the good graces of you and your officials? 

Who’s telling the truth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have not said that 

there will be no statement in writing. Mr. Speaker, I have not 

said that there would be no statement. I didn’t say that. Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order, please. Order, 

please. Please allow the minister to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What I will say is this. The members 

opposite once again, they raise . . . the gentleman from 

Saskatoon a couple of times now. Today they came with 

great glee, I might add, and raised the question of the 

gentleman from Ile-a-la-Crosse and the unfortunate 

circumstances of that family. They did. They raised that 

because it suited their political points. Mr. Speaker, the fact 

is, in the case of the Ile-a-la-Crosse there was no dire 

circumstance, but they said there was, and they talked about 

like and death in Ile-a-la-Crosse. Mr. Speaker, the drug plan 

did not contribute to that, and I’ll stand by that. And they 

stand in this House for political benefit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1754 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary 

question to the Minister of Health. And my question, Mr. 

Speaker, as a supplementary, must be prefaced with a very 

brief statement. 

 

There was a day in this legislature when the word of a 

premier, regardless of the political stripe of that premier, was 

accepted by the people of Saskatchewan. My question to 

you, sir, is this: are you today modifying, amending, 

undermining the statement made by your Premier to which I 

alluded in the second supplementary that there would be a 

statement by today and no longer than today; is that your 

position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I am not today 

modifying or amending anything that our Premier has said. I 

am not today doing any of those things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said that unique circumstances are being 

looked after. Mr. Speaker, people - some of whom have been 

mentioned by the hon. member in his rhetoric about all of the 

dire circumstances . . . you heard him, I heard him, all 

members of the House heard him on other days. 

 

Some of those people are being looked after this day; I 

believe some of them may have been looked after yesterday; 

others will be looked after tomorrow, as quickly as we can 

contact them directly. Those things will be done, and there 

will be a statement to the House. If it’s possible, Mr. 

Speaker, the statement to the House - probably tomorrow. 

 

Fraser Institute Conference 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on August 4, I took 

notice of a question from the Leader of the Opposition 

relative to the Fraser Institute, Mr. Speaker, and the question 

was: how many people attended the conference sponsored by 

the Fraser Institute on behalf of government at government 

expense? 

 

And the suggestion was that the minister responsible for SGI 

was there; and the suggestion was that the secretary, 

principal secretary to the Premier was there; and the 

suggestion was that Tim Embury was there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who were there are as follows: Don 

Baron, ministerial assistant to the minister responsible for 

SGI; Bruce Evans - and he’s a ministerial assistant as well. 

 

An Hon. Member: — To who? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I forget. 

 

Bill Gibson, president and CEO of Crown Management 

Board; Jill Hilsden, vice-president to finance for SGI; Peter 

Holle, policy analyst, Saskatchewan Executive Council; 

Larry Little, president of Sask Housing Corporation; Paul 

Schoenhals, chairman of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, not the 10 or the 

12 as suggested by the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. 

Speaker, there are seven. 

Graham Walker, chairman of the board of Crown 

Management, was there at the expense of the conference as a 

speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You said he wasn’t there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I said he was there at the expense of 

the conference. 

 

Now in addition, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatchewan there 

were two people from the city of Regina: Doug Archer, 

councillor for the city of Regina, and a Neil Zapf, analyst 

review officer, city of Regina - and I don’t criticize them for 

that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That wasn’t included in the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It certainly was. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, in addition there was a Mark 

Stobbe, executive assistant to the member for Nutana, Mr. 

Speaker, and that in itself raises another question. Was that 

person there at public expense, Mr. Speaker, or out of his 

own pocket, or out of the NDP caucus, out of the 

communications allowance? Just how did that person get 

there? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Will the members to my right please be quiet, please. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I have a question to the Deputy Premier 

in the light of the answer which he has given. And my 

question is very simple, sir: is it correct to say that, given the 

numbers of people who attended at government expense - the 

ones that you know of for sure that went at government 

expense, seven at least - is it correct to say that the 

government has decided that, as a consequence, all of the 

Crown corporations of Saskatchewan are now candidates for 

the sell-off to their friends - big business friends outside the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, that is a question that’s 

almost laughable. That’s to suggest that if people from 

government go to this conference, hosted by the Fraser 

Institute, dealing with privatization - if people from the 

government go to that - by implication if people from Regina 

go to it, the city of Regina is for sale. It’s ludicrous. If the 

NDP caucus are represented there, are they for sale? Well I 

think they are, Mr. Speaker. I think they are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, please. Order. 

Order, please. Both sides now. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I have a supplementary . . . 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1755 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The 

hon. member can’t ask his question if the House doesn’t 

settle down. I asked hon. members . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Which side? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . on both sides, as a matter of fact, to 

allow the hon. member to please ask his question. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

supplementary question to the Deputy Premier. And my 

further supplementary question to the Deputy Premier is 

simply this. I know that the city of Regina is not about to 

privatize. I know that the New Democratic Party is not about 

to privatize . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Order, please. I know we can crack jokes and 

have a lot of laughs, but we won’t get through question 

period. So once more I ask your co-operation in allowing the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale to answer the question. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for bringing the 

hon. members to order, especially the hon. Minister of 

Finance, who asks the only question that he can from a 

seated position, and given the fact that where a certain part of 

his anatomy of brains is located that’s probably . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’d like to ask the member from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden to please restrain himself and let the 

member ask the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, my question, if I may 

get it out - I will even concede to the Minister of Finance that 

I don’t know what the city of Regina says on privatization. 

I’ll even concede that I don’t know what the other members 

or the participants of the conference know on privatization. 

 

But I can’t ask them in any official capacity except right here 

in this legislature of this government during question period 

on accountability. And I am therefore asking the Deputy 

Premier and the Government of Saskatchewan, on behalf of 

the Government of Saskatchewan, isn’t it correct to say that 

the large numbers of important people that you sent to 

Vancouver is the first shot in the privatization of every 

Crown corporation in Saskatchewan. Isn’t that the policy that 

you have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not absolutely 

certain, but I do believe that the member from Riversdale 

was sitting beside the Leader of the Opposition when that 

very question was asked on August 4, when I replied, no. 

 

Overpaid Invoices 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’ve been waiting for this. 

Ms. Simard: — He says he’s waited for this. Well now he’s 

got an opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve already heard how the PC government is 

shelling out some $12,000 a month to rent a full floor of 

office space where only three people work. Now we learn 

that SPC has been paying out money it doesn’t even owe, 

and SPC has on several occasions overpaid invoices from the 

Moose Jaw Times Herald, which invoices showed a credit 

balance. 

 

So my question to the minister, Mr. Speaker, is: how can the 

minister explain this wasteful spending when his government 

claims to be practising restraint and when his government is 

cutting back on the drug plan, cutting back on dental services 

to children, and making children and people across the 

province suffer from these cut-backs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we have, I think, some 

very serious concerns relative to the uranium issue, relative 

to the potash issue, relative to trade agreements, which . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . and Principal Trust. 

 

We have very serious issues relative to the agricultural 

cost-price squeeze. We have very serious questions, Mr. 

Speaker, relative to the environmental impact study at 

Rafferty. We have very serious questions, Mr. Speaker, 

relative to even . . . the media recently have reported, on 

several occasions, Sask Power’s exercise in collecting bills 

for power and gas and so on, and eliminating the commission 

collectors in the communities in Saskatchewan and using 

financial institutions. And I’ve had several phone calls on 

that, and I’ve tried to deal with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this is the most urgent and compelling, this 

administrative matter that we will deal with . . . but if it’s the 

most urgent and compelling question that can be raised here 

in question period, Mr. Speaker, I want to applaud our 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please! Order, please. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I 

wish to raise a point of order with respect to the Minister of 

Health who read extensively from a document and then 

refused to table it. Mr. Speaker, I want to read a couple of 

excerpts from two different authorities, from Erskine May, 

20th edition, page 433: 

 

A Minister of the Crown (may not) read or quote from a 

dispatch or other state paper not before the House, 

unless he be prepared to lay it upon the table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cite as well, paragraph 327, of Beauchesne’s, 

page 115, which I think states the matter better: 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1756 

 

(1) A Minister of the Crown is not at liberty to read or 

quote from a despatch or other state paper not before the 

House, unless he be prepared to lay it upon the Table. 

This restraint is similar to the rule of evidence in courts 

of law, which prevent counsel from citing documents 

which have not been produced as evidence. 

 

The obvious problem, Mr. Speaker, is that if one is allowed 

to quote from documents without actually producing them, 

false and misleading impressions can be conveyed. The only 

guarantee in which this House and, I suppose, a court of law 

has, is if the document itself which is cited is actually 

produced. 

 

So my point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that the minister’s 

under an obligation to produce that document which he 

quoted from so extensively. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points to 

the point of order raised by the member from Regina Centre. 

As I indicated in question period and when he was raising 

some of those concerns from his seat, this document, Mr. 

Speaker, this scribbled document is a briefing note which 

had some detailed information as to dates and so on. Okay. 

It’s a briefing not; it’s not a state paper, Mr. Minister, as the 

member would suggest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we were to have a table, if everybody in this 

House tabled everything from which they read after question 

period on each day, I submit, on each day members opposite 

would be tabling their questions because, for the most part, 

they’re read. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

There’s a great deal of comment by members on both sides 

of the House who’s arguing this point of order. If they wish 

to speak to it, I’ll certainly recognize them. But I’d ask them 

to wait their turn and . . . Otherwise we’ll allow the Minister 

of Finance, I believe, who indicated he wishes to say a few 

words. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Speaking to 

the point of order, I just called to Mr. Speaker and the hon. 

member, who’s served in this Assembly for some time and 

should know better, that when members stand up and 

indicate most clearly that they stand behind the information 

they’re given, that that’s usually taken as appropriate and 

sufficient, Mr. Speaker. And I can . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. I 

believe the hon. member does have the right to . . . 

 

Order. Order, order, order. As I indicated earlier, we’re 

having comments from both sides of the House regarding the 

point of order. Once more I would like to remind you that if 

any of you wish to speak to it, I’m certainly willing to 

recognize you if you just wait your turn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think I’ve made my point, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s a historical rule of parliament. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I wait with some interest to 

indicate the potential ruling for the opposition having to 

table their written question that they’re using each day, 

contrary to the historical rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, being a rookie in this 

Legislative Assembly, I don’t pretend to be an expert on 

parliamentary procedure. However, I want to reiterate the 

point made by the member from Regina Centre in regards to 

the obligations of the minister of the Crown, which, 

unfortunately, that distinction between as an ordinary 

member of this Legislative Assembly, such as a 

back-bencher or a rookie back-bencher as myself, versus the 

Minister of Finance, who is a representative of Executive 

Council and who has access to state papers and documents 

upon which he . . . upon which the people of Saskatchewan 

must rely for accurate information, and to which ourselves, 

as non-members of Executive Council, do not have access to 

that information . . . 

 

The point raised by the member from Regina Centre is clear, 

that . . . and the rules, it appear to me, are clear, that a 

minister of the Crown is required, when he reads from a state 

paper, i.e. having an imprint of some organ of the 

government or not, that in fact he’s required to table that 

document. 

 

I also want to take note too, briefly, Mr. Speaker, that after 

the member of Regina Centre began to raise his point of 

order, the Minister of Health began to alter the document 

upon which he was reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

I think that’s complete speculation, and I don’t know if you 

want to put that into your argument. I don’t know if you 

want to do that. I’m just bringing that to your attention. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — That is not a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

And in fact I will . . . I stand here as an hon. member of this 

House. I saw with my eyes, as did other hon. members, the 

Minister of Health alter that document before it, by 

scratching on it with his pen. Now whether that changes the 

content of the particular document is not relevant. The fact is 

is that the member tried to alter the document after this point 

of order was being issued, perhaps in fear of exposing the 

contents of the document to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to consider the point of order as put 

forward by the member from Regina Centre in regards to the 

obligations of cabinet ministers. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If there aren’t any further members who 

wish to enter the point of order, I’d like to take this 

opportunity then to come forth with a ruling. And I refer to 

the Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, 

dated Friday, July 24, 1987. It refers to a similar situation 

that took place in the committee, and it reads as follows: 

 

During consideration of item 1 of the Estimates for the 

Department of Parks, Recreation and Culture . . . 

 

Order, please. Order. Order, please. Just allow me to read the 

passage and then you’ll have a more accurate opportunity to 

make your assessment. 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1757 

 

I am going to read this passage to you, and of course you 

have an opportunity to have your own opinion of it, but right 

now I’d like to have some order so I can make my ruling. 

Both sides. I didn’t hear anything. There’s too much talk 

back and forth, and I’m asking for the co-operation of the 

House on both sides to please resist interrupting. Let me 

begin again. 

 

During consideration of item 1 of the Estimates for the 

Department of Parks, Recreation and Culture, a point of 

order was raised by Mr. Van Mulligen stating that the 

Minister was required to Table the document from 

which he was reading. The Deputy Chairman of 

Committees ruled the point not well taken on the 

grounds that a Minister was not required to Table 

documents which were internal briefing notes being 

used to answer questions and referred Members to 

Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth 

Edition, cits. 327, 390(n) and 390(o). 

 

So for further clarification, once more I will repeat that. You 

may refer to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 

Fifth Edition, cits. 390(n) and 390(o). 

 

Mr. Anguish: — A brief question, and it would be for 

clarification on your ruling. On a point of order, if necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. There is no 

debate on the Chair’s ruling. There’s no forum for that. You 

may raise a new point of order, if you wish to do that, but 

you cannot enter into debate on the ruling I have just made. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. I was 

wondering, Mr. Speaker, any time someone uses a document 

in the legislature, in the case of a cabinet minister using a 

document, I suppose that whenever they use that document 

they could in fact say it was briefing notes. And my point of 

order to you, Mr. Speaker, is who determines what it is that 

the hon. member is in fact quoting from? 

 

If a member of the cabinet or a Legislative Secretary was to 

read from a document in this legislature, they could say, any 

time they don’t want to table it, if it is an official document, 

or if it’s something else, Mr. Speaker . . . Well, members 

from the opposite are hollering across in the usual lack of 

decorum, Mr. Speaker. And if they just let me finish, then 

they’ll have the opportunity to stand in their place and make 

their participation and contribution to the debate as well. 

 

But the point I am making is that at any time a member can 

stand up on that side of the House; it can be a very vital piece 

of information that they’re quoting from. By tradition and 

parliamentary convention over the years, it’s been their 

responsibility to, in fact, table such documents. But if they 

don’t want to table such a document, they’ll just say it’s 

briefing notes, and they never will table any documents again 

in this legislature. 

 

And so I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not just good 

enough to say that they’re using briefing notes all the time, 

that in fact they shouldn’t have that right to make the 

determination without any further inspection by yourself, or 

some process of this House, to determine whether or not it is 

briefing notes or whether it’s a scrap of paper with the 

minister’s doodling on it, or whether it’s an official 

government document. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — On the same point of order, several 

times in this session we have seen the members opposite 

during question period shaking letters that we have asked 

them to table, or other documents that they read from during 

question period, or in fact their stupid questions themselves, 

and they don’t table those either. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. This is not a forum for 

debate. I will bring in my ruling. It’s been the custom and 

tradition of this House that the Chair and hon. members in 

the Legislative Assembly must take another hon. member’s 

word for what he says. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 

proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 31 - An 

Act to amend The Local Government Election Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I indicated 

yesterday that this side of the House would support the 

principle of enabling lessees to become enfranchised in 

resort village elections. I think that all of us can agree that 

this initiative is long overdue. 

 

(1445) 

 

It is a well established fact in Saskatchewan that in addition 

to long-term residents of resort villages, the franchise . . . the 

right to vote and to run for public office, the right to 

participate fully in local affairs is also accorded to those who 

own land in resort villages, assuming in all cases, of course, 

that other basic qualification s such as age, citizenship and 

residency in Saskatchewan are met. This fact is established, 

because in the case of resort villages where the great 

majority of the population is seasonal and a minority are 

permanent residents, it seems reasonable that the majority be 

encouraged to take a direct hand in governing and 

administering their local affairs. 

 

It also seems a reasonable proposition, as the Bill purports to 

provide, that lessees be entitled to exercise these rights. By 

lessees I mean those who lease land on a long-term basis 

from private or public landowners, but own their own 

cottages and are assessed by their local municipality for 

those buildings, and accordingly pay property taxes on those 

buildings. 

 

When it comes to the administration and orderly 

development of resort villages, lessees, I would think, are no 

less interested in and implicated by local decisions. Their 

stake, like those of landowners and residents in 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1758 

 

local affairs, can be substantial and long lasting. Leases 

normally run for the projected life of a cottage, if not longer. 

 

It’s for all those reasons that we will support the Bill before 

us. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, there is at least one 

ambiguity. And I would think . . . or there would appear to 

be one shortcoming that we will attempt to deal with in 

committee. 

 

The ambiguity deals with the definition of lessees. The 

wording, I would submit, in the Bill requires some 

clarification. The shortcoming is a major one, and again is a 

matter of principle. 

 

Although the bill would enable lessees to vote, the Bill does 

not accord the right to lessees to be able to run for public 

office in their resort villages, unlike property owners. 

Property owners, according to The Local Government 

Election Act, have the right to not only vote in local elections 

in the resort village, but are also accorded the right to be able 

to run for office, for mayor or alderman on the resort village 

council. 

 

It seems to us that this Bill would accord a kind of junior 

citizenship, a limited franchise. And we would not 

differentiate between those who own and pay taxes on land 

and cottages, and those who lease land on a long-term basis, 

and in addition to that, pay land . . . or own and pay taxes on 

the cottages on that land. 

 

The minister will know that the Provincial Association of 

Resort Communities is also of the view that lessees should 

not only be able to vote in resort village elections, but also be 

able to run for and to hold a public office in resort villages. 

Now the minister may be of the opinion that there is some 

merit in waiting until a later date to introduce a further 

amendment that would then enable lessees, in addition to 

being able to vote, also to be able to run for public office, 

that is, to qualify as a candidate for public offices in resort 

villages. 

 

I’m not sure what will be learned and what benefit there will 

be in waiting. Again, we would submit that there is no great 

difference between those who - except in a legal sense - 

between those who own land and own the building and pay 

taxes on both the land and the building, and those who lease 

land on a long-term basis, whether it be 99 years from public 

landowners, or 35, 40 years from private landowners, but in 

addition to that, own and pay taxes on their own cottages. 

I’m not sure what the great difference is, except for a strictly 

legal one. I’m not sure what we will learn by waiting until 

later next year before introducing further amendments. We 

think the time is right, now, to introduce such an amendment 

and to accord the full rights of the franchise to lessees in 

resort communities. 

 

We agree, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill should be passed today, 

or at least at an early opportunity so that the wheels can be 

set in motion to enable lessees in a number of resort 

communities who are undertaking a local vote as to 

incorporation as resort villages, namely Cochin; I think there 

is one other one. We think the Bill should be passed today to 

enable those lessees in those resort villages to have that right 

to be able to cast their vote on that 

important question. 

 

And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would indicate to the 

House that we will have further remarks and, I would think, 

amendments during Committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later 

this day. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 31 - An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes. With me this afternoon, Mr. 

Chairman, I have my assistant deputy minister, Keith 

Schneider, to my right, and Lorne Tangjerd our planner. 

 

I would just briefly like to address the remarks made by the 

member from Regina Victoria regarding this Bill. This Bill 

contains a new feature extending the vote to people who 

lease land in resort villages. And he asks the question, well, 

why extend the right to vote but not the right to run for office 

to persons who lease land in resort villages. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, I would first like to make a brief 

comment on the background to this issue. Prior to 1982, the 

former Urban Municipal Election Act and The Urban Act 

allowed non-resident property owners the right to vote, but 

not the right to run for office in municipalities where they, 

indeed, owned property. This separation of the right to vote 

from the right to run for office was supported by SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). And it 

was for many years acceptable to the government in office 

prior to 1982. 

 

My department’s discussions with the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association over the years show that SUMA 

has consistently opposed the right of non-residents to run for 

office. They have expressed the view, generally, that it 

would not be a good idea to have councils dominated by 

non-residents who, through no fault of their own, may not 

have a full knowledge of day-to-day concerns of the 

community because they don’t live there year round. 

 

In fact, Mr. Chairman, in 1982 the urban law review 

committee, composed of mainly local government 

representatives, recommended that the non-residents’ or 

burgess vote be deleted from the Act. So accordingly, in 

1982, non-residents lost the right to vote in urban elections. 

There was considerable reaction to this from citizens and 

urban councils, and as a result, in 1983 SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) reversed 

their position. 

 

And I have here a copy of a 1983 SUMA resolution asking 

for the return of the non-resident property owner vote. but 

the resolution states, and I’ll just quote the back of it -s it’s a 

lengthy resolution - but the resolution states: 

 

Be it further resolved, that the non-resident  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1759 

 

property owner is not eligible to run for mayor or 

council. 

 

As a result, the Act was amended in 1983, restoring the 

non-resident vote, but not the right to run for office. SUMA 

passed a resolution again in 1986 reaffirming its general 

opposition to non-residents holding seats on councils. 

 

So I’ll turn to the Bill, Mr. Chairman. We delayed the vote 

on incorporating of the resorts of Cochin and Aquadeo, 

specifically because leaseholders in those resorts requested 

legislation allowing them to vote. And these votes had been 

planned for last summer, but at public meetings held last 

July, strong objections were raised. Lessees asked for the 

right to vote. The votes were then delayed until this summer 

to allow time to review this legislation. These votes are 

scheduled for summer-time when cottagers are in the area, 

and it’s necessary that this Bill go forward at this time to 

allow for the incorporation votes to proceed. The necessary 

forms have to be completed by September 5, and in fact the 

advanced polls will be August 29. 

 

But we as government must move carefully when there are 

proposals to extend the right to run for office to more 

non-residents. SUMA, in general terms, in the past, has 

expressed some reservations about extending, to a 

considerable extent, the right of non-residents to run for 

office. In law, and often in practice, a lessee does not have 

the same interests or the same rights as an owner of land. 

Indeed, under The Urban Municipality Act, provisions are 

made for landowners to pay taxes, but lessees usually only 

indirectly pay taxes through the rent that they pay to the 

landowner. 

 

In the past, SUMA has linked the voting rights of 

non-residents with the ownership of land, and this likely 

explains their initial reservations about allowing lessees to 

vote. This also explains why SUMA has no apparent 

concerns with the provision in the legislation allowing 

non-resident owners of land to vote and run for office in 

resort villages only. In our discussions with SUMA, Mr. 

Chairman, they expressed reservations about, indeed, 

allowing lessees to vote. They were concerned about people 

voting in more than one municipality. They requested 

implementation on an experimental basis only, and they 

further suggested that perhaps lessees should vote only 

where they are a majority of the community. 

 

But we, the government, are confident that this proposed 

amendment provides a realistic balance between the interest 

of lessees of land and the interest of landowners and 

residents. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I’ll summarize. Currently voters in resort 

villages must have resided in Saskatchewan for six months, 

and they must either have resided in the resort village for six 

months or own land in the village at the time of election. 

And this Bill takes a step forward and allows persons who 

lease land in a resort village to vote. 

 

(1500) 

 

To be a candidate in resort villages at present, you must be a 

resident of the province for six months. That’s a  

prerequisite. And then there are only two provisos, Mr. 

Chairman. First, you must own land in the resort. That’s 

simple. Or to be a candidate, secondly, you must be a 

resident of the resort for six months, whether you own or 

lease the land. So indeed a resident owner or a resident lessee 

of six months or more can in fact run as a candidate. 

 

So in short, this Bill does not change the qualifications of 

candidates in resort villages. As we mentioned, it’s 

imperative that votes on a corporation proceed later this 

summer. And I look forward to answering the questions of 

my critic. I think that this Bill is a major step in giving 

people who lease land in resorts a significant role in the 

democratic life of their communities. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Through you to 

the minister, I’m particularly pleased that we are able to have 

this piece of legislation, known now as Bill 32, before the 

legislature today. And I do hope that it receives passage this 

very day in all stages. 

 

The communities that I think are referred to by the 

department as Hunt’s Cove and Pirot Beach wish to have a 

vote to form resort village status. And there’s a similar 

situation at Aquadeo Beach, where the residents there wish 

to vote on whether or not to form resort village status. And I 

understand that the vote is to be held on September 5, with 

the advanced poll on August 29 of this year. 

 

I do question the minister in terms of what he says in regard 

to who is eligible to run for public office to seek the position 

of mayor or councillor if these areas, in fact, become resort 

villages. And my reading of the Act with the amendments - 

and I certainly defer to the expertise of your officials you 

have here today - but the way the Act reads, as it will be 

amended, seems to me that lessees do have the right to run 

for public office because the residency clause is residency of 

the province of Saskatchewan for six months prior to the 

vote being held. 

 

And I’d ask the minister to please consult with your officials 

and determine whether or not, in fact, that is correct. And my 

question to the minister is: if a lessee is resident of the 

province for a period of six months, then in fact they can 

seek the position of mayor or councillor when those 

positions become available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, it’s not quite the way 

that the member of The Battlefords has it, and perhaps by 

way of explanation I can clarify it for him. 

 

To qualify as a candidate, the first prerequisite, as I 

mentioned in my remarks, is that you must be a resident of 

Saskatchewan for six months. Then there are only two other 

alternates that exist if you want to become a candidate. The 

one is that you must own land in the area, then you can run 

as a candidate; or if you are a resident of that area, you can 

run as a candidate. And a “resident” is described as six 

months or more. So that even if you are a lessee, but live in 

that area, as a permanent residence, for more than six months 

of the year, you may then seek office. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I think that that’s unfortunate. I  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1760 

 

accept what you say because I certainly don’t have the 

expertise as an individual that the officials of your 

department have. I find that there’s some problem if, in fact, 

the Act was interpreted like that in a court of law. 

 

And I appreciate, Mr. Minister, that you pointed out that the 

people might not have the intimate knowledge of the are and 

therefore shouldn’t maybe seek public office in that 

particular resort community. 

 

But I would maintain to you, Mr. Minister, that the same 

thing would apply to landowners. A landowner may very 

well own land there and never see the community - they may 

never come to the community in which they own land. But 

yet from what you’re telling me, that landowner could run 

for public office, but the lessee who may be someone who’s 

there for five months of the year and spends the rest of the 

time in North Battleford, or in Hafford, or one of the 

surrounding communities, would have a very intimate 

knowledge of the workings and the intricacies of that resort 

village. 

 

And I would think that it’s the fault of the legislation, and I 

would hope we could try and work that out here this 

afternoon, that the residency clause of six months apply, and 

that would give the lessees an opportunity to in fact seek 

public office in those resort communities. 

 

The case of the elections that are coming up, I would ask the 

minister as to whether or not there is some process for the 

issuing of a writ. This is a separate question. I’d like you to 

just listen to this for a minute, and we’ll maybe go back to 

the item as to whether the lessees can vote if they’ve been 

resident for six months in the province. But there’s been no 

official notice, other than through the media, Mr. Minister. 

 

People who have ownership of land, or are lessees of 

property and land in those hamlets that exist now, have only 

known through, I suppose, the odd public meeting and 

through newspaper and media articles that, in fact, yes, 

there’s a vote September 5, and the advanced poll will be on 

August 29. That’s the most recent date; it’s been changed 

once. 

 

But is there a procedure that writs will be issued and there’ll 

be an official notification of election? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, this will follow the 

normal municipal election procedures. There have been 

several informational meetings occurred already. There will 

be another one occurring on August 22 to discuss the 

outcome of this legislation. Notifications to all affected 

people have been forwarded already. They are posted in the 

area now about the upcoming elections. 

 

And I would say this. The existing legislation, the 

landowners can vote as in the past, so they’re all aware of it. 

Residents, whether they own their land or lease it, can vote 

as in the past, but they have to live there for six months. Now 

what we want to do with this legislation, Mr. Chairman, is 

provide the opportunity for the lessees, who are not 

residents, and enjoy that area - whether it be for a month or 

two months, or yes, even five months - to have the 

opportunity to vote which they do not have that right at the 

present time. 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I’m happy to hear that the 

notifications have gone out and that the elections are posted. 

Now I would assume that this is for the election - since the 

election date has been changed at one point in time - that the 

notifications have gone out and the posting is for an election 

on September 5, with the advance poll on August 29. Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, they are in the process of 

being posted now. Your dates are right, but just to clarify 

something. Earlier in your remarks you mentioned a few 

other areas, but we’re talking now specifically of two areas, 

one of which you mentioned - Aquadeo, and the other one is 

Cochin. And those are the two areas that are affected 

presently for the vote of September 5 with the advance poll 

of August 29. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Further clarification, Mr. Minister. I 

understand that there are three locations. There’s Aquadeo 

Beach. Aquadeo is having a vote of their own to form resort 

village status, whether they approve or not approve of it. The 

other situation takes in Pirot Beach and Hunt’s Cove. They 

are also voting in a separate vote as to whether or not they 

wish to form village status. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that Pirot 

Beach and Hunt’s Cove will form part of the vote with 

Cochin as one area, and Aquadeo is a separate vote. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — If . . . okay, I accept that Aquadeo is a 

separate vote. What I’m trying to determine, Mr. Minister, is 

who comprises the other vote? Is there a community, a 

hamlet, called Cochin, Pirot Beach, and Hunt’s Cove, with 

possibly others? What are the identification of names of the 

pockets that make up the vote in the case of Cochin? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that the 

resort hamlet of Cochin and the resort hamlet of Hunt’s Cove 

as well as Pirot Beach, which is not a separate entity onto 

itself but rather a part of Cochin, is where the three names 

. . . the three areas you can put a name to. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well that’s my understanding as well. And 

I’m glad you clarified that, so now I do know definitely 

we’re talking about the same situation. There’ll be two 

separate votes, Aquadeo in one, and Hunt’s Cove, Cochin, of 

which Pirot Beach is part of Cochin, will be voting in a 

separate poll on September 5. 

 

I’m wondering if the minister could tell me today what the 

advance notice is that’s required prior to going to the polls? 

Like it’s maybe not called an issuing of the writ, but the 

notification that goes out - is there a requirement as to the 

number of days? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, my officials aren’t 

absolutely certain on a specific date that we can give you. 

We have all of the machinery in motion at this time, so that 

with the passing of this Bill and Royal Assent we will be 

within the required time frame to ensure that the - or the new 

eligible voters would have the required notice 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1761 

 

served to them. 

 

In the event that passage would not occur, then the rest of the 

implementation, without being able to give you that specific 

date at this particular moment, would still be in place for the 

other voters to vote without lessees having the right to vote. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well we certainly want lessees to have the 

right to vote. And I’d hope that your officials will dig up the 

time requirement while we’re here this afternoon. 

 

I’m wondering . . . I have a bit of a concern, and I’d like you 

to be very clear on the record, Mr. Minister, as to the six 

month residency clause. In terms of this legislation, not 

going through six months prior to the vote being held, can 

you assure us that lessees legally still have the right to vote 

in this election. 

 

And what I’m getting at is that there certainly isn’t six 

months between the passage today and when the vote is 

actually being held; but the fact that these lessees were 

residents of the province six months prior to the vote, does 

this legislation still allow them to vote? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes. With the passage of this Bill, 

anybody that would qualify — you know — we’re going to 

know the residents who can already vote, whether they lease 

or own land. We know who owns the land. And they have to 

be a Canadian citizen over 18 and a resident of 

Saskatchewan. So all that is in there. 

 

All this will simply do is allow lessees, who couldn’t vote 

prior, to have the opportunity to vote, assuming that they fall 

into the other qualifications that I just mentioned, and the 

time limit will be there because the Royal Assent will be 

given, and they will then qualify automatically as regard to 

the Bill. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — So what I understand you saying is, as long 

as there’s passage of this Bill prior to September 5, then 

lessees can in fact vote in that election. And I see the deputy 

minister shaking his head in the affirmative. 

 

I’d like to go back a bit to the concern of lessees as to 

whether or not they can hold public office. For example, if 

someone from The Battlefords owns a cottage which is 

presently at Hunt’s Cove, and they’ve had it for an extensive 

period of time — 10, 15, some cases 20 years — how do you 

determine what that person’s residency is for six months? 

Does that mean they would have to live there continually for 

six months without living at their permanent residence in, 

say, the city of North Battleford, or the town of Hafford, or 

town of Battleford; or is the residency of six months 

accumulative? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose that we could 

read the existing legislation into the record; it’s there, but 

rather than do that . . . we all have access to that. 

 

Basically, the voter goes to the electoral officer or the clerk 

at the polling station and makes a declaration that in fact that 

was their principal residence, and that according to the Act 

they do qualify. So they in fact qualify themselves as that 

being their permanent residence. Later on, following the 

election, if somebody should want to  

challenge a particular voter for signing the declaration 

falsely, this can be done as is the norm in any election. But 

the qualification is made by the voter himself. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, through you, Mr. Chairman. 

That presents a bit of a problem as I see it. There are many, 

many people who are lessees in the area that we’re talking 

about today, and I would be surprised if 1 per cent of them 

would declare their permanent residence as being within the 

resort village. Their permanent residence is somewhere else. 

But in fact if you take into consideration the fact that they 

spend their total summer out there and maybe commute into 

the city of North Battleford, plus going out there on 

weekends in the winter-time for fishing, recreation, they’re 

intimately in contact with that resort community. And if you 

counted up the days they spend there, they likely spend as 

many days there as what they would spend in the city of 

North Battleford or wherever they would call their 

permanent residence. 

 

So the six-month clause is very important in terms as to how 

you determine that, Mr. Minister. And if it’s an accumulative 

kind of process, then in fact that would maybe qualify them 

to have spent six months there of the year. So could you 

clarify that a little more for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll read again the 

qualifications of candidates, and this is as clear as I can be, 

because this is normal procedure under the existing Act. And 

we’re not dealing with this part of the Act or the Bill at this 

point in time, so keep that in mind. 

 

But the qualifications of candidates as they exist in a resort 

village; a person may hold office if they are an elector of a 

resort village, which means: have resided in the village for 

six month; owned assessed land in the village, and have lived 

in the province for six months; is the spouse of either the 

resident or owner of assessed land. Lessees and their spouses 

are excluded from holding office in resort villages. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — So if they’re a resident of the area for six 

months or more, in the amendments passed here today, and 

they’re a lessee, they then can run for office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — That legislation is in effect right now. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, do you want to provide further 

clarification? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member is talking 

here about the residency clause. That’s what he’s getting at, 

and that part is not on the Bill. I’m just trying to explain the 

existing situation to you. 

 

The existing situation is this: if you’re a resident for six 

months in the village, whether you are an owner or a lessee, 

you may run for office. The fact of who declares whether 

you’re that resident for that six month time is the voter 

themselves. this may later be challenged by whoever, 

following the election, because it is the voter that makes the 

declaration that he in fact is a permanent resident for six 

months. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Okay, I seek just a little bit further  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1762 

 

clarification. Is that six months within one year, or could 

somebody in fact declare that since they’ve had that property 

there, since they’ve been a lessee for, say, 15 years, does that 

mean that they’ve been resident there in a resort village for a 

period in excess of six months because they have been 

lessees on that property? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can clarify that 

one. The six month rule is in effect for the six months 

immediately preceding the date of the election. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I just have a few other questions. Under 

the situation, if the vote for village status passes and they 

become a resort village and attain that status, is it a 

requirement that they hire an administrator, and if so, what 

class of certificate under current legislation or regulations, 

what class of certificate does that administrator have to 

possess? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, because it’s a 

community of less than 1,000, there are no specific 

requirements as to the qualifications of their administrator. 

They can hire class A to class D or, in fact, somebody 

without any experience. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Is it required then, Mr. Minister, that they 

do have to hire an administrator? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I suppose technically, Mr. Chairman, 

they wouldn’t have to, but somebody would have to run the 

shop. So I imagine that they would. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — If they didn’t fire an administrator; if they 

just had a group of people taking care of the business of the 

resort village; if they didn’t fire any administrator, they 

would not be in contravention of any provincial legislation or 

regulations? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — They would have to hire a clerk or an 

administrator of some kind, call them what you wish, even if 

it were part time. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — And that’s required by legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — That a requirement of the legislation, 

yes. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, there seems to be some 

inequity here between the lessees and the landowners. As I 

understand it, what you’ve told me about someone wanting 

to hold the position of mayor or councillor, if they’re a 

landowner they don’t really have to reside there at all. But if 

they owned land, say a person from Regina who owned land 

in Hunt’s Cove or Cochin, that person would never have to 

be a resident there and yet could seek public office. Is that 

correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, in regular communities, 

non-resident landowners cannot hold office. And here we’re 

talking about the resort communities, which is a special 

status. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I understand that. So the question I pose to 

you, Mr. Minister, in resort village status, take for  

example if you who are a resident of Regina, owned land at 

Hunt’s Cove and they voted to form resort village status, you 

as a landowner would have a right to vote in that process, 

and you, although you are not resident there, would also be 

able to run for either the mayor’s position or councillor’s 

position, even not having met the residency requirement 

there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — That’s right. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wish that you would 

change your mind. I don’t think the people would elect you 

at the resort village anyway. And I don’t say that against you 

personally, but I would hope that people wouldn’t vote for 

someone who didn’t reside within their community and 

resort village status there - at least had an intimate 

knowledge of what was happening there. 

 

So don’t you see a little inequity in the fact that the lessees 

who— some of them spend a great deal of time there — in 

fact, cannot run for their public office. And they may spend 

as much time there as somebody who could qualify as a 

permanent resident or at least be as well-known as somebody 

who meets the six month residency clause. And this is kind 

of what we’re asking you to do here this afternoon is to 

change that sort of inequity that you could be there as the 

mayor and never have spent any time. In theory you could, 

but yet a lessee who spends a considerable amount of time 

there, in fact, cannot run for public office, and basically what 

we’re asking you to do is to extend the democratic process. 

 

I have one individual, Mr. Minister, who’s written to me 

who, in fact, is a landowner, and he and his spouse’s concern 

is that if they do go to resort village status after this vote, 

they want it to be as democratic as possible. And this is one 

landowner who doesn’t have any opposition to his 

neighbour, possibly who is a lessee, should be able to hold 

that public office. And won’t you get some consideration to 

changing that his afternoon, to make it more equitable for the 

lessees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member from 

The Battlefords wants to get into hypothetical situations, I 

suppose I could, too, and I’d rather not. But this legislation is 

not just for those two areas of your constituency. And, Mr. 

Chairman, as we pass this legislation, it’s for the entire 

province. And it’s conceivable that there are some areas that 

would like that and there are in fact no residents, and there 

are in fact no lessees, but all the landowners there. And there 

would be nobody on earth that would have a more vital 

interest and right to voting and running for council than those 

landowners, because the lessees aren’t there. 

 

In this particular situation, where we are listening to the 

people, where we are listening to the newly-formed 

Provincial Association of Resort Communities, where we are 

listening so SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), who say let the lessees, at least for now, have a 

vote. We are listening to the people and saying, fine. We 

agree with that and we’ll give you the vote. Because even 

SUMA wants to take a go-slow situation. And we’re kind of 

putting the cart before the horse in an area like this, because 

if you put that provision 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1763 

 

in, we’re not sure until that vote is taken whether they will 

even want to incorporate or not. And as a result of that, it 

would be kind of foolhardy to give them the provision to run 

when that provision may never ever be used. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well the minister makes a good point but 

whatever happened to the principle of no taxation without 

representation? Does just them having the right to vote allow 

them that representation? I maintain it doesn’t. I maintain 

they should have the right to run. 

 

So I pose another situation. It’s not a hypothetical situation, 

but I pose a situation to you that someone who is a lessee, 

they lease the land but they own the cabin or the house or the 

home that’s on the land. Many of those have been assessed 

taxes for their property because, I suppose, it’s viewed that 

they’re property owners there, because they own a structure 

but lease the land. Do those people have the right to run for 

public office they don’t spend the six months residency at the 

resort village? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — No they wouldn’t, because the residency 

would still apply there. What you’re asking would put us into 

almost an untenable position, in so far as . . . The natures of 

leases vary so extensively that I suppose we could argue here 

from now until the proposed date of the election as to how 

many tenants would actually pay taxes and how many are 

included in the leases and whatever. 

 

There might be several instances, and we don’t know this, of 

large tracts of land where the landowner who could have, and 

I’ll be hypothetical here, 25 or 50 lots, that only two of them 

may be leased. And he’s paying taxes on this entire piece of 

property and collecting his tenant’s rent on only two. 

 

And I believe that in consultation with SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and with 

PARCS (Provincial Association of Resort Communities of 

Saskatchewan), that a go-slow attitude is right. The people 

right now are satisfied with the right to vote, which is 

something that they’ve never had. And this right to run for 

office would come at an appropriate time when all of these 

things have resolved . . . all of these different matters have 

resolved themselves. First of all, the fact of incorporation 

itself, and then after that, after the incorporation, to establish 

that they’re a council and to see where they are in fact going, 

how it does affect the various lessees and the like. 

 

And I believe that a go-slow approach at this time is good. It 

meets the desires of what the people want. We've been in 

discussions with them now for a couple of years. They’ve 

never brought up the issue of running, rather simply the issue 

of having the right to vote. And we do agree with that. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I appreciate that, and my colleague 

from Regina Victoria, I think, will pursue this a bit more. I 

don’t want to unduly delay the passage here this afternoon, 

but the concerns that we have are very real. 

 

And I would ask the minister if he would give us his 

undertaking that at an appropriate date in the future, should 

these villages incorporate into resort village status, 

will you give us your undertaking that we will again have the 

opportunity to review this legislation, with the possibility of 

having lessees given the right to run for public office in those 

resort communities that don’t necessarily meet the strict 

requirement, of the six-month continuous residency 

requirement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that we can 

give the member assurance that, you know, we’re always 

reviewing our legislation. We’re always in discussion with 

interested parties, certainly the organized ones such as 

SUMA, such as PARCS. We’re in discussion with the 

various people of the resort areas themselves. And there is no 

question that we would be prepared to discuss this with the 

opposition when the appropriate time comes. If it’s adequate, 

there is no question of that. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if the 

officials have come up with the time requirement yet as to 

. . . if there’s any required number of days to give notice of 

the election that’s been given notice for on September 5? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the information that he 

was able to find indicates that the time period is from three to 

five weeks prior to the vote, with notice by publication or 

posting. So we’ve got that . . . we’re just right in that time 

frame now. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — There is no further special requirements of 

the lessees to give them the right to vote? The posting that’s 

there now is in fact adequate, and the notification . . . And 

there will be another public meeting that I assume you will 

have officials at. And I see the deputy minister shaking his 

head in the affirmative. Then you can assure us that by 

passage here today of these amendments, that the lessees will 

in fact have the right to vote? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, absolutely, with their 

co-operation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In his 

opening remarks, the minister somehow intimated that 

lessees have somehow less of an interest in local affairs, or 

have less of a stake in local affairs. 

 

And I think we come now to what is an ambiguity in the Bill 

that’s before us, and that is the definition of lessee, and the 

fact that no definition is really provided. And I assume that 

what we’re going with here is the normal dictionary or legal 

definition of lessee, and that is: someone who has all right of 

use and enjoyment to a piece of property for a given price, 

etc. 

 

If one takes the minister’s definition of a lessee, and his 

definition seemed to be — and I draw this, and I infer this 

from his remarks earlier, that is to say that, one who does not 

directly pay taxes, I suppose I might be inclined to agree 

with the minister that perhaps there is less at stake here for 

the individual cottager, and that that person may not have as 

much of an interest in local affairs than, say,  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1764 

 

someone who pays taxes. And that situation can occur. 

 

Earlier we were introduced to the agent-general for 

Saskatchewan in London. And let’s assume that Mr. 

Rousseau has a cottage, but because Mr. Rousseau has his 

overseas posting he decides that he will lease his cottage to 

someone else. Mr. Rousseau retains ownership of the land, of 

the building, and will be assessed, for the purposes of local 

taxation, by the resort village, whereas the lessee will 

indirectly pay that through the lease remuneration. And that’s 

one case of a lessee. 

 

But what is clear is that the Provincial Association of Resort 

Communities has a different interpretation than has been 

provided by the minister, and I would suspect that most who 

await the outcome of the Bill have a different interpretation 

of lessee than has been provided by the minister. 

 

And I would refer the minister to a report of the working 

committee on resort communities which was presented to the 

government in April of 1986. That committee included 

representatives from resort communities, included 

representatives from your department. And in discussing the 

question of elections in resort areas and dealing with the 

qualifications of electors, the report indicates, and I quote: 

 

(1545) 

 

Members of the committee from resort communities felt 

that non-residents who lease their land but are assessed 

owners of the building should be allowed to vote in 

resort village elections. 

 

And I would now come back to the remarks made earlier by 

my colleague, and ably so, by my colleague from The 

Battlefords, that one can draw a distinction in terms of 

lessees. And what we’re really talking about here is two 

kinds of lessees — the kind of lessee that the Provincial 

Association of Resort Communities and the working 

committee talked about, and that is someone who leases land 

for a long term, whether it be 35, 40 years as many leases 

are, or 99 years in the case of some leases from the Crown. 

 

But in addition to leasing the land, those people have either 

build or acquired cottages that sit on that leased land, and are 

assessed by the resort village or the urban municipality, 

whatever the case might be, for taxes on the improvement on 

that land. So that contrary to what the minister is saying, we 

have a case here of lessees directly paying taxes to the local 

municipalities, whether it be the rural municipality as the 

case now in Cochin, or whether it be a resort village. 

 

And that is the distinction I would like to draw. And if we 

can clear up this ambiguity, if we can clear up this ambiguity 

in the Bill, then I think that it might seem more reasonable to 

accord lessees not only the right to be able to vote in resort 

village elections, but also the right to run for public office. 

Because like property owners, like property owners, they 

also are assessed for taxes. They also pay taxes directly to 

the local municipality. 

And with that in mind, Mr. Chairman, I would like to move 

an amendment to clarify section 3, and that is to: 

 

Amend clause 3(b) of the printed Bill, by striking out 

“for at least six months” in the second line of 

subparagraph 23(1)(c)(iii)(B.1) of the Act, as being 

enacted by clause 3(b) of the printed Bill, and substitute 

the following: 

 

and is the owner of assessable improvements located on 

that land. 

 

And that amendment is seconded by the member for The 

Battlefords. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was sure 

that it had passed one way or another, but I guess not. 

 

I hope that the minister will ask his officials that 

notwithstanding the amendment that was defeated, that he 

will ask his officials to examine this point, and to very 

clearly gain an understanding from the people that are 

involved in resort villages and resort communities as to what 

it is that they mean by lessees. Because if I read the 

minister’s remarks, he has one interpretation of what is 

meant by a lessee; if one reads the comments of the 

Provincial Association of Resort Communities, one gains a 

different interpretation of what is meant by lessees. 

 

In the one case, a person who rents the land and buildings 

according to a lease agreement with a private property owner 

does not directly pay taxes, as opposed to someone who 

leases land on a long-term basis, builds their own building, 

or otherwise has acquired a building that is situated on that 

land, is assessed for land, or is assessed for that building by 

the local municipality, and pays taxes directly to the 

municipality. 

 

And I wonder, will the minister agree that there is that very 

clear distinction, and that what PARCS (Provincial 

Association of Resort Communities of Saskatchewan) is 

talking about is something different than the type of lessee 

who, in effect, leases the land and buildings. Can the 

minister agree that there is that difference? 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll be in continual 

discussion with PARCS, and if a problem develops over the 

terminology “lessee,” or in the event that this amendment 

that was just defeated should come forward again because of 

circumstances, then we’ll discuss it again at that time. But 

I’ll be in touch with PARCS over it. I don’t anticipate a 

problem at this time, however. 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I appreciate that the minister has 

given that undertaking, that he will enter into those 

consultations. My view is that if the consultations had been 

more extensive, that we would not be dealing with 

amendments and that we would have a much clearer Bill 

before us at this point in time. 
 

Again, I would commend to you looking at that 

differentiation and clarifying the definition of “lessee,” 

because if we can agree in future amendments that lessees 

should be taken to mean someone who in fact is 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1765 

 

the owner of assessable improvements located on that land, 

and by definition, therefore, one who directly pays taxes, it 

seems to me that all of us can agree that that person should in 

fact have the right to not only be able to vote inn local resort 

village elections, but also should have the right to run. 

Because, like a landowner, that person also pays taxes 

directly, and will be directly concerned because of that, about 

the affairs of local administration and the development of the 

local resort village. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Victoria is right on. And that’s exactly why we proceed to go 

with the legislation as it is. We don’t know if they’re in fact 

even going to pass the incorporation. 

 

Once the incorporation is indeed passed and a resort village 

formed, then as a result of the tax rolls and all the rest of it 

that goes on with it, we will be able to determine precisely 

what your concerns are. And if the concerns are valid, and if 

Parks has a problem, and the people in that area, certainly we 

don’t want to make their problems more severs, and we’re 

prepared to amend anything that we might have to. But what 

we’re saying today is that that’s an unnecessary procedure 

today. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m surprised 

that the minister does not have access to that information 

today - information that would help the House to make a 

more informed decision on the matters before us. To 

discount the amendment because they don’t have the 

information, I think is an indictment on the minister that he’s 

not on top of things. Mr. Minister, we’re stuck at this point 

then, with section 3 as it stands. 

 

Let me ask you, or point out to you that it is not clear 

whether or not a person who actually leases land for the 

six-month period will qualify, or whether the term of the 

lease must be stipulated by the parties as being for a time 

longer than six months when the lease is entered into. That is 

not clear. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said before, a 

person that has been leasing land six months prior to the 

election will be eligible to vote. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, again there is this 

ambiguity. And I’m informed by counsel that this ambiguity 

exists. Again I would comment to you and your officials a 

review of those ambiguities. 

 

I think that the people of Saskatchewan would not want to 

see a duplication of the kind of fiasco that was created in 

Ferland because of amendments to this House and 

amendments that were not well thought out by your 

government. 
 
So I would comment to you, sir, a more thorough review, 

notwithstanding your stubbornness today. But I would 

commend to you a more thorough review of this legislation 

so that any ambiguities might be cleared up before elections 

take place. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I beg your indulgence and 

ask you leave. I have just a couple of very brief questions I 

ask for clarification that don’t, in all honesty, apply to the 

section 3 of the Bill that we’re on. I’ll be less than a couple 

of minutes, if I could ask those. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I’ll put the questions all at 

once, and if you could answer them for me. One of the 

members who wrote concerning the vote was concerned 

about the number of people who had petitioned the 

government to actually have the vote for incorporation into 

resort village status. And could you tell us what the number 

of people is, or percentage of the population? It seems to me, 

in my figures, there are about 70 people who petitioned the 

government, and there are in the area of 600 people who are 

affected. 

 

The second question I have is one of concern about the vote 

date itself. Some people are wondering — I’m sure they’ll 

ask at the public information meeting on August 22 — that 

is, that many people who are lessees will be gone by the 

September 5 date. And some people are asking, is it 

mechanically or technically possible, I suppose, to have that 

date changed, either over to next year or back into the 

August period? 

 

The third question I have is: could you just briefly outline for 

us what the steps are if the vote goes in favour of resort 

village status? Is there a time period when they have to, in 

fact, elect a council and mayor? Is there a time period when 

they have to hire an administrator? Just if you could give us a 

thumb-nail sketch of the procedure that has to be taken in the 

resort villages if, in fact, the resort village passes on 

September 5. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate those 

questions, and we have the answers. According to the Act, a 

minimum number of people of . . . a minimum of 30 is the 

requirement. And there were 77 on the request, so we had to 

deal with it. 

 

Regarding the voting day, it could be changed. But it’s really 

not practical to change it now because the people, most of 

the people affected, know; they are expecting it. To delay it 

another year . . . They’ve been waiting for two years to get 

this vote out of the way. And I don’t think it would be fair to 

them to delay it. And they do have the advantage of the 

advanced poll on August 29. So hopefully they’ll all still be 

around. 

 

Regarding the time period to proceed, the government leads 

the procession, so to speak, and we would do it in 

consultation with the people in the area. I suppose we could 

get it done. It would be nice, I suppose, or comfortable if we 

could proceed on a fiscal year, which would be January 1, 

and if they chose to do that, then we would try to meet that 

deadline. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier 

the minister expressed a point of view that had been put 

forward by SUMA over the years, in that SUMA has 

expressed reservations about local councils becoming 

dominated by people other than those who live in the local 

municipality. I would agree that those are valid 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1766 

 

reservations, especially as these pertain to urban 

municipalities, or what is commonly referred to as urban 

municipalities - our cities, towns, and again, especially our 

villages. 

 

(1600) 

 

The minister would do well to listen to the concerns of 

SUMA, especially given the Ferland fiasco where we had a 

fiasco that resulted from a less than adequate consideration, 

by that government, of amendments put forward by it in 

1983 and ’84 — a situation where the government, because 

of its ideological blinkers, felt that it was imperative that 

property owners be given the right to, in addition to money 

bills, be able to vote for local councils, and therefore resulted 

in a situation in Ferland where people from outside, 

basically, were able to dominate the local election. And that 

is a fiasco that results from the actions of the government 

opposite. So I would commend to him those reservations of 

SUMA, and I would commend to him a thorough review of 

The Urban Municipality Act, The Local Government 

Election Act, and to rectify the kind of problem that occurred 

there. 

 

Resort villages are a different situation that is clearly 

outlined in the legislation. I have received a review from the 

law clerk, who states that, and I quote: 

 

Resort villages are treated differently from other 

municipalities in that spouses of residents and 

assessable owners of land are qualified as electors, and 

non-resident owners and their spouses are also qualified 

to be candidates. 

 

It is not clear whether or not . . . the amendment, I go on: 

 

The amendment proposed by Bill 31 would permit 

persons who lease land in a resort village for at least six 

months, and their spouses, to qualify as electors, but not 

as candidates. And the situation proposed for lessees by 

Bill 31 will differ from the situation for owners of land 

in the resort village, in that owners of land, and their 

spouses, because they are electors, are also qualified to 

be candidates. Lessees will be qualified as electors, but 

not as candidates. 

 

In speaking to the second reading of this Bill, Mr. Chairman, 

I indicated our reservations about this dual status, this junior 

citizenship, this limited franchise that is being offered for 

lessees, as distinct from landowners. And again the minister 

refused to entertain an amendment which would have 

clarified what was meant by “lessees.” But I’m not satisfied 

with the minister’s explanation that for some reason or 

another, that we should wait before a further amendment can 

be entertained which might then allow electors the 

opportunity . . . or lessees, not only the opportunity to vote in 

resort village elections but also to be able to run for office in 

resort village elections. 

 

He’s somehow indicating that some massive review will take 

place; that we will know more next year than we know now. 

And I would ask the minister what is the nature of the review 

that he proposes to undertake with respect to the question of 

allowing lessees not only the  

right to vote but also the right to run for election? What is the 

nature of the review? What kind of methodology do you 

have in place to examine this question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I guess at the outset all I 

can do is apologize to lessees out there. I’m sorry to hear that 

the hon. member opposite doesn’t hold too high an opinion 

of lessees. I do. and that’s why we’re bringing in this 

amendment. We want to provide them with the opportunity 

to vote. 

 

The mechanism that’s in place is the continuing and ongoing 

discussions that our government is known for right across 

this province. We have consulted with groups since 1982. 

We still do, and we will continue to do so. And if these 

consultations bring about errors in our legislation, certainly 

we’re going to look at them and, hopefully with the 

co-operation of the opposition, amend any errors in 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Chairman, he points out for instance to the unfortunate 

situation that arose in Ferland. And I agree, and as a result 

we will be bringing forward legislation to correct that 

situation. And in some instances there’s kind of a parallel 

between what his argument is and what he’s asking, because 

the problem in Ferland turned out to be non-residents. 

 

He’s asking us to treat the lessees in, again, a different matter 

in a lot of instances, maybe in not the two particular 

communities that are affected today, but in other 

communities, resort areas throughout the province, a lessee is 

a non-resident. And we could have exactly the same situation 

occur as occurred in Ferland, and we want to avoid that. And 

in consultation with SUMA and with PARCS and with a lot 

of people out there that are both lessees and owners who 

have vital interests in their properties, this is the legislation 

that we came up with. This is the legislation that they want. 

This is the legislation that they’re happy with. And they 

know that at some future point in time, after all is said and 

done, if we have to amend it to, in fact, allow them the 

opportunity to run for office, when all of these facts and 

figures come in, if indeed the incorporations ever even occur, 

then we’ll deal with it when we have to. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, for the minister to 

somehow suggest that we don’t support the right of lessees to 

have the right to vote, I would point out to him that we just 

passed section 3 and that was supported by this side of the 

House, notwithstanding your stubbornness and your 

intransigence and not accepting reasonable amendments that 

would improve that section. This side of the House supported 

section 3, and we support the right of lessees to be able to 

vote in their local elections in resort village elections. 

 

The question at stake here in section 4 is the question of 

whether these lessees, in addition to having the right to vote, 

should also have the right to be able to run for office. And 

you say that you have consulted. I would submit to you that 

you’ve not consulted fully. I would submit to you that what 

you’ve been doing is listening to yourself. 

 

The opinions that I’ve received from people involved in 

resort communities, including those involved in parks, 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1767 

 

would seem to indicate that they, in addition to wanting the 

right for lessees to be able to vote, they want the right for 

lessees to be able to run for office, to be put on the same 

footing as those who are landowners. And again, their 

interpretation of lessees is someone who is also directly 

assessed and taxed for improvements on leased land. 

 

Mr. Minister, how long will we have to wait until your 

review is completed and until you come back with an 

amendment to also allow lessees the right to run? Can you 

advise us as to whether or not this amendment will come 

forward, or some statement will come forward on this prior 

to resort village elections which are scheduled for 1988? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, I can’t give you any absolute 

assurance of the date. And keep in mind this, and this is the 

important point - the residency clause is the awful important 

point - if a person lives there six months prior to the election, 

even if he is a lessee, he does have the opportunity to run. 

 

So I don’t think that there’s a big problem out there at all. I 

think that you’re carrying it far too far. A lessee right now 

has the opportunity to run as a councillor, providing he lives 

there for six months; that’s it. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I’m beginning to get 

an impression here of a minister who knows and recognizes 

that there are shortcomings in a Bill. But rather than do the 

right thing, and that is accept reasonable amendments, the 

minister is choosing to explain away an oversight in the 

legislation with vague assurances of some future 

improvements. Again I would point out to the minister that 

consultation is a good think, but that there is a further forum 

for consultation in this province, and that is this Assembly, 

and that if there are reasonable amendments to be put 

forward, you should take heed of those rather than simply 

disregard them, and in your own stubborn way try to explain 

away your shortcomings. 

 

Mr. Minister, I hope that you would say that there would be 

amendments forthcoming next year to enable lessees to also 

have the right to not only vote, but also to run for office. 

Although assurances about legislation coming forward next 

year is not the type of solid assurance it once was in this 

House, Mr. Chairman, we don’t seem to have an assurance, 

once this session adjourns, whether the House will sit again 

for another year. But anyway, I would . . . notwithstanding 

the minister’s protestations, I think that it would be 

appropriate to amend section 4: 

 

By striking out section 4 of the printed Bill. 

 

Seconded by the hon. member for The Battlefords, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

(16:14) 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 15 

 

Prebble Kowalsky 

 

 

 

Shillington Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Anguish 

Rolfes Hagel 

Upshall Lyons 

Simard  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d ask members to be quiet when 

the vote is being taken. 
 
Calvert Smart 

Lautermilch Van Mulligen 
 

Nays — 30 
 
Devine Smith 

Duncan Swan 

Andrew Muirhead 

Berntson Schmidt 

Lane Hodgins 

Taylor Gerich 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’ve asked members to 

remain quiet while the vote is being taken, and I will enforce 

that. 
 
Hepworth Swenson 

Klein Martens 

Meiklejohn Gleim 

Martin Neudorf 

Toth Gardner 

Sauder Kopelchuk 

McLaren Saxinger 

Hopfner Britton 

Petersen Goodale 
 
 
Clause 4 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 31 - An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move the Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want 

to indicate that this side of the House will support the Bill. 

There are shortcomings in the Bill. We attempted to put 

forward amendments to improve the Bill, in particular to 

provide for a clearer definition of the term “lessee” in the 

context of resort villages; secondly, to enable lessees not 

only the right to vote in resort village elections, but also to be 

able to run for office in resort village elections. 
 
These amendments were denied by the members opposite. 

Nevertheless we will support the Bill. And it is our opinion 

that some progress in this area is preferable to no progress at 

all, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1768 

 

under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, we have a few questions to 

ask this afternoon prior to going into the subvotes. 

 

My first set of questions deals with students who have 

enrolled in private institutions, particularly in some of the 

newer private schools that have come to being in the last few 

years. We have a tradition in =Saskatchewan of course, 

where both private and post-secondary schools work 

alongside with the technical schools to provide skills in 

business education, or in some cases it could be some trades. 

But there’s some things that have happened and people have 

brought to my attention that I want to ask you about. 

 

The problem is that some of the students who have now been 

enrolled in some of the private schools have come to me and 

said, look, we were talked into and sort of induced into 

taking a course at a private school as opposed to a tech. We 

were on a waiting list for the technical school. We knew that 

the tuition fee was $4,000, or close to $4,000, whereas, at the 

technical school it was a smaller tuition fee. We enrolled in 

good faith, and then what happened is we ended . . . 

 

There’s a couple of scenarios. Some of the students that 

finished their courses went out, and although they were sort 

of given the indication - or they tell me that they were given 

the indication that they might get jobs - found out that people 

that they went to look for jobs with, would not accept their 

credentials. And they felt used, as a result of this. 

 

Other students would get into a conflict, maybe with a staff 

member or with the institution itself, or might decide 

half-way through that, gee, this isn’t the course for them, and 

they would end up pulling out. 

 

Now the difficulty here is that one they make that decision to 

leave the schools, or after they’ve come out of the schools, 

they felt abused, and they have no . . . didn’t seem to have 

any way of appealing - appealing what has happened to 

them, appealing to any authority other than the principal of 

the school if they do feel abused. 

 

And I’m wondering if there’s anything that you could do, 

Mr. Minister, or anything that your department could do, in 

terms of the regulations regulating private schools, that 

would provide for a student the right of appeal in more than 

one manner. Right now the only thing they can do is to go 

directly to their instructor, who goes up to the principal, and 

the principal’s decision holds. 

 

At a university, for example, a student has several avenues. 

He may go to an instructor; he may go to a student council; 

he may go to a faculty council; he may go to a faculty 

member; he may even go to a board of  

governors. Is there anything in the regulations that you might 

consider doing in this respect? And I ask also whether you 

have received this type of concern directly to your 

department? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the 

question that you raise relative to private institutions and 

mechanisms for students to deal with actions that they may 

feel unfair, or of whatever nature, is a fair question, and a 

good one that you raise. And it may be, to some degree, be 

an emerging issue. 

 

In the course of the discussions that I had this past winter 

when we were looking at restructuring post-secondary 

education, one of the meetings that I held was with a number 

of private institution operators. And they too, to share with 

you some of what went on at that meeting, they too are 

concerned about getting black eyes by having a bad apple in 

the barrel, if you like, about fly-by-night operations, and 

raised with me while they were there in the discussion the 

possibility of they themselves looking at perhaps formalizing 

a professional association amongst themselves. 

 

I don’t know as anything’s come forward on that yet, but I 

can assure you that certainly the ones who are in that room 

are keenly interested in not having their quality reputations 

jeopardized because of the actions of one or two or some 

who might be seen to enter into some of these areas in a 

fly-by-night, almost, kind of manner. I suspect that we’ll see 

something more come forward on this over the weeks and 

months ahead. The cases that are brought to our attention 

now, such as you mentioned, would number maybe three or 

four dozen a year, I’m guessing, but something in that order. 

And we do have some avenues. 

 

And most often we are prepared to take it up on the student’s 

behalf and raise the issue with the institution in question, 

albeit that it is . . . the tool we’re using there is moral 

suasion. I suppose if we saw something so severe in our 

minds, we could go to warnings and even ultimately, I 

suppose, threaten to withdraw licensing and that kind of 

thing. 

 

Given what I’ve heard, the operators themselves say when I 

met with them . . . I would like to see what develops on that 

side, because I sense that they were too genuinely interested 

in maintaining their reputations, that they are not well-served 

if they’ve got a bunch of . . . if their institution becomes 

known as not being one of high standards. 

 

So your question is a good one. It may be an emerging issue 

there. We’ve been able to deal with them to date, as I said, 

through moral suasion, largely. If there’s further action that 

needs to be taken, it may well be forthcoming on the basis of 

some other discussions. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, I’m assuming that you’re familiar with The Private 

Vocational Schools Regulations Act, which your department 

administers. I would like to know how many contraventions 

of this Act there have been in the last 12  



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1769 

 

months, and what were the natures of those contraventions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I said in reply to the hon. 

member from Prince Albert’s question, we get about three to 

four dozen, and that’s an estimate. We could undertake to 

find the number out more accurately if you like. But 

something in the nature of 40 or 50 complaints a year, and 

based on those it seems to make sense we do try and carry 

them forward on behalf of the student. 

 

Ms. Smart: — I asked you also what the nature of those 

contraventions were. Were there any that related to a private 

vocational school failing to having competent instructors? 

And can you table the information relating to each of these 

contraventions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In so far as a detailed list, we don’t 

have that available here, but we can undertake to provide you 

with that, if not yet today, as soon as possible. 

 

In so far as the kinds of contraventions or the kinds of 

complaints we get, there’s a fairly wide range. A couple that 

are fairly common, I suppose, or a couple that would come to 

mind, at least, would be . . . oh, thinks like, you know, an 

individual who has failed or been expelled, and the natural 

kind of reaction that you might get from somebody who has 

been failed or expelled when they thought they were . . . had 

not been treated fairly. The quality of instruction has been a 

source of complaint on occasion; those would be a couple of 

the kinds of things we’ve dealt with. 

 

Ms. Smart: — So you are saying that you will table the 

details of those complaints in the House as soon as possible? 

We would like very much to have those. 

 

Another question I would like to ask you is: I understand 

there have been several incidents in which your department 

has been paying out student loans and sends them directly to 

the private vocational school, which then cashes them instead 

of giving them to the student to cash. Are you familiar with 

that, and don’t you think that cheques should be cashed 

directly by the students rather than by the schools? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, my understanding is the 

cheques are sent where the student instructs, and maybe 

there’s instances where the student asks them to sent it to the 

institution, in the event that they might be in limbo and 

moving and not sure what their new address could be. I 

mean, I don’t think either of us would want to have the 

situation where, as you describe, cheques are being cashed 

and the money ahs not been forthcoming to the student, 

unless that was an arrangements that had been worked out 

between the student and the institution. And my understand 

is, unless you know of a case differently, the cheque goes to 

where the student instructs. 

 

Ms. Smart: — So as far as you’re concerned, you don’t 

know if the institutions are cashing the cheques and then 

giving the money to the students, rather than giving the 

cheque directly to the student. 

 

Another question: I would like to know what steps you’re  

taking to ensure that the curriculum being submitted to your 

department on paper by a private vocational school is as 

good as the curriculum actually being delivered in the 

classrooms of that school. What inspections are done at each 

school to check the curriculum quality, and how frequently 

are these inspections done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I understand that if a school 

or institution applies for a licence, there is some inspection, 

and we have to be satisfied to the point that they have a 

proper plan or proper facility, that the curriculum is a factor. 

I’m also advised that if they put in a course that they really 

hadn’t originally had licensing under, or for, in the initial 

instance, that we look again at what they’re proposing so that 

we’re satisfied of a new course that’s put ion place, through 

some . . . that we have some understanding of it and some 

sense of their curriculum. Not that it’s maybe an in depth 

process and an ongoing one, but there is some requirements 

for a new licence and for establishing of new courses. 

 

Ms. Smart: — that doesn’t sound like a very strong process 

of inspection of the private schools. But I just have one other 

question and one comment. When you submit the 

documents, table the documents, about the complaints and 

the nature of the complaints, will you also give us the names 

of the schools that the complaints have been lodged against? 

 

And my final question: will you give us the names of the 

schools, and have you set a maximum rate for tuition that can 

charged by the private schools in Saskatchewan — private 

vocational schools? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We don’t have any say over tuition 

fees. I think the market-place, I suppose, is the factor that’s 

the determinant factor there. 

 

The other thing I’m advised, to clarify with you, is relative to 

what I can supply you, in so far as the complaints that have 

come forward. We can give types and numbers based on 

legal implications on this. We may not be able to name 

names, if you like, because we might be seen to be 

besmirching the name of a reputable institution, if I 

somehow might suggest in this legislature that it’s under 

investigation, or I had these complaints and they turned out 

to be nothing. And I’ll give you as much as I can give based 

on the constraints that I will have to operate within from a 

legal standpoint. So I’ll give you everything I can, given that 

caveat. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be brief. My 

spirit’s willing, but my voice is not, today. 

 

I just want to say to the minister, first of all, that his 

comment with respect to the fact that tuition rates at private 

vocational schools are to be governed by the market-place, I 

don’t think is accurate. In fact, under the private vocational 

schools Act, which your deputy minister kindly sent me . . . 

on upon examining that, it’s very clear in there that you have 

every right to pass regulations setting maximum tuition rates 

for private vocational schools. 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1770 

 

And I suggest you look at setting some maximums, Mr. 

Minister, because it’s just outrageous that tuition rates of 

$3,000 or more can be charged for courses of only six 

months duration which, if they were taken at a technical 

institute, would only be one-sixth of the cost they are at some 

of these private vocational schools. 

 

But my question to you, sir, relates to your failure to consult 

with the trade advisory boards at Saskatchewan’s technical 

institutes before you severely cut back on instructor positions 

and student spaces in many of the trade programs at those 

technical institutes. You have been indicating for months that 

you, as minister, would meet with the chairman of each trade 

advisory board. When can we expect that you will actually 

hold such a meeting and consult with them about the future 

of training in areas such as carpentry, welding, and the trades 

as a whole? When can we expect that meeting to take place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — A couple of points I would make 

here. I don’t think the hon. member should assume that just 

because we’re in this legislature, or just because we’re 

making some changes based on some consultation 

throughout the winter, that somehow when that legislation is 

passed or the new institute is up and running that somehow 

we stop talking and consulting with these trade advisory 

boards. I think you will probably know there’s 100 or more 

that follow that category and it’s just there are some physical 

constraints as far as how many one can meet in any given 

day or week or month especially given what we’ve been 

doing for the last three weeks, certainly. But that 

consultation can be ongoing. 

 

I can tell you that I met with, as part of those meetings that I 

described earlier, across the province this winter, with the 

provincial apprenticeship board which in many ways would 

be the umbrella organization. Maybe not as good as meeting 

with 100 individual boards, but certainly I think it provided 

me with some useful insight. And as it relates to the 

instructors and laid-off instructors, I think I would underline 

and remind you again that everyone offered a job with the 

exception of one. I think we ought to bear that in mind. We 

tried to be very conscious of their needs. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, that last statement just can’t 

be true. You fired 142 instructors at Saskatchewan’s 

technical institutes, and you simply can’t be accurate when 

you’re telling this House that they all had an opportunity to 

get other employment. 

 

I can tell you that in my home city of Saskatoon where you 

chose to fire 74 instructors, that the large majority of those 

instructors, many of whom are my friends, many of whom 

are acquaintances, don’t have jobs today. So don’t talk about 

that kind of nonsense in this House, Mr. Minister. 

 

I want to urge you to get on with pursuing your meetings 

with the chairpeople of the trade advisory boards. 

 

And I have one final question for you, and that pertains to 

the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 

Regina. As you know, Mr. Minister, a large number of the 

faculty at both of . . . particularly at the University of  

Saskatchewan, were hired from the United States and from 

England in the 1960s to work in Saskatchewan. And a large 

number of those faculty will be retiring in the late 1980s, the 

early 1990s. There is obviously a need in this province to 

phase in the hiring of new faculty members. We’ll not be 

served well by a process in which a large number of people 

retire in a short space of two or three years and the 

universities have to rush out onto the market-place looking to 

hire dozens of new faculty members each year. 

 

So my question to you is: would you be prepared in 

conjunction with the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina to set up a faculty renewal fund 

whereby early retirement opportunities would be made 

available for some senior faculty in those institutions now, 

and the hiring of new faculty could be phased in over a 

period of 10 years rather than being done in a hurried manner 

from the period 1990 to 1992? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative . . . I want to . . . I sensed 

the hon. member’s emotions when I said that, relative to the 

lay-offs, that those who had wanted to get another job had 

been offered another job, with the exception of one. And I 

think the hon. member thought I was talking nonsense, to use 

his own words. And I want to say to you that I’ve done some 

re-checking with my officials, and I stand by that statement. 

 

And I know there’s been a fair amount of media hype about 

the treatment of people in the Public Service Commission at 

educational institutions, but we’ve also clearly said all along 

that we want to do right by our people if we can. And so 

when the lay-offs occurred, there were some who . . . They 

had a number of options, one being that there were some 

settlements, and some took those. Others could bump, and 

some did, and there was bumping. And I’m led to believe 

that, even to this bumping process, everything has worked 

out, if you like. 

 

And there was others who were, as I said earlier, offered 

employment. And some of the examples that you raised, it 

may well have been that they were offered but turned the job 

down because they want to wait for something better. But I 

stand by my statement that those who wanted, were offered, 

and last time we checked there was only one who we hadn’t 

been able to — that that statement wouldn’t ring true for. 

 

So I stand by my original statement, and I think it speaks 

well for what the institutes, in conjunction with my staff 

officials and the administrative staff of these institutes, have 

been able to do through this process. 

 

As it relates to your suggestion for a faculty renewal fund at 

the University of Regina, University of Saskatchewan 

because of the demographics of our faculty, I’m advised that 

under the auspices of the University renewal and 

development fund, both universities have put forth proposals 

that would see some of that money being used for faculty 

renewal. 

 

And I can’t say much more than that about that at this point 

in time, except that to say it’s under consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

August 13, 1987 

 

1771 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, thank you very much for 

your very enthusiastic response to my rising to speak to these 

estimates. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we are nearing the completion of the 

Education estimates, and in these . . . before we complete 

these estimates, I would like to take some time to review 

some of the things that we have heard. We have strived in 

these estimates to bring to the attention of the minister, the 

concerns of the public of -s, and I intend to take the rest of 

the time this afternoon, Mr. Minister, and then to complete 

my remarks when we reconvene at 7. 

 

But the message is this. All the people that we have talked to, 

Mr. Minister, and people who have sent us letters, and 

colleagues of mine, and colleagues of other members in this 

legislature, have very grave concerns about what your 

government has done to education, what this minister is 

doing to education. And I could pass this concern on in a 

one-sentence summary, Mr. Chairman, and that summary, 

and the message that I pass on to the minister is this: the 

choices that your government has made are a betrayal to the 

youth of Saskatchewan. And I will repeat that. The choices 

that your government made are a betrayal to the youth of 

Saskatchewan. That is a one-sentence summary of what has 

happened to education as we’ve revealed in these estimates. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Minister, there were choices, and clearly your 

choice was to remove Education from a priority of this 

government as you did Health and Social Services. And I say 

it was a betrayal to the youth of Saskatchewan, that is, it was 

a betrayal to the entire population of Saskatchewan. Now 

why? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — No one asked, prior to this budget 

coming forth, no one asked that school grants be cut. No on e 

asked that the educational development fund be cut. No one 

asked that the Department of Education staff be purged. No 

one asked that the university budgets be frozen. I didn’t hear 

anybody ask that the community college offerings should be 

slashed. I didn’t hear anybody ask that technical school staff 

or technical school student positions should be slashed. No 

one asked for that. 

 

Nor did you on the government side campaign on that. And 

that’s why the people of Saskatchewan were betrayed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I agree with the people when they say 

that they were betrayed. Nobody believes that Health or 

Education should be short-changed for the purpose of 

accomplishing the political agenda of any party, particularly 

in this case, of this party, the Conservative Party that’s 

running this government. 

 

Now what has happened is that your incompetent 

government has so mismanaged, so mismanaged the finances 

of this province that when you went to the money-lenders 

they told you that there was no more low 

interest money for Saskatchewan. Shy? Because you are $3.4 

billion in debt. 

 

They told you if you wanted to get any more low interest 

money you had to change your ways. Your financial house is 

in a mess, they said, so change your ways. 

 

During your first four years of government you made the 

first bad choice. You chose to go on a spending spree. And I 

say that was a choice because as I will point out shortly, you 

could have collected more resource income. 

 

And then when it came in this budget, you were faced with a 

second choice. How could you change your direction? 

Unfortunately, education was affected. Because this budget 

and these education estimates reveal the real choice that you 

made. You clearly reduced the amount that should have been 

wisely spend in education, in my estimate, is by about $30 

million. 

 

Did you go before the people and say, we must keep our 

education offerings first-rate, therefore we’ll charge higher 

oil royalties and we’ll put some of that money into 

education? No, you didn’t do it. You did exactly the 

opposite. What leadership! 

 

Did you say: we made a mistake by giving Weyerhaeuser a 

$248 million paper mill . . . pulp mill and the forest rights, 

and we’ll get payment only after a 30 per cent profit? Did 

you say you made a mistake? No. You didn’t say that, well 

maybe we should go back because we need some money for 

the school dental plan. No, you did exactly the opposite. 

 

And I say, where’s the leadership? Did you make any 

decision . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. It being now 5 o’clock, I 

will leave the chair until 7. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


