













































July 23, 1987 Hansard Evening


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 23, 1987 

 

 

1347 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. The business 

before the committee is Education, and I would like at this time 

to ask the Minister of Education if he would please introduce 

his staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 

right, I have Lawrie McFarlane, the deputy for the department; 

to his right is Liz Crosthwaite, assistant deputy minister; behind 

me and to my right is Glen Penner, associate deputy minister; 

and to his left, Don Wright, assistant deputy minister; and to my 

left, Steven Pillar, associate deputy minister. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I think, Mr. Chairman, my first words must 

be one of thanks to the House Leader. I didn’t expect to have an 

opportunity to get into Education estimates close to the 

beginning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I, and a number of others who might have 

had to sit while the member from Prince Albert, who is our 

critic, conducted these, now have an opportunity to get in and 

discuss issues which are of interest to us. 

 

It is, of course, accurate to say that when the critic’s back, the 

same issues will be canvassed again. He’ll want to do it from 

his own perspective, but we have an opportunity to do it 

tonight. So, as I say, my first words must be one of thanks to the 

House Leader for giving us this extra evening on which we can 

pursue some estimates in a slightly different fashion. 

 

I want to address some general comments to the Minister of 

Education. The path of destruction which your government has 

wrought in the five years it’s been in office has really been 

awesome, Mr. Minister. 

 

If someone had told me on April 26, 1982, when you were 

elected, four years hence the provincial deficit would be over $2 

billion, if someone had told me that skilled tradesmen would be 

begging jobs, if someone had told me that our education 

system, particularly higher education, would lay in ruins, I 

would have said nobody could do that much damage in four, 

short years, but you did. And since the election, Mr. Minister, 

the path of destruction has broadened considerably. 

 

Mr. Minister, our educational system ought to make all of us 

ashamed of ourselves. In my riding, Mr. Minister, I have an 

abnormally large percentage of the old and the young. It just 

happens to be the demographics in my riding. So I meet with a 

fair number of young people, and I say to them, Mr. Minister, if 

you are not . . . I say to these people, if you’re not furious about 

what’s happening to  

you, then you haven’t been where I’ve been, because when I 

was your age, the educational system was a lot better than it is 

now and we didn’t face the challenges which you face. 

 

Mr. Minister, the technical institutes are bursting at the seams. 

The universities are in such sorry shape that during a general 

election in October in Regina, the Conservative Party couldn’t 

find anyone with sufficient courage to go to that university and 

participate in a debate. Mr. Minister, not one person was 

prepared to go and try to justify what you people have done to 

higher education . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, you 

showed up two weeks late after you were thoroughly 

embarrassed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — The member from Regina Centre, who 

might have been trying to figure out his party affiliation at that 

time - that may have been one of his problems . . . The member 

from Regina Wascana said he was there. The member from 

Regina Wascana was there two weeks late. He wasn’t prepared 

to come when the debate was on, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, the scope of the destruction which you have 

wrought in the last nine months leaves us an endless number of 

areas which we are going to examine. Mr. Minister, I want to 

begin with one of your more widely acclaimed triumphs, your 

amalgamation of the technical institutes. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have met with a number of my constituents. All 

who are attending the institutes fear a loss of autonomy. The 

native education institute, Gabriel Dumont, the Saskatchewan 

Indian Federated College, have a particular need for a separate 

board of governors, a separate board to ensure that those 

institutes reflect a particular culture of native people and their 

particular needs. And you’ve washed that away without, 

apparently, any consultation with native people. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you don’t care about the preservation of the 

native culture - and that’s a big part of what those institutes are 

about - and if you don’t care about the success of those 

institutes in training native people - and they have a very 

impressive track record - one would at least have thought that 

common decency would have moved you to discuss it with 

them in advance. But you didn’t have that kind of courtesy. 

 

The rationalization of the technical institute, Mr. Minister, has 

meant a very considerable difficulty to students. It is just simply 

irrational to suggest that one course in the province of this size 

in any given discipline is enough. That’s just irrational to 

suggest that. That’s what you’ve done. You have, Mr. Minister, 

said to students that if you want to take a given course, you’ve 

got to travel. That’s an option for some people. For some who 

have recently graduated from grade 12, who haven’t any ties, 

that’s an option. But for a lot of people, Mr. Minister, who need 

technical training and who want it, travelling is just simply not 

an option. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to read you one letter which I got,  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1348 

 

given the vindictive record of this government in dealing with 

people who have the temerity to suggest that there’s any room 

for improvement. I’m not going to use this individual’s name; 

we’ll call her Jane Smith. She wrote to me as follows: 

 

I am writing my concerns about the recent government 

cut-backs in adult education. I am presently a student 

enrolled in the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and 

Sciences (Business Division). 

 

These cut-backs directly affect (me and) quite a number of 

students in this province. Myself, I know that I will not be 

able to continue my education, at least for a few years. To do 

so would mean making a move to Moose Jaw, which for me 

is financially impossible, going to school during the day to 

pick up one class, (I am self-supporting) and not being able to 

hold down a job unless I was able to find one with shift work 

that could revolve around a class in school. 

 

Even if I were able to make this move and incur all expenses 

. . . it would mean staying out of school for at least one year, 

as the enrolment at STI . . . is presently full, and has been 

such for the last two months. 

 

I think the real problem involved here is the lack of 

communication between the government and the students 

directly (involved) . . . We have no idea (and had no idea) 

how extensive the problem is or may become, and we also 

have no idea what our possible recourses may be. 

 

Madam Minister . . . Mr. Minister, it’s an easy mistake to make. 

Mr. Minister, I would appreciate your giving me an answer 

which you might bring to this student who is unable to continue 

her education. She not only wrote me, Mr. Minister, I phoned 

her, and the facts in her letter are accurate. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d tell me what you think . . . how 

you think this letter ought to be replied to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, there is 

a number of points in your opening remarks. I suppose the 

essential one is why did we put together a new blueprint for 

post-secondary or adult education in this province. You 

suggested in your remarks, wrongly of course, that higher 

education - I think these are your words - is lying in ruins, 

talked about widely acclaimed crimes, talked about how when 

you were in school it was a lot better. And I would suggest to 

the hon. member that really probably that is part and parcel of 

the problem with the NDP party today, is that they continue to 

cling to the past when it comes to addressing the issues of the 

future. And the issues of the future consist of things like 

addressing education and its importance as we move towards 

the 21st century. 

 

And I say that because, Mr. Speaker - Mr. Chairman, 

rather - the young people of this province who are going to be 

the big users of the adult education system over the next couple 

of years, no matter what political stripe they  

are, recognize that there has to be changes, that some of the 

structures in the institutes that we cling to in the past, albeit that 

they served us well - it’s not as though they somehow failed us 

or somehow that we were wrong in those policies because we 

were not - but you must face up to the future. You must face up 

to the realities of the future. 

 

And I would suggest to you that’s why there have been 

resolutions, resolutions like this one where young people 

endorse . . . resolutions like this one from the young people of 

this province, where young people endorse and actively support 

the reorganization of technical institutes under an independent 

board similar in nature and structure to the university board of 

governors. 

 

That’s the kind of thing the young people are saying. They said 

to reorganize, support the reorganization of technical institutes 

under an independent board similar in nature and structure to 

the university board of governors. That, Mr. Chairman, was the 

resolution at the last NDP convention from the Saskatchewan 

Young New Democrats. The youth in the New Democrats 

recognize there had to be change. They put forth this resolution, 

Mr. Chairman; they are ahead of their party. Young people 

across this province want these changes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The hon. member harkened back to the days when he was in 

school - and they were grand old days then and I loved them 

too - but . . . And back in those days we farmed with horses, and 

horsepower - in the very, very classic sense of the word - was 

important to the well-being of a farm. That was replaced by the 

horsepower in tractors. And to have told a farmer then that to be 

successful, and rather then buy a tractor, that you should 

somehow double the number of horses you have on your farm, 

would make no more sense then than if we were to suggest that 

today. And that’s exactly what we’re facing in education. 

Horsepower is going to be replaced by brainpower, and that’s 

why we must make these changes. 

 

Back in your days there was, what, one university, maybe one 

institute, compared to what we have today. So how can one say 

that you should cling to the past, stick to the status quo, and 

make no changes. The budget then was probably a quarter of 

what it is today. 

 

And you made reference particularly to native education. And I 

want to read to you from the report, the document Preparing for 

the Year 2000, adult education in Saskatchewan, which will 

serve as our blueprint for the next couple of decades in this 

province, insofar as the course we will chart with adult 

education. And here’s what it said - and we released this, as you 

know, a couple of three months ago: 

 

The province will propose that there be joint native 

ownership and management of the new Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology. This will be 

accomplished by establishing a Native Studies division of 

the new institute, on an equal basis with other program 

divisions. Native representatives would be appointed to 

the Board of Directors. By this mechanism, not only can 

native programs be  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1349 

 

delivered by native people, but native people will also 

have a say for the first time in the running of the entire 

institute. 

 

We believe this proposal breaks important new ground in 

native education by creating a partnership of equals. If this 

approach is successful, the province will consider 

expanding it to other parts of the adult education system. 

 

(1915) 

 

And indeed that is breaking new ground. And it flies exactly in 

the face of what you were saying about no consultation, no 

involvement. That is involvement like we’ve never seen before, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

And as it relates to the number of spaces that are available, 

training spaces that are available, in this province this year at 

technical institutes . . . And you can resort to your inflamed 

rhetoric, your overstatement that quite frankly no one believes. I 

mean no one buys, nor is it the truth. No one buys, nor is it the 

truth that higher education lies in ruins. That’s silly talk. You 

know it’s silly; I know it’s silly; the people know it’s silly. 

Because the reality today in Saskatchewan is, we are spending 

between the school boards and this government something well 

over $1 billion on education in this province, kindergarten right 

through to universities - over $1 billion. And although the 

opposition may try to suggest to people that somehow higher 

education will lie in ruins because of $1 billion expenditure in 

education, they will look at what you cannot do for $1 billion. 

The people of Saskatchewan, the young people, the parents, the 

teachers of this province prefer to look at what we can do with 

$1 billion in educating our young people as it relates to 

technical institutes, specifically, and the spaces in technical 

institutes. 

 

When you were in government, did you ever build a new 

technical institute at Prince Albert? No. We have expanded to 

four centres. We have now a fourth campus in Prince Albert. 

And there are now 1,700 more spaces in . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. I’m having 

difficulty hearing the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There are 1,700 spaces today, 

additional spaces that exist today that didn’t exist when your 

party was in power - 1,700 plus spaces. That’s a 25 per cent 

increase. And that doesn’t address the expectations we have for 

things like our extension programs, our off-campus programs 

across this entire province through distance education and the 

extension network, whether it be for university programming or 

institute programming. 

 

So by whatever measure, by whatever measure, what we have 

done in the last four years has set us apart from other provinces, 

quite frankly, and what we are doing now will set us apart from 

other provinces, quite frankly. Saskatchewan has traditionally 

been known to be ahead of the pack, and I would suggest to you 

that with these changes we will continue to stay ahead of the 

pack. 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, when I was in university, the 

classes were not overloaded. Instructors had time at the 

completion of the classes to go with students and discuss the 

content of the lecture. 

 

Mr. Minister, you said that you are the way of the future. I can 

tell you, Mr. Minister, that the worst fear of these students is 

that this is the way of the future. That is their very worst fear, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, one out of four students who apply to get into a 

technical institute actually are admitted. They’re afraid that 

yours is the way of the future. Mr. Minister, the universities are 

impossibly overcrowded. No one could learn in such an 

atmosphere. They’re afraid, Mr. Minister, that that’s the way of 

the future. Their very worst fears are that yours is the way of 

the future. Their highest hope is that a new government’s going 

to get elected which will have a much more a compassionate 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that they’re 

getting closer to their dreams and further from their nightmares 

as this charade carries on. 

 

Mr. Minister, I said there’s 5 bucks in it for you if you can 

remember what the question was. You didn’t take it, and I 

assume you couldn’t remember. 

 

Mr. Minister, what do you say to the students who can’t get into 

the classes, whose own classes are cancelled, who can’t get into 

the courses at the neighbouring institutes, who can’t afford to 

travel, and who can’t, Mr. Minister, and who can’t arrange their 

job schedule to do that? What do you say to them? Wait for the 

year 2000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, Mr. Chairman, 

made reference to when he was in college there were no waiting 

lists, and he somehow thinks that we should be proud of the 

number of people that had access to post-secondary education 

in the country 20 and 25 years ago. Well I want to tell you what 

the University of Saskatchewan report, Issues and Options, had 

to say about accessibility to universities and post-secondary 

institutions in this province 2 and 3 and 4 decades ago. I don’t 

have the report in front of me, but it goes something like this, 

Mr. Chairman, it goes something like this: some several 

decades ago about four young people out of a hundred had the 

opportunity to go on and get post-secondary education or 

university training in this province. That might have been the 

days when the hon. member was going and the days that he was 

referring to - four out of a hundred - and he somehow suggests 

that was a good track record. 

 

Since that time we have moved up to, Mr. Chairman, something 

in the order . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Members 

wishing to contribute to the debate will have that opportunity by 

standing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Back in those days, Mr. Chairman, 

four out of a hundred young people, something in that order, 

had the opportunity. Today, now  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1350 

 

something in the order of 25 country, and the urban centres 

more like 35 young people out of 100, have the opportunity to 

go to universities and get post-secondary education. So it seems 

to me, Mr. Chairman, that we have, what, a 6, 7, 800 per cent 

increase in the number of young people that are being able to go 

to university. And where some people think that somehow a 

large number of applications and a large number of enrolments 

for our universities is somehow a problem, I look upon that as a 

positive thing and that a lot of young people are having an 

opportunity to get a post-secondary education that never had to 

before. 

 

And he would further try to suggest that somehow, somehow 

waiting lists all of a sudden have come on the scene magically, 

and that is not the case, Mr. Chairman. Waiting lists, 

unfortunately I suppose one might argue, have been with us for 

some good long time. I think it’s safe to say that they are 

probably no worse, particularly, now than they were four or five 

years ago. In fact, in some institutions like STI, for every 14 

students that apply, 10 get in. 

 

I can recall the days when I was in college, which probably 

weren’t that much different than when the hon. member was in 

college, not that different in terms of time frame, there was a 6 

and 700 applications for 30 and 31 spaces. So to suggest that 

somehow this is a new phenomena, it would suggest to me that 

the hon. member has a poor memory. 

 

But it’s no good just to talk about waiting lists, it’s no good to 

talk about the very, very large enrolments, one has to do 

something about them. And that’s why, Mr. Chairman, that’s 

why we’re moving to deliver more and more programming to 

rural Saskatchewan, whether it be institute programming or 

university program, particularly through our regional college 

network. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’ll deal with 

the question. What do you say, Mr. Minister, to students whose 

courses are cancelled, who cannot get into the courses at the 

other institutes because they’re already filled up, who can’t 

afford to travel, and/or cannot arrange their work schedule? 

What do you say to them, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What I say to them is, yes, we are 

doing something about it. We have 1,700 more spaces today 

than when your party was in government, number one. And 

number two is, we have an extension program for rural 

Saskatchewan, province-wide accessibility that was not in place 

when you were in government. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, they’ll be delighted to know 

that you’re doing something about it. That’s all she wanted to 

hear, I’m quite certain. She just wanted to know that it was a 

matter of concern. 

 

Mr. Minister, did you give any thought at all to the human 

misery you were going to cause with this abrupt change? Did 

you give any thought at all to the students whose careers were 

going to be interrupted, perhaps ruined, as a result of this? Did 

you give any thought to that at all? Or did you simply allow 

those who believed that the deficit is the only problem you’ve 

got, did you simply allow them  

to run amuck in your department and cut whatever they like? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Because we recognize that, in fact, 

moving in the middle of, for example, a two-year course might 

cause some hardship, what we have done there is, for those 

students enrolled full time, we’re going to allow them to 

complete their course at the campus they were at. And I don’t 

think that . . . I think that’s very fair and certainly isn’t causing 

any human hardship. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, did it ever occur to you that 

there was a more . . . If this is a good idea, which we hotly 

dispute, did it ever occur to you that there’s a more 

compassionate way to do it, in a way which wouldn’t interrupt 

the training and the courses of students such as this? I’ve got a 

file full of these things. If you want to hear, Mr. Minister, from 

other Jane Smiths, I could read these letters all night. Did it ever 

occur to you, Mr. Minister, that there was a more 

compassionate way to do it than this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’ve already indicated to the hon. 

member, if he would have been listening, Mr. Chairman, and I 

would like to see the letters. Because if he’s so concerned, I 

would have thought he would have forwarded them to my 

office, but I don’t think I’ve had one letter from the hon. 

member, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I’ll say it again. If those people were enrolled in a two-year 

course, for example, and in the middle of that course, and 

they’re a full-time student, as far as is possible, they’re going to 

be allowed to complete that course where they first enrolled. 

Now that sounds awful fair. And if you want to continue to 

scare young people and to distort the facts, then you go right 

ahead because that’s just part of clinging to the past, and the 

NDP does not want to accept change. 

 

Everybody, the 550 groups, individuals, and associations that I 

met with over this winter, recognized we needed a system more 

in tune with this new economy. Your own critics, wherever they 

might be, recognized that there had to be change. They 

circulated a questionnaire to the institute people. Did they bring 

that forward to me with their recommendations? No. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave the 

subject of this letter with just this comment. Every time there’s 

a monumental screw-up in this government - and they come 

about once a week - the response of you or the Premier is, write 

me, bring these problems to me personally. Mr. Minister, that’s 

a sign of a bad program and an incompetent government. If you 

can’t design a program which doesn’t make a mess of students’ 

education, you shouldn’t have introduced it. And if the only 

response you’ve got is, well come to me and I’ll personally fix 

it up, that, Mr. Minister, is an admission of failure. 

 

Mr. Goulet; Mr. Minister, I’d like to direct my questions, my 

first series of questions, in regard to the North, and more 

particularly in regard to the creation of that northern career 

college. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where does the North begin? 

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1351 

 

Mr. Goulet: — The minister over here wants to know where 

the North begins. The Deputy Premier doesn’t know where the 

North is. He’s been governing for five years; he doesn’t know 

where the North is. 

 

(1930) 

 

The first question in regards to the North pertains to the 

involvement of people in northern Saskatchewan. That has been 

a continuing issue for many, many years. In 1973, when the La 

Ronge Region Community College was one of the first four in 

the province of Saskatchewan, a lot of the people mentioned 

that it was extremely important during that time in getting 

northern involvement. And of course, they had gotten that first 

through the NDP government. As time went on, in the latter 

‘70s, the people from the west side wanted involvement. So the 

West Side Community College was created and there was more 

involvement of people at the community level. Then, in the 

early ‘80s, the people from the north-east side wanted more 

involvement, and the NDP government said, yes, we will have 

more involvement of people at the community level. So 

approximately 20 communities were involved in the decision 

making of adult education in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

When this government came in the second time around, after 

decimating the North in the first four and a half years, the issue 

of involvement of people came to be of paramount interest 

again. The creation of a northern career college was put on 

people’s laps when they didn’t know and were not consulted to 

any great extent at all. People didn’t know anything about this 

northern career college that was all of a sudden dropped on their 

laps this spring. 

 

I really feel that this aspect of involvement and consultation so 

that you get the people of northern Saskatchewan governing and 

controlling their own institutions - that this government is 

straying away from that. The minister mentioned that we were 

supposedly clinging to the past. Well, I would say that he’s not 

only clinging to the past, he is clinging to the colonial past of 

the way back. Now you’re coming back to the real past. He’s 

trying to establish a northern career college with less 

involvement, from approximately 20 people to maybe 7 people. 

 

The other thing that was very important is the fact that people 

said, look, we have moved to the stage of involvement, we want 

to get in the stages of actually an elected board in the North. 

That’s the progression that it directly leads to. 

 

So the first question I would ask the minister is this: is that 

board that’s going to be governing the northern career college 

in northern Saskatchewan, is that going to be an elected board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I’m 

prepared to give that consideration. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chairperson, I am not at all satisfied with 

the answer by the minister. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Every time people from the North ask a 

question, the ministers from across here always don’t want to 

give you anything straight. It’s always under advisement. It’s 

always looking into it. Thirty years down the road it’ll be 

looking into it if they were ever that long. But we know we’re 

going to knock them off the next time around. 

 

We are here for answers. The people in northern Saskatchewan 

want answers. They want to know . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — They want to know, Mr. Minister, whether or 

not there will be an elected adult education board in northern 

Saskatchewan. Come out straight and say something about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As it relates to the North, I suppose, I 

approach this job with the view that I’m not a minister for the 

North or the South or the East or the West. I like to think that 

I’m a minister, and that we’re a department for the entire 

province, would be the first point I would make. 

 

Secondly, the hon. member is somehow suggesting that we’re 

decimating the North. I think that rhetoric does little to enhance 

the debate, quite frankly. It really has no place in here and it 

quite frankly doesn’t stand up against the facts. 

 

As I said in my earlier response, I’m prepared to give that 

option consideration, and I can tell you quite frankly that giving 

a consideration is a heck of a lot more than your party ever gave 

when it was government. And the thing that we are maintaining 

absolutely is all of the best of what we had in the past system, 

the local contact committees - and those centres will still be 

there; that network will still be there. 

 

Certainly, I suppose, we’ll have less need for triplication or 

duplication of administrators and some of those kinds of 

positions, albeit we are trying to accommodate all of the staff as 

best we can. And I suppose I shouldn’t be surprised that you 

don’t like what we’re doing there because I know your party, 

for the most part, operates on the theory that the more 

government the better, the more administrators the better - big 

government is better government somehow. 

 

What we are . . . the Northlands Career College will offer a 

number of services: university extension, vocational technical 

training on an outreach basis, and on a brokerage basis from 

institutes - the literacy training, I think, and the literacy 

initiative will be of great benefit to that area; enterprise 

assistance to provide specialized training to northern 

businesses, career services, counselling - that kind of thing. 

 

And it seems to me that the questions that the hon. member 

should be asking, including the member from Regina Centre in 

his earlier remarks, when they talked about responding to letters 

and saying where will I get this  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1352 

 

course and that course, it seems to me as we move into the 

information age, the knowledge-based economy, the more 

appropriate questions that you should be asking and, quite 

frankly, that the young people were asking us is - and I relate 

specifically to, for example, the northern part of this 

province - you should have been asking, where are the 

programs that will match the jobs of the future? Where is the 

training for the tourism industry? Very important in your area 

of the province. Where is the training program for the mining 

initiatives that are going on in northern Saskatchewan? It seems 

to me that was the sad fact in this province. Where were these 

training programs? 

 

The hon. member from Regina Centre would still like to train 

buggy whip manufacturers and buggy whip repair men when 

we don’t need those jobs any more. They are not positions 

there. It seems to me that you should be asking, where are those 

people who can work in gerontology as our population ages? 

Where are those people? Where is the training for those that 

will find jobs in the information industry, whether it be the new 

AV (audio-visual) technician courses at the northern campus? 

 

It seems to me you should be asking about where are the 

training for those jobs that the electronics industry is going to 

need. Or, where is the training programs for something like 

welding, the new kinds of welding technology that will go into 

the construction of the NewGrade upgrader, Mr. Chairman? 

 

It seems to me you should be asking . . . In this new 

knowledge-based economy there’s going to be jobs in industrial 

instrumentation technology, and where is the training there? 

Where is the training in the computer-assisted design job areas? 

Where is the training for the wild rice industry, and the kinds of 

jobs that are involved in that industry? Or the hog production 

industry, where are those jobs? 

 

It seems to me not to address all of these areas is to let our 

young people down, and to not address the jobs of the future. 

And whether it’s north, south, east or west, that’s what we’re 

doing with this restructuring of our post-secondary education 

system. 

 

And you mentioned that there was no consultation. Well I want 

to tell you, I was in La Ronge and held a meeting there with a 

number of people, and these are the kinds of things I heard: I 

heard this from the chief of the band up there - I believe it was 

the chief . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. I think what we’re 

going to have to do is just have a little bit of a look at what’s 

happening here tonight thus far. 

 

I look at my role here as the chairman to enhance debate, and 

it’s certainly not my intention to do any stifling of the ability of 

members to debate. However, I do think we all have some sort 

of an obligation here to maintain some kind of decorum within 

the House, and I am certainly of the opinion right now that that 

is somewhat lacking. 

 

Now I know that you’re all anxious to get into the debate. You 

will have the opportunity to do so. When a question  

is asked, please let the minister answer and then you can have 

your comments following that. So I ask for your co-operation at 

this time. The minister may continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What I’m saying is: no matter where 

you are in the province, to not put the training opportunities in 

place for these jobs of the future which I’ve talked about, and 

which we have no capacity in the past . . . And one can say we 

should continue to turn out people and put people into courses 

where there are no jobs, just because we’ve done that for the 

last 10 or 20 or 30 years. And what kind of a favour are you 

doing those people? None, I would argue. 

 

We had courses in this province, Mr. Chairman, where we had 

20 spaces; something less than half of them were filled because 

the people themselves recognized there was no job 

opportunities after they’d spent two years in that course. So 

what was the sense of having those training spaces? 

 

But it seemed to me that when we didn’t have spaces in the new 

high-tech areas, and in the mining industry that’s so very 

important for the member who raised the question, or in the 

wild rice industry, or in the berry industry, and all those kinds 

of things; then it seems to me he should have been criticizing 

us, why haven’t you got training in those areas? Gold mining is 

flourishing in the North. How are those companies going to get 

trained people? What are you doing about it? Those are the 

kinds of questions you should be asking us. 

 

I’ll tell you what the answer to those questions are. We’re doing 

something about it. In fact, what we are doing about it, Mr. 

Chairman . . . If we back up to ‘82-83 there was one program, 

the northern training program, in place, responsible for 

something in the order of 1,133 jobs - budget at that time, in 

total, something in the order of 5 million. 

 

Well since that time, Mr. Chairman, we have put the following 

in place: Saskatchewan skills development program, 

Saskatchewan skills extension program, apprenticeship native 

career development program, winter works, Saskatchewan 

youth access, Special ARDA (Agriculture and Rural 

Development Act), Northern Economic Development 

Subsidiary Agreement, - federal. 

 

And so we’ve gone from a situation where we had 1,133 jobs 

that were put in place, Mr. Chairman, to a 165 per cent 

increase - now 3,000 - and as well, the budget has gone up, Mr. 

Chairman. And it seems to me that that speaks well for what 

we’re doing. We’re listening to what the people are saying up 

there, and we’re responding to where the jobs are because there 

has been some very, very, very positive activity in the North, 

whether it be in the agriculture sector and wild rice, or the 

mining part with the gold - a tremendous amount of excitement 

up there. 

 

And I have to tell the hon. member and the House . . . I have to 

share a story with them as to what I heard when I was at the La 

Ronge meeting consulting. And I believe it was Joe Roberts, the 

chief of the La Ronge band that related this. In fact, I’m almost 

certain, Mr. Chairman.  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1353 

 

This is what he told me at the La Ronge meeting as it relates to 

K to 12 programming for his young people. And it stuck with 

me because, in a way . . . The story, in a way, tells a tragic 

situation. 

 

He related to me at this meeting, and to the others there, that in 

some instances they were grabbing U.S. educational 

programming off the satellite - off one of these satellites flying 

around the world - so that they could use that programming for 

their young people in the schools. Now he was careful to point 

out that they just don’t grab anything, and they just don’t use 

that as the only teaching tool, but in fact they are grabbing some 

U.S. educational TV programming off the satellites that are 

circling the earth. 

 

(1945) 

 

And as I sat there and I listened to that, I said, what a tragedy it 

is, and how we are letting this person and his young people 

down. Why don’t we have a distance education network? Our 

geography in this province . . . A distance education network 

would make so much sense, given the geography. They are 

already doing it, but we weren’t giving them access to Canadian 

or Saskatchewan programming. And, Mr. Chairman, that’s 

exactly why we’ve got money in this budget for a distance 

education fund, so we can look at some of that kind of 

technology, get a policy in place, and do some very positive 

things for Joe Roberts and the people, the young people, that he 

has in his school system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chairperson, in regards to the next 

question, Mr. Minister, and in regards to your arrogant ramble 

that you’ve just . . . the pompous ramble that you just went 

through, this is the same type of pompous ramble we heard in 

the past five years in northern Saskatchewan, and we hear it 

again from you. When I ask . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — When I ask an important question of elected 

representation, democratically elected representation in northern 

Saskatchewan, you go on a petty ramble. 

 

In the past five years you have directed many people to come in 

the North and every time a Northerner asks a question that is of 

a central issue, such as control over their own democratically 

elected institutions, you go on a pompous ramble. 

 

I would like you to be straight. This is not a mere consideration; 

this is one that demands action. It demands a direct statement 

by the minister. You are the person who is the final authority on 

this in education, and you have the right to make that decision 

to democratically involve people in northern Saskatchewan. 

Will you or will you not do it? Answer it straightforward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think I’ve answered the 

question on two occasions already. I said that I’m  

prepared to give it consideration. I suspect there are arguments 

on both sides, and I’m prepared to go into it with an open mind. 

 

I would want to point out, however, that contrary to the 

impression that you might leave that there is somehow no 

support and no consultation relative to the setting up of 

Northlands Career College, I would like to point out to you that 

the CEIC (Canada Employment and Immigration Commission) 

northern training advisory committee - which as the hon. 

member knows has AMNSIS (Association of Métis and 

Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) membership and 

support - passed a motion to support the intent of the 

Northlands Career College as stated in our document Preparing 

For The Year 2000. 

 

And I might add, as well, that I don’t think that 21 community 

college trustees are all wrong either, in fact, because they do 

support what we are doing with this restructuring. Because they 

know that, sure, we’re going to be doing some things different 

here, and I suppose that what separates you and me, and you 

from them in a way, I suppose, is that we are of the view that 

doing things different can in fact be doing things better. 

 

And you want to cling to the status quo, never change. Well this 

is a time for change and these are the right changes. And I’m 

not trying to suggest to you or to the people of Saskatchewan 

that somehow you go from what you had and three months later 

you’ve got this smoothly running, well-oiled machine, up and 

percolating along, because you don’t. It takes some time. 

 

But I can say, I think, in all fairness to all involved that it’s 

going quite smoothly, and it’s going to be for the betterment of 

the people of the North, not unlike it will be for the betterment 

of those across this entire province. And I look forward to this 

restructuring, this new blueprint, as do, I think, most people in 

this province. 

 

And I will grant you that we can argue with the process, and 

whether we should’ve done it this way versus that way, you 

know, which is the point you’ve raised, appointed boards versus 

elected boards. 

 

But the reality is, when you talk to the people, that’s where the 

arguments come down. For the most part they’re process 

arguments. Because the reality is, for the most part, no one 

disagrees philosophically with what we’re doing. They know 

that the agrarian economies are a thing of the past. We’re into 

the post-industrial era, the technological age, the information 

age, the knowledge-based economy, and change was necessary. 

And that’s what we’re doing. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, you said that you have to go 

forward in adult education. The question that I’m asking you, in 

regards to an elected board, is a step forward. The appointed 

board that you are proposing is a step backwards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — It involves less people. Because it’ll be a new 

board, there will be greater control by the PC  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1354 

 

government on the few that they will appoint to that board. We 

see the patronage and the appointments in the South; we’ll 

definitely see it in the North if it’s strictly an appointed board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — What is forward, an appointed PC board or a 

democratically elected board by the people of northern 

Saskatchewan? What is the forward one, Mr. Minister? Tell me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said earlier, I mean, I’m prepared 

to give consideration to the elected board concept, but I think 

perhaps the hon. member is being somewhat unfair to the 

existing board members. I think they have served well. I don’t 

think they’ve let us down in their advice and guidance and in 

the way they’ve operated things in the North. And it’s 

unfortunate that the hon. member would leave that impression, 

that somehow these people haven’t done a good job and can’t 

do a good job because they’re appointed rather than elected. 

The reality is they have done a good job and will continue to 

serve as well in whatever capacity. 

 

But I want to point out to the hon. member just some of the very 

positive and very tangible, concrete results of a thrust that 

focuses on having Northerners, and particularly of native 

ancestry, involved in a very real way in our economic 

development in the North. I think it’s worth pointing out to the 

members of the legislature, Mr. Chairman, that approximately 

75 per cent of Northerners in training are native or of native 

ancestry, and as well - and this, I think, speaks well for the 

department and our officials - has a firm commitment that entry 

level as well as skilled positions for the Cigar Lake mining will 

be filled by northern people when the project begins because so 

often there’s criticism that Southerners, if you like, get these 

positions. And I think that speaks well for the corporation and it 

speaks well for the department and speaks well for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and they recognize that these jobs should be for 

the northern people. 

 

And what we’re talking about is these kinds of things, Mr. 

Chairman. We’re talking about making sure that we have the 

mill operators for the uranium mines. We’re talking about 

making sure that we have native ancestry diamond drillers for 

the gold and the diamond drilling that must go on in advance of 

that mining. What we’re talking about is making sure we have 

the skilled labourers for the many jobs in these mining projects, 

whether they be uranium or otherwise, and that we have 

assayers, Mr. Chairman, and that we have surface utility 

workers, and that we have prospectors - who I know have 

undertaken some of their field course work outside at the 

Anglo-Rouyn mine just outside La Ronge, which I visited last 

year when I was in Energy and Mines - and also that we have 

these geophysical technicians. And these are some of the very, 

very positive things that have happened because we’ve 

expanded our training initiatives there from merely having one 

program to now having a range of programs, and in keeping in 

tune with what’s happening in the North because it has been a 

very exciting area. 

Mr. Goulet: — My question now goes into a bit on 

programming. In ‘82, of course, there was $6 million that was 

transferred from northern Saskatchewan to support the election 

of Sid Dutchak, which a lot of our money from the North then 

went to the P.A. technical institute. And of course that was 

good for P.A., but in regards to the North where we needed the 

facilities, that just was not good. 

 

The question I would ask . . . There was a lot of rhetoric coming 

from the PC government at that time that Northern Institute of 

Technology in Prince Albert would help out the people in the 

North. A question I would like to ask is this: how many 

graduates directly from northern Saskatchewan have graduated 

from Northern Institute of Technology, and how many of them 

are working, and where are they working? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well insofar as what’s happened to 

the disposition of the graduates from the northern institute, that 

campus, because it is a relatively new campus, I think the hon. 

member can appreciate that there has been very few graduates 

to date. And until they graduate, it’s pretty hard to determine 

what jobs they do take. I can tell you this, that something over 

50 per cent of the enrolment there is native or native ancestry, 

and we expect that number to increase. And I think, at least in 

terms of our goals, that I would say it is on track. 

 

And the hon. member from prince Albert asked how many 

grads. My officials advise me that there could be a handful. So 

it would hardly be . . . I mean it’s not that many because the 

institute is still relatively new, and if it’s a two-year course, 

you’ve got to take two years to finish it before you can go to the 

job market. So I think the question will be better posed next 

year at this time. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Goulet: — For $6 million being transferred for the North 

to Prince Albert and all you can give me in reply is a handful. 

What do you mean by a handful? One? Two? What do you 

mean by a handful? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We don’t have with us how many 

have graduated but I will undertake to get that for you. But I 

reiterate again, and I want to be very clear on this, that 

something in excess of 50 per cent of our enrolments are 

Northerners, or of native or native ancestry, and I think that 

certainly in terms of our goals or what we had in mind for that 

campus, we’re on track and we expect it to increase. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — When will you have that information for me, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll endeavour to have it for you the 

next time we are in estimates here. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Could I have a more concise answer, Mr. 

Minister, because the estimates can go for a long time and I 

would like to know. If it’s only a handful, you should be able to 

figure that out. You know, counting from one to 10 shouldn’t 

take you two months. It should take you a day. Could you get 

that to me at a more precise time? 

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1355 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member can be a little 

bit cute and he can criticize my officials and they can guffaw 

from their seats, but the reality is, my first inclination on that 

question was to say that we’ve had for the most part virtually no 

graduates because the institute hasn’t been up and running long 

enough. But in the sake of trying to be as precise as possible 

and because, as I understand, the program there is competency 

based and they go at their own speed, there may well have been 

some early graduates. 

 

We do not have that information, but we will get it for you as 

soon as we can, and I’m sorry that I don’t have it tonight. And I 

know my officials are sorry that they don’t have it for you 

tonight, but we will be absolutely as forthcoming with you as 

we can. And I’ll tell you why, because we’re proud of that 

campus. 

 

The Northerners wanted a campus up there for a long time, and 

it never got built under the NDP, I can tell you that. And that’s 

why we’ve got 1,700 more training spaces in this province 

today, is because we built institutions. We recognized that 

training was needed in the North and for natives. Your party 

never recognized it. We built it, and Northerners are reaping the 

benefits, and I’m proud to say that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I’d like to remind the minister that he keeps 

talking about the North in terms of the P.A. Northern Institute 

of Technology. Most of the people in Athabasca and 

Cumberland consider that still in the southern urban area, so I 

would like to correct you on that. 

 

In regards to the programming and administration, budget-wise, 

your forward-looking government cut $500,000 from the three 

northern colleges. Where is that money gone, I would like to 

know? There was promises in the paper at that time that it was 

going to be going to programming. Did that money go back to 

programming in northern Saskatchewan, and if so, where? And 

how was it put in the community college budgets in the past 

little while? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I really have to thank, Mr. Chairman, 

the hon. member for his question, because there are savings in 

the neighbourhood of $500,000, as the hon. member pointed 

out, savings that result from, at the administrative level, the 

single board of trustees, eliminating the unnecessary duplication 

of administrative personnel, and better use of administrative 

facilities. 

 

We are going to take that money and plough it back into 

programming, so I think you’ll be happy to hear that. But even 

over and above that, the new structure will allow for a greater 

revenue generating capacity. And thirdly, the $3.2 million 

distance education fund or the education outreach fund, I think I 

would suspect very highly at least, although that’s not worked 

out yet, that some of that money and certainly the initiatives at 

least, given the example I gave you about satellites and satellite 

technology, I would suspect some of the benefit of that $3  

million will find its way into northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So the answer to your first question is: the savings from 

administration by having that money can be ploughed back into 

programming, in fact, to increase it there; a greater revenue 

generating capacity; and thirdly, the distance education fund. 

We score three times. That’s a triple header on that one, I’d say. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — My next question . . . Maybe I’ll pursue a 

statement that you made in regards to the development of adult 

education with the NDP, but just quickly because the 

development of education within the NDP was to move adult 

education right into the North to be controlled by the people of 

the North. That’s what the NDP did. They moved three 

community colleges. Your government dismantled them. 

 

That’s what the NDP did. They had community level 

involvement at the greater scale. That’s what the NDP did. 

They moved the facilities right into the North. That’s what the 

NDP did. 

 

When you came in, you took the money from northern 

Saskatchewan to build the La Ronge facility, and you took it 

down to P.A. That’s what you did. You robbed the North of a 

proper, strong build in La Ronge . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Precisely. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What does the member from P.A. say 

about all this? 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I said at the beginning that it was a very good 

deal for Prince Albert. I have absolutely no problem with that. 

The problem that I have is this: that you always rob the North, 

as far as you’re concerned and as far as your government is 

concerned, and leave them with nothing but to work from a lot 

less than what you expect that people from the South to work 

from. 

 

I would like to go into another area of education that’s very 

important, and that’s aboriginally controlled institutions of 

education. More specifically, I would like to make my 

comments in regards to Gabriel Dumont Institute. Again, here is 

the situation that demands a very important question and the 

question of control and autonomy. And it’s the same problem 

that you have, of course, with the colleges. 

 

The question of autonomy has always been a central issue, 

especially in regards to the long-term goals of self-government, 

especially in relation to adult education institutions. And 

Gabriel Dumont’s goals, of course, are geared in that direction. 

 

My understanding of the situation that you mentioned in regards 

to this joint native ownership concept that you do have is that it 

is transposed to the complete autonomy of Gabriel Dumont 

Institute. Right now, the Gabriel Dumont Institute is governed 

by a 25-person board, which of course includes - included - the 

democratically elected representatives from 11 areas and four 

people from AMNSIS, and also representatives from the 

universities, and also from the education, from the government, 

and also from the federal government. People enjoyed that 

control. 

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1356 

 

When you came in with your budget this spring, as I heard the 

story, there was either you take a 20 per cent cut or you come in 

to our joint ownership situation. I want the minister to tell me: 

is that true or not, that you had, more or less, a gun pointed over 

the Gabriel Dumont Institute in regard to your joint ownership 

concept, when they were really for complete, true autonomy? 

And you said, come with us and our so-called new joint 

situation or you’re going to get cut back by 20 per cent. Of 

course they will agree with you when you give them a threat. 

 

Mr. Minister, the question is this: in your joint ownership 

concept that you do have with the technical institutes, where 

Gabriel Dumont Institute gets one directorship out of 

seven - they get one vote out of seven decision makers in the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology . . . 

You call one out of seven joint ownership? I thought it was 

usually 50-50 when you’re talking about joint ownership. Is it 

not true that the joint ownership concept at the directorship 

level is actually one out of seven? Is it not true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Every time, of course, that an important 

question is asked, the minister either goes on and on or just 

simply says no. The question I would ask therefore is this: well, 

what is it? What is the management structure? How many board 

members are going to be on Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology, and how many members will Gabriel 

Dumont Institute have in that overall board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think the relationship between 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology) and Gabriel Dumont Institute is basically one that 

I’m happy to report on to the member because it’s been an 

example, again, of having some new ground broken, literally, in 

North America. It’s very much a good news scenario, and I’ve 

been very proud of the co-operation that’s gone on in the 

negotiations and the meetings between departmental officials 

and Gabriel Dumont. We would envisage this as two 

interlocking boards in an interlocking relationship. 

 

I think we talked about joint ownership, and that would be the 

first of its kind, literally, in North America. They can keep their 

board. I mean, virtually every point that has been raised, as I 

understand it, we have been able to meet and adjust and work 

out with them. And there’s been good co-operation. And I am 

also proud to tell you that as a result of this, there will be a 

funding increase. 

 

So by every measure, it seems to me, we’re making good 

headway here. New ground is being broken, and I would 

suggest to you that it will serve everyone well in the future. 

They keep their board, there’s an interlocking relationship, 

there’s been good co-operation, and there’s a funding increase. I 

don’t know what more you can ask for. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — On that same question, on the same topic, the 

Gabriel Dumont Institute board will still exist. Who will it 

report to in regards to the overall structure of the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology? 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The staff at Gabriel Dumont would 

report to both boards, in fact, depending on where the 

jurisdiction is, or what the issue is. There’s the external 

component and the internal component, if you like, and it seems 

to be one that everybody’s satisfied with. It’s not something that 

we have rammed down anybody’s throat, I can tell you that, but 

one that’s been worked out, and as I understand it for the most 

part is a mutually agreeable situation. As I said in my earlier 

response, I’ve been very impressed with the co-operative nature 

and the constructive nature of the consultations that we’ve 

engaged in, that my officials have engaged in there, because I 

think everybody’s come out a winner. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I wasn’t talking about the specific process of 

negotiations. I was asking you a structural question, and that 

structural question is one of reporting authorities. The question 

that I asked you was: who does the Gabriel Dumont Institute 

report to? My understanding is this, that they report to the 

government representatives, who then reports to the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 

and the final authority is Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology. Is that not correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My answer is really no different. 

Because of the interlocking relationship, when it comes to 

institute affairs, report to the institute board - by institute, I 

mean SIAST - and when it comes to issues that are purely 

Gabriel Dumont issues or affairs, report to Gabriel Dumont. It 

seems to be something that everybody has mutual agreement 

that they’ve reached through the normal consultative process. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Then I will ask you more specifically, in 

regards to your theoretical interlocking structure, who has the 

final authority in terms of overall finance? Tell me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to funding, it would be a 

contractual arrangement through Gabriel Dumont and SIAST, 

and would, in that way, I think, provide some protection, as the 

hon. member might want and as they might want. To try and 

give you some sense of how this model might work, I’m 

advised that an example that is already in place that has many 

of the same kinds of features is the Luther College affiliation 

with the University of Regina, for example, that kind of 

structure that seems to work well. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I think you’ve answered my question. The 

Luther College, in finality, does report to the university. In 

other words, the Gabriel Dumont Institute, in finality, will have 

to report to Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology. Is that not correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. For example - and now we’re 

given the track of the Luther College - it does not because 

there’s obviously the involvement of the church and the board 

of governors, or regents, or whatever the correct term is relative 

to Luther College. If I’m misleading you with the example 

because you’re not conversant with it, I apologize for that. I was 

trying to make this exercise more lucid and clear and not to 

confuse it. 

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1357 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I am very conversant with both the structure 

and the university, and both the structure of . . . I am conversant 

in both structures at the university level and the proposed one. 

 

In your answer you are stating, therefore, that you have final 

authority. You have agreed that the government has final 

control. It is not indeed real joint ownership as you theoretically 

state. The financial controls are, in the final analysis, decided by 

you. 

 

Luther College cannot take any budget of the total university 

and say it is theirs. They can’t just go in and take Arts’ budget 

or anybody’s budget. The same with the Gabriel Dumont 

Institute - they will be restricted to the budget that you give 

them. Is that not correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well it seems to me what is important 

here is the goal which we are trying to obtain in terms of 

training and opportunities for natives and Northerners. And I 

suppose what you’re talking about here - and negotiations are 

still ongoing, certainly, with the Gabriel Dumont - but what it 

comes down to, I suppose you’re making the argument that 

what would they rather have, 100 per cent control of 5 million 

or joint ownership of SIAST budgeting in the range of $60 

million, something like that. It seems to me, that sounds like a 

pretty good choice to them. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — How much real control would they have of that 

$60 million that you’ve just tossed in the air? How much of that 

in that joint ownership concept? 

 

You’re thrown in a figure of $60 million. How much of that 

will the Dumont Institute be able to control? If they were in 

now, they would control at least 10. What is the improvement? 

Are they now controlling $10 million out of the $60 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It seems to me that anything is an 

improvement because right now they have zero. They have 

nothing. And what they will have in the future is representation 

on that board, (a), and a chance to put in their views about how 

that money should be managed and the programs that should 

come out of it, first of all. And secondly, they’re going to have 

a senior executive member in the administrative structure. They 

have none of that now. So, to me, it seems to be entirely an all 

up-side potential for them. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — How many in that new administrative structure, 

how many senior administrators do you have that are about the 

same level as where you will have your GDI (Gabriel Dumont 

Institute) administrator? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There will be very few positions at 

that level. This is still in the formative stages. I would guess, 

senior vice-presidents, probably somewhere in area three, four, 

five, something like that, and this person will be one of them. 

So it seems to me that’s a significant positions and it’s not some 

kind of moot position. That, and along with the board 

representation, is a very real commitment. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — The initial proposal - was it not for seven  

positions at that level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised that in terms of all the 

models that were looked at, administrative models, there was 

never one that had seven at the senior level, which you talk 

about. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — How many did they have, then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said in response to the question 

before this, it’s still in the formative stages. But I think if this 

takes on some of the characteristics that other administrations 

have, something in the order of three, four, five, seems pretty 

normal. And I suspect we’ll find it and that’ll be where it’ll 

come shake down at. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — So what you’re telling me is that under the joint 

co-operative ownership concept you will have one out of five of 

the senior administrators. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That is incorrect. The member is 

trying to, unfairly I think, twist what I said. And I’m 

disappointed at that. Because what I said, what I said now three 

times, is that there would be something in the order of three, 

four, or five. Now you’ve said that I say is what I say is that 

will be one out of five then. That is clearly not what I said. And 

I don’t know why you would try and twist it that way. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Well what did you say then? I heard number 

five. I heard you trailing off saying four or five. So I picked off 

the figure five because you mentioned five. Well, what was it? 

Was it four or five? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What I said, first of all, some several 

questions ago, will be a heck of a lot more than they’ve got 

right now, Mr. Chairman, because they have none - absolutely 

zero. And they don’t have access to a $60 million budget. So 

they’re a long ways away ahead of where they are this very day, 

or they have been in the past, I can tell you that. 

 

And if it’s three, it’ll be one out of three; if it’s four, it’ll be one 

of the four; if it’s five, it’ll be one out of five. And I think that, 

quite frankly, you’re trying to make light with some silly 

mathematics, when the reality of the issue here is we’re trying 

to put some very real management and board level input here 

from the Northerners and the natives. 

 

Twenty-one community colleges as trustees think what we’re 

doing is right, CEIC northern training advisory committee think 

that what we’re doing is right. Somehow you think it’s wrong. I 

would suggest to you that you’re in the minority. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Well, I guess, as you said, I’m a minority. And 

in regards to minorities, we’re always one out of five, or one 

out of four. And that’s the point that I’m making. All I’ 

m doing is pointing out what your administration structure . . . 

the importance of which is not a question of the numerical 

questions I’m asking. What I am really interested in is the 

human factor and the human beings that are involved in it, in 

terms of administrative decision making. And I would state that 

it would be a lot better if you said, oh, we are going to have two 

out of five. Then I would have said, hey, the minister is going 

somewhere,  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1358 

 

now he’s really improving, because that would be what I was 

trying to get at. You always misinterpret some of the questions 

that we throw out. 

 

In regards to the Gabriel Dumont Institute, again, Mr. Minister, 

did you or did you not cut them back by 20 per cent? 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To give the story as best I can to this 

point in time, given that I think I’m correct when I say that 

some negotiations are still going on, if one backs up far enough 

in history, yes, there was a decrease in the core, but throughout 

the negotiations, I think, we have offered back more than the 

original decrease. So it seems to me at the end of the day, 

they’re going to net out ahead. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Could I ask then how much of an improvement 

are you getting at the present time. If you were cut back by 20 

and you made an improvement, it would only be 19, you know, 

per cent cut. It would still be a 19 per cent cut-back. Is it a 

significant improvement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s going to be more than what was 

there previous. I can’t tell you exactly what the number will be 

because it’s still under negotiation. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Will it be . . . I’m not too sure about your 

statement. Will it be more than what you originally cut back, 

that 20 per cent? Or what do you mean by zero budgeting 

during the year? Is it more than the zero budgeting basis? Is that 

what you’re saying? Or are you saying it’s more than the 20 per 

cent cut-back? Are they going to get more than what the usual 

budgeting is for the province in general, which is zero or 1 per 

cent budgeting? Is that what you mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can’t really be much more specific 

than I’ve been. There is going to be an add-back. Whether it’s 

15 or 25 per cent, or what, I can’t say yet, because it’s under 

negotiation. But it could well be. The add-back could be higher 

than the loss. It may not be, but that’s all what’s in negotiation. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Well I’ll make a summary comment, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Number one, I might say that the PC government policy on 

adult education is unwise, regressive, and really lacks the basis 

for true and meaningful consultation of people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — It appears that they are bringing back the old 

colonial model of having the financial gun over the institutes or 

colleges, and saying, do it my way or else. And then you 

interpret it as co-operation. 

 

I think you would do well, Mr. Minister, if you followed up on 

some of the suggestions that are implied in my questions, 

especially in regards to a democratically elected board in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Goulet: — I would say that is wise, that is forward 

looking, if I heard you do that, Mr. Minister. But all you say, 

oh, I will consider it. Oh, the same old story we heard in five 

years. How can the people believe you? You’ve been saying 

that for five years. It’s the same thing. You will consider. Oh, 

we will encourage you from the North. That’s all you need, is 

what you always say. And the end result, the facts come out and 

we are cut. 

 

In regards to the whole issue of coming out with new structures 

for important delivery, you are using a centralization model that 

has been tried in the past. In the North especially, we have tried 

coming to school in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, P.A. for 

many, many years. 

 

The greatest success, Mr. Minister, has always come from the 

developmental-type structures that are brought in by 

democratically elected people in such concepts as northern 

teach education program, controlled by an elected board in 

northern Saskatchewan, where they deliver the training right in 

the North - not by mere satellite, but by real people teaching in 

real class-rooms and delivering them right at the community 

level. I mean, that is the essence of education. Satellite-type 

education becomes just a support system for an effective 

people-centred model of education. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you were at the graduation at the NORTEP 

(northern teacher education program) program which was run 

by a democratically elected board. And the success was great, 

and you saw that in regards to the people that were there. 

 

Mr. Minister, the success has been great also in regards to the 

establishment of aboriginally controlled adult education 

institutions in this province. They have been operating now for 

about 15 years from the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, from the Association of Métis and Non-Status Indians 

of Saskatchewan. The success has been astounding in 

comparison to what it was in the past. And I must say that, Mr. 

Minister, you should learn from these models. 

 

Re-centralization or re-assimilation is not the proper solution. 

Unless people have real voice and a real representative voice in 

any new restructuring, which you may call joint ownership, 

unless there is real representation in the administration, in the 

instructional staff, and in the governing board structures, your 

so-called joint concept will fall flat in the long run. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — So my advice, Mr. Minister, is to re-examine 

carefully some of the questions that the people have relayed 

through me in this legislature, and be prepared in the future to 

say, yes, we will give education and put it back under people’s 

control. And I hope that happens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, and 

members of the legislature, I’m happy to see that for the most 

part the hon. member agrees with the  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1359 

 

philosophy and the changes that we’re undertaking. Certainly 

we have disagreements on the process, whether it should be 

elected or appointed. And as I’ve said before, I’m prepared to 

give that consideration. But the important thing is to know that 

you too agree with the fact that there needs to be change, 

because that’s a . . . I think we’ve accomplished something here 

tonight in that we’re both agreed on that. 

 

I suppose what I have to take exception to, though, is your - I 

think what I would call it - this trite speech on colonialism. I 

mean, if there was ever an example of colonialism in this 

province it was DNS (department of northern Saskatchewan). 

There is no question about that. And I’ll tell you what. I’ll stack 

up our PC party policies in the North any day. I’ll stack up the 

young; I’ll stack up those natives and Northerners who today 

have $60,000 a year diamond drilling jobs against the NDP 

$12,000 a year road building jobs to build roads to the South. 

That’s colonialism. 

 

And you ask that young person today who’s doing that job, at 

$5,000 a month with bonuses, which he prefers. And I’ll tell 

you, he’ll give you the answer in spades, time and time again. 

We have done more for the young people, the adults in northern 

Saskatchewan, than your administration ever did. And that is 

unequivocally the fact. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well the Minister 

of Education has just indicated to this House that he will stack 

up the Conservative program in northern Saskatchewan against 

the NDP program in northern Saskatchewan. And I’ll remind 

members of the House this evening that he’s done that, and the 

answer was delivered on October 20, 1986, and we have in this 

House the result of that comparison. We have two members 

from the constituencies of Cumberland and Athabasca as a 

result of that comparison. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — What that means is that the program put 

forward by the Conservative Party is a program that is not 

accepted by the people of northern Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Chairman, the Minister of Education was queried by my 

colleagues from Regina Centre and from Cumberland about 

pertinent matters that apply to many people in this province. 

The member from Regina Centre raised questions with respect 

to technical institutes, and the member from Cumberland raised 

questions with respect to problems that he sees in appointed 

boards in the North. And the minister continues to give answers 

that he believes are applicable to the year 2000. 

 

I’d like to address my questions this evening to the minister, 

with questions that are a little more historical, a little more 

closer to 1987. And I’d like to ask the minister whether he can 

tell the House this evening whether his department, the 

Department of Education, has undertaken renovations at 2220 

College Avenue in the last year or two. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — What part of the Department of  

Education, Mr. Minister, was renovated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, as the hon. member will know, 

as of April 1 the new, and I might add new and stronger, 

Department of Education consists now of what used to be Sask 

Library, K to 12 system or the traditional Department of 

Education, the Department of Advanced Education and 

Manpower. And some renovations were undertaken at the 

location you referred to bring together, and as a result of that 

amalgamation, to make sure that we’re providing the best 

service to the people of the province given the new 

amalgamation. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — My question to the minister is: what offices 

in the Department of Education at 2220 College Avenue were 

renovated in the year 1985 and ‘86? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member raises a question 

relative to the year’ ‘85-86. I was under the impression that 

we’re in the ‘86-87, ‘87-88. We’re two years old - that’s two 

years ago you’re referring to. You may have difficulty with me 

looking towards the future and the year 2000. I’m having 

difficulty going backwards far enough to catch up to you. 

 

(2045) 

 

Our best recollection, not that we have the ‘85-86 stuff here 

particularly, would be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Our best 

recollection . . . And for the hon. member from Regina North 

East, I resent the term empire-builders when it comes to my 

officials; they’re extremely competent officials. And there may 

well have been some changes to the ground floor to 

accommodate the computer system. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Were there any renovations, Mr. Minister, to 

the offices occupied by the deputy - the former deputy minister 

of Education, not the current one - by his associate, by his 

assistant, or by anybody in his office in ‘85 or ‘86, at 2220 

College Avenue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In 1985-86, I’m advised that there 

was changes made to accommodate an additional associate 

deputy minister. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Could the minister tell me whether that 

project was tendered or not; who the successful company was, 

if it was tendered; and if it was not, who undertook the project; 

and what the cost of that project was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’d have to advise the hon. member 

that the Department of Supply and Services would have 

undertaken this work. You’re best to question that minister 

which would now be the minister in charge of Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. I mean, just to sort of give 

you everything I have on it, if you’re looking for some project 

here that’s a multimillion dollar project, forget it. I’m advised 

that it was a relatively minor renovation. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Could you please define in dollar terms your 

word “minor renovation” for us, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Not several millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — So the minister is telling us that there  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1360 

 

were renovations in ‘85 and/or ‘86 to the suites occupied by his 

deputy ministerial staff. 

 

I ask the minister now a question: are there any renovations 

being undertaken at 2220 College Avenue in the offices that are 

occupied by the current deputy minister and/or his staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, as I mentioned earlier, to 

accommodate the reorganization was - the old K to 12 

department - advanced education and manpower, and 

Saskatchewan library. That’s what I said just a few minutes 

ago. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — What was the size in relative terms and 

comparative terms to the renovation? How many square feet 

were renovated previously compared to what is being renovated 

now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Once again this question is probably 

more properly put to property management, but in an attempt to 

be as forthcoming with the hon. member as I can, I’m advised 

that our best guesses are the renovation will be costing 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of 40 to $60,000. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I’m surprised that the minister is not aware of 

major renovations being undertaken in his deputy minister’s 

office. 

 

I’d like to ask the minister whether the current renovation being 

undertaken has been tendered; if it has, who is the successful 

bidder; and when was that contract awarded? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I have 

to correct a statement I made previously; I do not want to 

mislead the House. 

 

I said $40,000 to 60,000 - that’s incorrect. It would be 40 to 

$60,000 for renovations at two of the office locations we have, 

not at the 2220 address that you mentioned. And they would be 

spread out over 10 floors to accommodate the amalgamation. 

So it’s not 40 to 60,000 at the one site. And these are all our 

best guesses. And the additional information required, I would 

have to defer that to property management. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — So you’re telling me that the property 

management corporation is involved with all of the matters 

relating to the renovations in your department. is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — How many secretaries did your former 

deputy minister have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m almost embarrassed to give you 

this response, but this is an example of what happens in this day 

and age when persons become person-years, etc., etc. The 

former deputy’s office had 2.6 secretaries or persons or 

person-years. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And how many 

secretaries does your current deputy minister have occupying 

that suite of offices that are being renovated? 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Four. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Four. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, who 

occupied the deputy ministerial suite of offices of your former 

deputy? Was it the deputy, his assistant and his associate, plus 

the secretaries, or was it not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The former office had . . . I mean I 

want you to be clear on this because this is a critical issue, and 

when it comes to excellence in education, I get quizzed on this a 

lot when I’m out in the country. We have established by a great 

deal of stealth and cunning that there are 2.6 in the former 

deputy’s office; there were 2.6 secretaries. And now I will tell 

you - I will add the other parts of the puzzle - there was one 

deputy and two associates. You’ve dragged it out of me 

successfully. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Is the space occupied by your current deputy 

the same size as was occupied by the former group that we 

referred to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Is the space where we had 5.6 persons 

before, we now have six. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — So what we’ve seen, Mr. Minister, is: you’ve 

had renovations a couple of years ago in the deputy minister’s 

office, which at that time provided room for an assistant deputy, 

an associate deputy, and two to three secretaries. We have now 

seen, a year later, with this magical shift of amalgamation and a 

magical shift of personnel out of the department and into the 

department, another major renovation. The ADMs and the 

associate deputy are no longer there. We have the deputy 

occupying an area of equal size with four secretaries. 

 

Does the minister believe that this is a cost-effective procedure 

as a result of the amalgamation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What I’m advised is: with the 

amalgamation we’ve freed up one whole floor, and we have one 

associate or assistant deputy less than we had - one deputy less, 

rather - in total, obviously, than we had before. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to just turn for one 

moment to another topic, then I’ll come back to this other one. 

 

Recently there was an announcement by your government that 

one Gordon Dirks was hired to undertake a study on private 

schools. Could the minister inform the House as to what the 

terms of reference for that contract was and what amount of 

money will be paid to Mr. Dirks for the service, including 

expenses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Hon. member, before I answer this 

question I want to just address briefly your other points where 

you were probing and trying to establish, probably, some kind 

of case for the savings, in your mind, that were probably 

non-existent with the amalgamation. And the question that you 

did ask me and that I would like to give you the answer of is: 

when we amalgamated, did we have any savings, and if so what 

did we do with the money? 

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1361 

 

Well, when we amalgamated we saved something in the order 

of a half million dollars. We freed up an entire floor of 

government office space, and I would like to suggest to you that 

that half million . . . One could say that it found its way back 

into the library system to buy books for northern and southern 

and eastern and western Saskatchewan. And they’re very happy 

about that, and that’s why we will continue our thrust towards 

efficiency and efficacy in the delivery of educational services in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As relates to . . . Gordon Dirks was 

appointed in March, 1987 to carry out a study of private schools 

and home schooling issues in Saskatchewan, in which he would 

undertake to look at the quality of the education, issues relating 

to taxation, funding, attendance requirements, and parents’ 

rights. This study will cost $30,000. And you asked about 

expenses, and I don’t have that for you. I’ll just have to check 

on that for you. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — You’re telling this Assembly and the people 

of Saskatchewan that as a result of your terrific efficiency, with 

massive early retirements and firings in the Department of 

Education, that you’ve saved all of this money, and the money 

has gone to libraries to improve the stocking of libraries. Well it 

seems to me, Mr. Minister, that you are misleading the House 

because the Saskatoon library has not had an increase in their 

position. The Regina library has not had an increase. As a 

matter of fact, they are suffering a cut-back, and you call that 

providing them with more money. I think you’ve misled the 

House. 

 

But my question with regards to Mr. Dirks is that I would like 

to know from the minister . . . He has a number of officials here 

tonight. I’m sure one of them have signed the contract or 

written up the contract to employ Mr. Dirks. Could you please 

tell the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan how many 

dollars in expenses you will be allowing Mr. Dirks to undertake 

this study, in addition to the $30,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To pick up your questions in this 

order. The $500,000 that we saved, that’s merely at the 

administrative level. The entire government efficiency 

operation, in terms of early the retirements and the position 

abolishments, will yield the taxpayers of this province 

something in the order of $220 million in savings over the next 

five years. 

 

(2100) 

 

And I know you and your party believe that big government is 

good government and the larger the bureaucracy the better. We 

don’t view it that way. The people of Saskatchewan don’t view 

it that way. And where it makes sense, we will continue to 

down-size and streamline government, but we will do it in a 

common sense and humane manner, using voluntary 

approaches where possible, like early retirement and position 

abolishment. 

 

And as it relates to library funding, for a party that  

espouses always as if the rest of us have no heart, it espouses 

always that one should be fair and provide where the need is 

greatest. That’s exactly what we’re doing with that special fund 

for libraries, because the reality was this - that the cities of 

Saskatoon and Regina had as much money, or more, than the 

rest of the entire province had in the library system to buy 

books. I don’t have the exact numbers, but it’s something like 

that. And so it seems to me when we were looking at using our 

money fairly and providing it to those who are most in need, 

which the opposition party always claims to have a monopoly 

on, is moral integrity. And yet when we do provide to where the 

need is the greatest, they criticize. They say, oh, you know, it’s 

not good enough. Well I’ll tell you what, the people of 

Saskatchewan believe that’s good, and it’s a step in the right 

direction. 

 

And, in fact, I’ll take it one step further. It was the northern 

libraries that needed it the most, and so the grant for the North 

will be double what they are in the rest of the province. And I 

would say to you that that’s being responsible. It’s right. And 

what we’re trying to do is get the rest of the province in the 

same position that Regina and Saskatoon enjoy when it comes 

to book budgets, and that’s right; that’s fair; that’s responsible, 

and it makes sense in terms of being fair to the people of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In fact, Mr. Chairman, in 1986 Regina 

and Saskatoon libraries, who serve about 35 per cent of the 

people of this province, spent 1.9 million, or approximately 1.9 

million on books and other library materials. Regional libraries, 

who serve two-thirds of the province’s people, had only 1.38 

million to spend on books and materials in 1986. Two-thirds of 

the people had less money to provide library books and 

materials than one-third of the population had access to. 

 

Is that fair, I ask the hon. member? You stand in this House and 

you tell the people of Saskatchewan that we should continue the 

unfairness that was in the system. You stand in the House and 

can tell the rest of the people of Saskatchewan that, although 

you represent two-thirds of the population, you should make do 

with less funding; you tell the people in northern Saskatchewan 

that no, they shouldn’t get extra money for funding libraries and 

establishing new libraries. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, I’ve been very, very happy 

with our government’s performance, even in tight economic 

times, and what we’ve been able to do with library funding and 

books - the heart and the soul of the library system since our 

government came into . . . have formed the administration in 

1982. 

 

I want to tell you about some of the things we did over the last 

six months since I was in this portfolio, Mr. Chairman, with 

libraries and library systems, because these are worth noting 

and worth having on the record. And the hon. member 

mentions, because he’s from Regina, about the hardship in 

Regina. Well let me tell you about the hardship in Regina when 

it comes to libraries and library materials and library accession 

in Regina. 

 

It’s just some few months ago that I was over to the  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1362 

 

University of Regina. And certainly, Mr. Chairman, on this 

occasion I was not in the pit, I was in the library. And do you 

know what we were doing there? We were unveiling or having 

the official ceremonies for a very innovative and creative 

funding arrangement that the University of Regina library under 

Ernie Ingles had undertaken, with a company called U.M.I. 

(Universal Microfilms International). And this is how it went, 

Mr. Chairman, and it’s a particularly noteworthy story because 

so often the public, and we who are responsible for the public 

purse, are asking and expecting all institutions to be more 

efficient, to be innovative, to be creative. 

 

Well I’ll tell you, Ernie and his staff and the University of 

Regina are exactly all of those things. They’re creative; they’re 

innovative. And what they did is they took a million dollars and 

they got U.M.I. to match that with another million. And 

normally one would say, well one plus one equals two, and one 

would think that you would get $2 million worth of library 

books with $2 million. But what they did in this instance, Mr. 

Chairman, is they took that $2 million and they bought over 

$200 million work of books, because they didn’t buy them in 

the traditional form, they bought them in microfilm; $200 

million worth of publications, in excess . . . I might even be 300 

million. It was a very large number, and I’ve seen it, something 

in excess of $200 million in microfilm accessions for the 

University of Regina that go right back into almost early 

recorded history in some of the areas. That will make them one 

of the university libraries of great renown in North America, 

Mr. Chairman. That’s innovative, and that’s creative. 

 

And I could talk about similar funding initiatives that this 

government has undertaken at the University of Saskatchewan. 

And I could talk about the numbers of books and resource 

centres and library facilities that have been updated and built 

and have had books put into them since my colleague, the Hon. 

Pat Smith, when she was in this portfolio, brought about with 

the establishment of the educational development fund which 

has improved libraries across this province. And now because 

we recognize the regional library system had a very large role to 

play here, we’ve given them a special half million dollar fund. 

And I think it’s fair, and it’s right, and it’s responsible, and I’ll 

tell you I have had lots of very, very good comments from the 

library community as a result of that latest initiative, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

And in so far as Mr. Dirks’ expenses, I would think it would 

come in - and I can only give you an estimate - at something 

less than $5,000. It may even be substantially less than that. 

There’s been some travel involved around the province, I know, 

to visit many of the schools, private and otherwise - meetings 

with STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), LEADS 

(League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents), SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association), all the players, as he undertakes his study - I 

suspect SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), etc. I think given his qualifications, 

the people of Saskatchewan will be well served by this report. 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, the minister went on ad 

nauseam about not having figures. He indicated to this House 

he doesn’t have the figures handy. Then he proceeded to stand 

up and fabricate a number of figures. He talked about all the 

wonderful things they’re doing in education, what a great job 

they’re doing at the university. We all know that the university 

has had massive cuts. We all know that the education system 

has been crippled to the point of severe injury because of the 

lack of grants to this system by the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He talked about what a great job they’re doing in the North. The 

North is just devastated. Mr. Chairman, I worked in northern 

Saskatchewan for two and a half years, and I happened to work 

at that time for the department of northern Saskatchewan. 

During that time we saw people who had never had any hope or 

never had any experience in terms of running their own 

communities, or working in the communities for a living, or 

being involved with learning new things with respect to 

administering their own affairs, were, through the department of 

northern Saskatchewan, afforded the opportunity, Mr. Minister 

and Mr. Speaker, with attaining some self-sufficiency. They 

were learning skills. They were learning things that would help 

them provide food for their families. They were learning things 

which would employ them in industries and occupations that 

they never before had the opportunities to perform in. 

 

Yet the minister here gets up and says what a wonderful job 

they’re doing in northern Saskatchewan. They are doing a 

wonderful job. The unemployment rate in La Loche is 95 per 

cent. Seven or eight years ago it was half that, and that was still 

too high. But they’ve done a terrific job there. They’ve talked 

about doing a wonderful job in northern Saskatchewan. Well 

they’ve cut back subsidies to food in northern Saskatchewan, 

yet they continue massive subsidies to providing less expensive 

alcohol to those people who live in the North. That’s the kind of 

education program they’re providing, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s a 

total disaster. 

 

The minister skimmed over and flowered over all of the things 

that he thought he could mislead the House on and fool the 

House on. But in fact what he’s done, in my view, is that he’s 

skirted the issue. The issue here is that the Department of 

Education is pleading restraint and promoting restraint on the 

one hand, and on the other they’re practising unrestrained 

spending by giving political hacks like Gordon Dirks 

$40,000-a-year - or I should say for half a year contract, a 

part-time contract which includes expenses. They’re giving Mr. 

Deschambault, or whatever his - René Archambault - who is the 

brother-in-law to the Premier, a little bit of assistance as well. 

And yet they’re saying we have to cut back in education. 

 

I think what they’ve done is promoted patronage. They have 

encouraged patronage among their own people, and we’ll be 

getting down to more of that when we have another opportunity 

in this department to review the estimates, Mr. Chairman. 

 

What’s I’d now like to ask the minister is whether or not a 

person by the name of René Archambault is currently  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1363 

 

employed with the department. And if so, in what capacity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, I 

have to take exception to your remarks and your comments 

relative to university funding, and the word you used is 

cut-backs. Even this year, in a period of belt-tightening, the 

universities will receive the same amount of money from this 

government as they did last year. Now I don’t know how you 

can call funding that’s the same this year as last year as a 

cut-back. And let’s look at the record, Mr. Chairman. What is 

the record of this administration when it comes to university 

funding? By any measure, if you look at the numbers between 

‘82-83 and ‘87-88, university grants, operating, and capital, 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Look at operating. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Look, the hon. member from 

Saskatoon South says, look at operating. So let’s look at 

operating. The University of Regina operating grant, $40 

million. The capital there this year is $5.2 million. He says, look 

at this. Okay. Well that represents more in one year at the 

University of Regina than the NDP in their last six years. That’s 

performance at the universities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, let’s look at it some more. Let’s 

look at it some more. In about 1961-62 and through the ‘70s, 

when the NDP were in the administrative and executive 

command of this province, the university, the agriculture 

college was reviewed and reviewed and reviewed and reviewed, 

given lip service, but did the farmers, did the young people of 

this province have access to a new facility, Mr. Chairman? Did 

they get one while the NDP were in government? Did they get 

one in the early ‘70s and the mid ‘70s and the late ‘70s? Did 

they get one during the entire 11 years that the NDP were in 

government? No! 

 

And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, because we recognize 

that agriculture is the backbone of this economy, and that our 

young people and our adults, and that one job in five in this 

province depends on that, and that one half the value of all 

goods produced in this province come from agriculture, and 

because that one-fifth of the value of all goods and services 

produced in this province come from agriculture, and because 

this province is well known across the world for its agriculture 

initiatives, the University of Saskatchewan is going to get a new 

agriculture building because our Premier, this caucus, and this 

party understand agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — But let’s not stop there. Let’s not stop 

there because we hear this talk of so-called cut-backs. I will 

stack up the increase in funding since our party came to power 

in this province against any other province in the country, 

without fear of shame or contradiction. Because the numbers go 

like this . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Because the numbers go like this. And 

the hon. member said, let’s hear the numbers. Well here’s what 

they are: Saskatchewan, between ‘82 and ‘83, ‘87-88, they had 

an increase of 32.7 per cent, and what was it in Manitoba? 24; 

Alberta, 9.5; British Columbia, 1.7. The best track record of any 

in western Canada, and the story line goes on and on and on. 

 

The operating in capital to universities was the highest in 

Canada - the highest in Canada between ‘82 and ‘86, Mr. 

Chairman. And the share of the provincial budget directed to 

university funding, up by 20 per cent, as compared to a 30 per 

cent decrease during the NDP term. And last year government 

funding for a full-time equivalent student, the second highest in 

Canada, and 35 per cent higher than in Manitoba. 

 

(2115) 

 

Now it seems to me . . . But then again, Mr. Chairman, it should 

be no surprise to us about how the NDP historically have 

treated universities in this province or in any other province 

where they are in executive power. They didn’t build 

agriculture colleges, Mr. Speaker; they didn’t fund our 

universities; they were in a state of disrepair; equipment hadn’t 

been updated; buildings hadn’t been built. And when we came 

along, this Premier and this caucus, because they recognize the 

importance, undertook several initiatives of which I’ve touched 

on some. 

 

Through the university renewal and development fund we’ve 

had a number of buildings and facilities and equipment 

replaced. I’ve talked about the libraries, and the list goes on and 

on and on. 

 

And so it shouldn’t surprise us when we check back into the 

files and we find in those files, in February of 1980, a memo 

from one Hon. A. Blakeney, Premier, to one Hon. D. McArthur, 

minister of Education and continuing education. Because this 

provides an insight . . . And I presume this document was never 

made public, Mr. Chairman, for reasons which will become 

evident. 

 

This shows you how out of touch . . . And remember prior to 

the 1982 election - that was the issue in 1982. The state 

capitalists, the NDP, were seen to be out of touch with the 

electorate. Well I’ll tell you how out of touch they were, 

because here was the predictions and the marching orders from 

the Premier, Allan Blakeney, to the Hon. D. McArthur, then 

minister of Education, continuing education, as he related to 

post-secondary education. And this memo reads in part, Mr. 

Chairman: 

 

I am particularly interested in knowing how we intend to 

organize our relationship with the universities, the manner 

in . . . 

 

Oh, and this is the key line, Mr. Chairman: 

 

I am particularly interested in knowing how we intend to 

organize our relationship with the universities, the manner 

in which we intent to reduce the rate of growth of 

university funding. 

 

I’ll read that again. He want to know - this is the  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1364 

 

Premier of the day, the NDP Premier in a memo to his Minister 

of Education, the Hon. D. McArthur - and he’s wanting to know 

how he’s going to reduce the rate of growth of university 

funding. 

 

Now, this is in the 1980s when we’ve just seen - it’s early 1980 

when we’re poised on the edge of these tremendous enrolment 

increases, and here is what he says. Why does he want to reduce 

the rate of growth of the university funding? He goes on to say, 

“As enrollment declines in the early 1980s.” 

 

Now, what could have been more wrong with that. They 

thought there was going to be enrolment declines, Mr. 

Chairman. And he went on to say: 

 

. . . and the methods by which we intend to ensure that 

Saskatchewan young people are training in the skills 

which will be required in our resource-related growth over 

the next several years. 

 

The resource-related growth, i.e. the potash mines and the 

uranium mines and those kinds of resource-related growth - and 

we know where those industries are today. So on every count, 

then NDP Premier, Allan Blakeney, to his Minister of 

Education was wrong. He was wrong to reduce funding to 

universities. They were wrong when they suggested that 

enrolments were somehow going to go down and that these 

people would somehow disappear off the face of the earth. And 

they were wrong when they talked about the implications of the 

new economy, the information-based economy, the 

knowledge-based economy as opposed to the resource-based 

economy. He was wrong on every count. 

 

So it doesn’t come as any shock or surprise to us when we find 

that in 1982 we take over a university system underfunded, 

buildings in a sad state of repair, and equipment not having 

been kept up. And that’s why I take particular exception to the 

hon. member’s implications that somehow there have been 

cut-backs. 

 

And I want to tell you something else, Mr. Chairman, because 

this is particularly interesting and I . . . when I was being 

briefed by my officials earlier this morning and we were 

looking at university funding - and the Deputy House Leader 

for the NDP will be interested in this one, Mr. Chairman. I was 

particularly interested when my officials brought forth the 

numbers showing university funding over the past 10 or 12 

years. It showed the funding levels when the NDP were in 

government. And you know what it showed, Mr. Chairman? 

 

It showed this, and this is typical of those pork-barreling, the 

pork-barreling attitude of the NDP. What it showed, Mr. 

Chairman, is every time we were in a run-up to an election the 

university funding would take a little blip. That was in ‘77-78, 

and you remember what happened in 1978. We had an election. 

And then along came ‘81-82 and the funding took another little 

blip. And I made the observation, Mr. Chairman, that what the 

NDP had there was a case of electoral . . . (inaudible) . . . The 

only time those universities got any cash was when there was an 

election coming. 

They liked to keep people dependent and hobbling on their 

knees, you know, because they like those people dependent on 

them. They like people dependent on the state. And I made the 

further observation, Mr. Chairman, that when our government 

came along there was none of these blips. You know why? 

Because our funding was always up here, and it’s been up there 

every year, and it’s been rising. We don’t practise this electoral 

“wave-itis.” And the hon. member talks about Gordon Dirks 

and somehow he’s not qualified to do this study, and somehow 

$30,000 is an inordinate sum to spend on it - and it’s not 

40,000 - that 30,000 is somehow an inordinate sum to spend on 

him. 

 

And yet, somehow, when every Koskie in the province, 

practically, had a job with the government, that was okay. And 

somehow when Ian Dean gets a $93,000-a-year job with the 

federal government, that’s okay. And somehow when Jack 

Messer - remember Jack Messer, and what’s his buddy there 

with the potash? - are bleeding the Manitoba taxpayers to the 

tune of three-quarters of a million dollars, that’s okay. 

Somehow that’s okay. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about Paul Schoenhals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. deputy leader for the 

opposition from the NDP, I would suggest to you that if Paul 

Schoenhals could get one-tenth of what Jack Messer is getting 

in Manitoba, he’d be very happy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — This is a very disappointing performance, 

Mr. Chairman. I’m very disappointed in this show. The minister 

went on a tirade and talked about all these terrific funding 

levels. 

 

Well the only funding levels that have increased are funding 

levels to political hacks of his party. I’ll mention a few names: 

Paul Schoenhals, for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 

150,000 or $100,000; George Hill, 150 to $200,000; Tim 

Embury, part of the Coopers & Lybrand-Embury firm now, 

$0.5 million; MLA Keith Parker, former MLA for Moose Jaw 

North, about $50,000 a year as an executive assistant to the 

head of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board; Paul Rousseau, the 

agent-general for Saskatchewan in London now, at $100,000 a 

year in salary and expenses; Paul Rousseau’s daughter working 

for SaskTel - another little patronage appointment; of course 

Sid Dutchak, we won’t talk about him, he’s getting a few 

dollars as well. 

 

Now we can go on and on, but I want to say to the minister that 

his show was very disappointing this evening. I’m very 

concerned about what he had to say, in particular, when the 

question had to do with the Premier’s brother-in-law, who he 

refused to answer. I’d like to ask the minister again the 

question: is the Premier’s brother-in-law employed in the 

Department of Education, and if so, in what capacity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Director of French minority 

education. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — And what does he do at this minority . . . 

What is it? The minority language branch of the  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1365 

 

Department of Education? What does the brother-in-law of the 

Premier do, and how much is he paid for this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Archambault is classified at the 

professional seven level within the new management 

professional plan. He currently draws a monthly salary of 

4,373. His responsibilities are: advise the official minority 

languages office on French minority education matters in 

developing a division 3 and 4 French language arts program for 

designated programs; provides consultative services to teachers, 

principals, directors of education, and parents of region 2 which 

is in the south-west. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — So the Premier’s brother-in-law is making 

52,000 plus a year, plus all of the other patronage appointments 

that I’ve had a very brief time to remind you about. We’ve 

heard about all those patronage appointments and the major cost 

to Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

How can the government, how can your government expect 

Saskatchewan taxpayers to support the tax increases in the 

budget, to support the cuts in the public services, including the 

Department of Education, and other wage freezes in the private 

and public sector, when your government continues to waste tax 

dollars on massive political patronage? 

 

On top of this, Mr. Minister, we have determined earlier that 

your deputy minister - the former and the current - have 

renovated their offices, not once, in the last two or three years, 

but twice. And the costs, you’re not able to give to us this 

evening. You tell us 40 to $60,000 for one, but you can’t 

remember the other. 

 

You’ve got 14 bureaucrats here this evening - none of them 

would’ve knowing anything about this. Some of them probably 

occupy the space. Why can’t you give us that figure? All of this 

money that you’re spending, that you’re wasting at taxpayers’ 

expense - no reason to have a deputy minister’s office renovated 

twice within three years unless there’s some major political 

problems. And I’d like to know what your answer is to those. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member asked, essentially, 

why are we charting the economic course that we’re charting? 

He talked about raising taxes. He talked about the budget in its 

global essence, quite frankly. And I want to address that point 

because, Mr. Chairman, that’s what separates us from the NDP. 

I want to talk about it because it’s right, it’s responsible, and it’s 

fair. And unless the NDP realize that, they’ll be sitting over 

there for a long, long time. 

 

He talks about how can we do the . . . Why we would do these 

. . . Mr. Chairman, and hon. members, in this budget what we 

have said is we will get our economic house in order. And why 

will we get our economic house in order is because, number 

one, is we want to make sure we have our economic house in 

order. Because that’s the only way you’re going to preserve the 

things that are important to the people of this province, the 

protections that they see as important, whether they be in the 

health field or the area of social services or, in fact, in terms of 

providing good education, is if you do have your economic 

house in  

order. And secondly, if we do not, then we shall deny ourselves 

of opportunities in the future. 

 

And those are the two essential reasons. Because I ask the hon. 

member, are his children well served or my children or the 

children of Saskatchewan well served if we allow the deficit to 

get out of control and to get ourselves into a situation where 

several hundreds of millions of dollars that should be being 

spent on health and education and social services are going to 

service the debt. 

 

I would say, no, that would not be the right course. It would not 

be the responsible course. It would not be the fair course. It 

would be merely transferring a debt to our children. I’m not 

going to do that. Our party does not stand for that. Our 

government does not stand for that. 

 

And quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, education would be one of 

the big sufferers, and I’ll tell you why. Education is one of the 

big spending departments in this government. You can’t deny 

that. Education is a priority, and it’s evidenced by the fact that a 

substantial percentage of the provincial budget goes to this 

department. And hence, if that money that should be going to 

education was spent to service debt, we would be the big losers. 

 

And that’s why we must get our economic house in order. You 

do not think we should get our economic house in order, but I 

am of the view we should get our economic house in order, and 

that’s what we shall do. And that’s what separates us from the 

opposition. That’s the course we’re plotting for the future. 

We’re plotting it, Mr. Chairman, not because it’s somehow easy 

and that you’ll somehow become popular doing it. We’re doing 

it because it’s right, it’s responsible, and it’s the fair thing to do. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Now, Mr. 

Minister, never before have I heard someone talk about creating 

a $3.4 billion deficit in a period of five years, and brag about 

getting their economic house in order - never before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I dread the possibility of what the minister might 

be describing in getting the house in order as we go down the 

road two or three years with the kind of financial flimflam that 

has been carried on by this government, and the track record 

that it’s had so far. 

 

Mr. Minister, never before have I ever seen a minister attempt 

to drag out with long, flowery, nonsensical, illogical speeches 

during the estimates period as I’ve seen here tonight. We have 

seen you be pompous. We have seen you be insensitive. We 

have seen you be uncaring to the students and the future of 

Saskatchewan people tonight. And you’ve given ample 

evidence to the people of Saskatchewan to not trust in the 

credibility of what you so proudly call the blueprint of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you make it easy to turn this  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1366 

 

discussion of estimates of the Education department of 

Saskatchewan into a game because of the attitude that you bring 

to this House. 

 

And I want to raise with you, Mr. Minister, I want to raise with 

you some very serious questions about a very serious matter. 

And my first question to you, Mr. Minister, is simply this: why 

did you fire the former principal of Saskatchewan Technical 

Institute, Dr. Andrew Nicol? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The gentleman to whom you refer, 

and I will be clear and precise on this, the gentleman to whom 

you refer was not fired. That position was abolished. And quite 

frankly, it’s unfair, it’s unfair to that man’s record to suggest 

that he was fired because it is not because of anything that that 

man did that he lost his job. That position was abolished; there 

was no position there for him to fill. And I would not want it to 

be on his record, nor would he want it to be on his record, that 

he was fired. And I’m very clear on that. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Precisely, Mr. Minister, what was the position 

that was abolished? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Principal of Saskatchewan Technical 

Institute. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — You were saying, Mr. Minister, that the position 

of the principal of Saskatchewan Technical Institute was 

abolished. Did I hear that correctly? Mr. Minister, did I hear 

that correctly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Is there someone at the Saskatchewan Technical 

Institute today who is acting principal of the Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The position that is there and is being 

filled today in an acting capacity is the principalship, and the 

person who is involved in bringing together the Coteau Range 

Community College into the institute in the amalgamation 

process for the new Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Let me ask the question for clarification, Mr. 

Minister, because I find it a little difficult to follow the logic. I 

understood you to say that the position of the principal of the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute was abolished. I understand 

you also, to just have said that there is a person who is carrying 

out the position of the acting principalship of the Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute. Is that what you said? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To try and clear this up for you, what 

we had was a principal at the community college and a principal 

at STI. We only need one in the new structure; one position was 

abolished, and that’s what has happened as a result of it. And to 

explain further, because  

I think what the hon. member is trying to do is trying to lead us 

into the scenario that would suggest - he would try and 

suggest -that somehow this heavy-handed rotten Tory 

government has somehow done a disservice here to one of its 

employees. And that is not true. 

 

I want to tell you what the basis was for what happened there 

and save you a lot of this fancy lawyer kind of approach to this 

questioning. 

 

When we undertook the amalgamation - and you must 

remember this was a provincial initiative, so what we are doing 

here was going on as well in Prince Albert and Saskatoon and 

Regina - and through all of this we did not want to have a 

situation develop where somehow the institutes were seen to be 

swallowing up the community colleges in this amalgamation 

process or, on the other hand, that somehow the community 

college and the boards would somehow steamroller over the 

institutes who had no boards. 

 

So what we tried to do was set up a situation where we had 

balance. We picked two from the community college side - two 

of those principals - and two from the institute side. That seems 

eminently fair. I’m not happy that anyone had to lose their job 

because of position abolishment, but certainly you have to 

recognize that nobody is served well. The taxpayers are not 

served well if we have two administrative positions where we 

only need one. 

 

And there was some several thousands of dollars in savings as a 

result of this amalgamation, but I caution you from suggesting 

or drawing the conclusion that we went through this process 

and that it was somehow budget-driven, because that would be 

an absolute mistake. 

 

Because I’ll tell you, as sure as I stand here today, it wouldn’t 

matter if the Department of Education - the community 

colleges, the institutes, the universities, whatever part of 

post-secondary education - had had a budget increase of 110 per 

cent. We would be going through this restructuring because we 

have to position ourselves for the decades ahead. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, this is not the member from 

Moose Jaw North engaging in lawyer questioning. This is the 

member from Moose Jaw North, an educator, asking the 

veterinarian in charge of the Department of Education some 

questions about the operation of your department. 

 

Is the action that you have taken at the STI in Moose Jaw, in 

eliminating - you say abolishing - the position of the principal 

of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, the Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute which will be the body that will combine the 

operations, you say, that were formerly delivered by the STI, 

the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, and Coteau Range 

Community College. Is the decision to eliminate the position of 

the principal of the institute the same as the decisions you’ve 

made in Regina, where we have the Wascana Institute and the 

Regina Plains community college? Is it the same as the decision 

you made in Saskatoon with the Saskatoon Region Community 

College, and Kelsey Institute. Is that the same decision you 

made in all three of  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1367 

 

those centres, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The basis for the decision making is 

the same in all centres. As I said earlier, we tried to have a 

balance, half and half, fifty-fifty. We didn’t want to have a 

situation develop where it was all the community college 

principals that got jobs as a principalships, no more than we 

want a situation to arise where the institute’s principals were 

seen to get the acting principalships. We tried to have a balance. 

The basis for that was the same at every location you 

mentioned. I think the amalgamation team, the interim 

governing council, have done a good job of making some major 

changes, and it’s going as smoothly as one might ever expect it 

to. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, what will be the title of the person 

who is the chief executive officer of the Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute once this amalgamation that you have been 

referring to in this famous blueprint of yours? What will be the 

title of the person who is in charge of the Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute in Moose Jaw? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There will be a president - that, I 

suspect, would be the appropriate title - as the chief executive 

officer for the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology. STI, as you refer to it, and have known it, will 

become one of four campuses under the structure of the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 

and there will be a principal there that will head up that campus, 

which would be the old STI and the old community college, as 

you probably would refer to it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, what is the name of the person 

who is the acting principal of the STI now, and what are her 

qualifications? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Okay, the acting principal in charge of 

the amalgamation at the new campus, if you like, is Nancy 

Lynch: Simon Fraser University, master’s in Business 

Education; M.A., faculty of education, communication and 

media technology department; diploma in adult education; 

University of Western Ontario, Bachelor of Arts. Eminently 

well-qualified, I would suggest. But they’re in an acting 

position, certainly. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, was Dr. Nicol a member of the 

transition team that was originally appointed to oversee the 

transition of the STI and Coteau Range Community College to 

the Moose Jaw campus of the new applied arts and science 

super-institute? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, all principals and vice-principals 

sat on the amalgamation team. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, are you telling me that you . . . 

Did you . . . Who appointed him as a member of that transition 

team, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The deputy minister. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And on what basis, Mr. Minister, do you say 

that the current acting principal of the STI in Moose  

Jaw is more qualified to oversee the transition than Dr. Andy 

Nichol? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That’s not the issue here because that 

wasn’t the basis for the decision making. As I said earlier, we 

had two principals as we did at all locations. And as I explained 

before, we did not want to be seen to have a situation develop 

where all the principals from all the community colleges 

became the acting principals, because then the institutes would 

say, oh yes, this is just a community college initiative, and the 

institutes are being left out in the cold - no more than we 

wanted to see the other scenario develop where all the 

principals from the institutes became the acting principals at the 

new campus locations. 

 

We’ve tried to have a balance, and I think we achieved that 

because we have, as I understand it, two from each side. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you’re telling me that Dr. Nicol 

was appointed to the transition team to oversee the transition 

between . . . of the two institutes, the STI and Coteau Range 

Community College. You’re telling me also that subsequently, 

you dismissed Dr. Nicol because you determined that his 

position was redundant, and the position was abolished. 

 

You are then also telling me, if I understand correctly what 

you’re saying, that you found it necessary to bring in an acting 

principal to oversee the transition between the STI 

(Saskatchewan Technical Institute) and Coteau Range 

Community College. Mr. Minister, who is responsible for that 

decision? Is that your responsibility? And will you justify to me 

and for the people of Saskatchewan how that represents the best 

interest of the education system in Saskatchewan? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, a correction. He was not 

there to oversee. I said he was on the team, as were all 

principals and vice-principals. And obviously, as part of that 

amalgamation process where we took eight bureaucracies, if 

you like, and made them into one with the four campuses, some 

positions were redundant. It’s that simple. 

 

Mr. Nicol was not dismissed in the sense of firing. As I pointed 

out earlier, the position was abolished. I’m not happy that 

anybody had to be laid off, but that’s the reality. There were 

savings there. This is not an anti-Andy Nicol process, this is a 

pro-taxpayer process, pro-education process. He was on the 

team, as were others, and the basis for the decision-making 

from that point on is as I described to you earlier. It’s 

unfortunate. I sympathize with the honourable gentleman. 

Would there be anything way around it, it would be great. 

 

As I understand it, there’s positions going to be available in the 

new structure that will be open for competition. And who 

knows what would happen. Many people could apply for them, 

and I suspect that might be a possibility for the person in 

question. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, who will be the next principal  

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1368 

 

of the Moose Jaw campus of the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Arts and Science? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised that this will go to 

competition. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — What will be the qualifications that you seek? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just on a point of clarification. Are 

you asking qualifications for the Chief Executive Officer of the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, or 

at the Moose Jaw campus? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Thank you. 

 

We will be looking with somebody with obviously educational 

expertise, administrative expertise and, equally important, as 

important, maybe even more important, somebody who has a 

sense of the new economy and its implications for 

Saskatchewan, somebody who has a feel for the information 

age, the knowledge-based economy, and what, in fact, it means 

for Saskatchewan people, and what it means in terms of how we 

position ourselves relative to providing training for those new 

job opportunities in the future. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Does Dr. Nicol have those qualifications, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think your question is not well 

founded. I would not want to speculate on who might fill the 

position. I think that would be irresponsible of me, quite 

frankly, and unfair as well to all candidates. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, being irresponsible and unfair 

would not be a new experience for you, believe me. I ask you 

again the same question, Mr. Minister. I did not ask you who 

the new principal was going to be, I asked you if . . . you just 

outlined the qualifications that you’ll be seeking for the position 

of principal of the Moose Jaw campus, and I ask you if Dr. 

Nicol has those qualifications. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I said earlier that it’s a competition 

and it’s an open competition, so I suspect anybody can apply. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Let me ask you again, Mr. Minister. You appear 

to be hard of hearing. Does Dr. Nicol have the qualifications? I 

would assume that you knew, according to this blueprint that 

you keep referring to, what you’re going to be seeking, and I 

ask you again, Mr. Minister, does Dr. Nicol have the 

qualifications for the position that you will be seeking to fill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Little useful purpose is served in 

discussing qualifications or lack of, because I would point out 

again that Mr. Nicol was not fired, the position was abolished. 

It had nothing to do with . . . That is just a simple statement of 

fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, we must be clear 

about that because I don’t think it serves Mr. Nicol’s reputation 

to have anything else but that laid out in the public record. 

 

Let’s flip this one around, you know, to look at the other side, 

because what could have happened is the principal  

of the community college, that position could have been 

abolished. I mean, either way we had an unfortunate situation to 

the degree that one position was redundant. And I don’t think 

the debate is . . . We’re well not served focusing on the 

individual. Either you agree with the logic we 

undertook - which I think was eminently fair - or you do not. 

 

We did not want to have the community colleges swamp the 

institutes or the institutes swamp the community college. We 

have done this in an eminent fair way, and certainly there was 

position abolishment, but you didn’t need eight administrators 

and eight secretary-treasurers and eight registrars, and you can 

take that money and put it into programming, which is what the 

people want. It seems to me that is good public policy, and that 

is what we are doing. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, let me go clearly on record as not 

agreeing with the logic of your decision. Mr. Minister, will you 

tell me what date Dr. Nicol was dismissed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The job that Mr. Nicol was in, that 

position was abolished May 12. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, will you advise me and will you 

please advise the people of Saskatchewan just how it was 

communicated to Dr. Nicol that his position was abolished and 

what was communicated to him that day? Would you please 

clearly state the procedure that was used to abolish the position 

of the principal of the STI? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — He was advised by his immediate 

superior that that position was abolished and then, as with some 

other 100-150 other position abolishments, we had the highly 

competent firm of Stevenson Kellogg Ernst & Whinney there in 

a consultant capacity to assist those who had been laid off. And 

I think for the most part - given that this is a difficult exercise 

under the best of circumstances - that things were relatively 

well across the government in that down-sizing exercise. It’s 

never easy; nobody ever enjoys it, but we tried to do it in every 

step of the way in a compassionate and humane way. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, who, from the Department of 

Education, was involved in the communication to Dr. Nicol that 

the position was abolished on May 12? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — His immediate supervisor, the 

assistant deputy minister. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And the name of the person in that position, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Elizabeth Crosthwaite. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, one final question. Will you tell 

me why it was communicated to Dr. Nicol when the position 

was abolished on May 12 that he was not allowed to attend the 

STI graduation ceremonies scheduled to be held about two and 

a half weeks later? Will you tell me why that was 

communicated to Dr. Nicol? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

July, 23, 1987 

1369 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The Minister of Education, nor his 

assistant deputy minister in the Department of Education, have 

no control over who is or is not invited to the graduation. The 

student union’s council run that particular graduation ceremony. 

We had nothing to do with it. And if you’re trying to suggest 

that somehow this hard-hearted government didn’t allow this to 

happen, quite frankly, that inference is wrong - 100 per cent 

wrong. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 

 


