


















































July 2, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 2, 1987 
 

875 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order, under rule 11(7), I hereby report 
that I have examined the following petition, lay it on the Table for 
reading and receiving: — Of Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation 
of Saskatoon, praying for an act to amend its Act of 
incorporation. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Monday next move: 
 
Whereas the Constitution Act, 1982 came into force on April 17, 
1982, following an agreement between Canada and all the 
provinces except Quebec; 
 
and whereas the Government of Quebec has established a set of 
five proposals for constitutional change and has stated that 
amendments to give effect to those proposals would enable 
Quebec to resume a full role in the constitutional councils of 
Canada: 
 
and whereas the amendment proposed in the schedule hereto sets 
out the basis in which Quebec’s five constitutional proposals may 
be met; 
 
and whereas the amendment proposed in the schedule hereto also 
recognises the principle of the equality of the provinces, provides 
new arrangements to foster greater harmony and co-operation 
between the Government of Canada and the governments of the 
provinces and requires that conferences be convened to consider 
important constitutional, economic, and other issues; 
 
and whereas certain portions of the amendment proposed in the 
schedule hereto relate to matters referred to in section 41 of the 
Constitution Act, 1982; 
 
and whereas section 41 of the Constitution Act, 1982, provides 
that an amendment of the constitution of Canada may be made by 
proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great 
seal of Canada, where so authorised by resolutions in the Senate 
and House of Commons and of the Legislative Assembly of each 
province; 
 
now therefore the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
resolves that an amendment to the constitution of Canada be 
authorised to be made by proclamation issued by Her Excellency 
the Governor General under the Great seal of Canada  

in accordance with the schedule hereto. 
 
A copy of the schedule which contains the text of the proposed 
amendments is attached to my notice of motion, Mr. Speaker, and 
is as copy of my notice of motion and the resolution in the French 
language. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Legislative Assembly, some guests we have from the United 
States, and particularly from the great state of Montana. 
 
I want to, first of all, introduce the Governor of Montana, Mr. 
Ted Schwinden, who is here for a one-day visit, discussing 
matters of interest between Saskatchewan and the state of 
Montana with respect to developing a better working relationship 
and moving towards areas of mutual interest with respect to 
agriculture, trade, environment, tourism, and so forth. 
 
I want to say that Governor Schwinden was elected Governor in 
1980. He’s been involved in political life since 1958. He’s held 
several positions in the state of Montana. He hosted the western 
governors’ conference and the premiers of Saskatchewan in 1983, 
and did an outstanding job, and has pursued with a great deal of 
vigour a better understanding and a better working relationship 
between the province of Saskatchewan and the state of Montana.] 
 
Would you please welcome the governor of Montana, Ted 
Schwinden. Governor. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And he has some colleagues with him, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to introduce the Hon. George Turman, Lieutenant 
Governor of the state of Montana, the Hon. Swede Hammond, 
state senator, and several other people for the delegation,. Would 
they all rise and be recognised. Welcome to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, may I join with the 
Premier in adding our word of welcome to Governor Schwinden, 
and the Lieutenant Governor, the state senator, and other 
members of the delegation from the state of Montana. 
 
We have always had warm relations with the state of Montana 
her in Saskatchewan, and I am happy to see that the Governor is 
here to cement and perhaps even to augment the good relations 
which have existed between our two jurisdictions. We regard the 
people of Montana as good neighbours, and we hope that the 
good relations which have existed will continue to exist. And we 
thank you, sir, for coming here and adding your support to what 
has been a very acceptable and expanding relationship. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

876 
 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. speaker, it’s a pleasure for me, and indeed a 
privilege for me, to introduce to you, and through you and to the 
members of the House, 17 students from Quebec who are here at 
the University of Regina to learn English. I suppose they 
probably already speak it to some degree, but to fine tune it for 
use back in their own home towns. With them is Mike Little. 
 
I apologise, Mr. Speaker, to our visitors from Quebec for my 
inability to address you in your first language. However, I am 
proud to say that two of our daughters have studied French for a 
year at Laval, and a third one will be down there this fall, so we 
are trying to get along with it. 
 
I know that the members will join me in saying to you, bienvenue 
à Saskatchewan. Amuzez-vous bien. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 
members for Wascana in extending a welcome to the students 
from Quebec. I join with him in apologising to the guests because 
of inability appropriately to express our greeting in the French 
language. 
 
I want to say that we have watched with the interest the program 
operated at the centre bilangue at the University of Regina. I’ve 
had a daughter who has been a monitor there, a wife who has 
taken a number of courses at the centre bilangue. We had one of 
the students who was there on a previous occasion, one Sylvie 
Drapeau, from Disraëli down by Thetford Mines who stayed with 
us for a year or so while she was studying English. We very much 
wish that your stay here in Regina will be a joyful one and hat it 
will be a successful one, that you will come to know and 
appreciate our province. 
 
Bienvenue à Régina. We are happy you are with us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Monsieur le président, bienvenue à nos 
visiteurs de la belle province ici aujourd’hui. Nous espérons que 
vous allez enjouir de votre visite à la legislature. Bienvenue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members of the House, I would like to welcome and ask 
members to join me in extending a welcome to the member of 
parliament for Regina East who is seated in the east gallery, Mr. 
Simon de Jong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Situation of the Province 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, and it is the question of which I gave notice to the 
Premier on Tuesday afternoon. And my question is this, sir: were 
you or any person responsible to you within  

the Executive Council, either cabinet ministers or senior officials, 
advised in writing or otherwise before October 20, 1986, by any 
person or persons form the Department of Finance, that the 
provincial deficit for the 1986-87 fiscal year would exceed a 
figure of approximately $500 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the hon. 
member for providing me with the question in advance. First let 
me say that I received, and the Minister of Finance received, 
several estimates of what the deficit may be in 1986 on into 1987. 
Some of the estimates forecasted lower revenues and higher 
expenditures; some forecasted lower interest rates; and obviously 
there were a combination of forecasts that were made, depending 
on and assuming certain things about taxation and about 
government expenditures and prices. 
 
In October, at that time I suggested that the deficit would be in 
the neighbourhood of half a billion dollars, and knowing full 
well, as I said a that time, that a government has three 
possibilities in dealing with a deficit of any kind, and depending 
on which way it will go. It can obviously modify expenditures; it 
can modify revenues, which means you’re going to change the 
tax structure; or you can do some things to obviously help change 
the economy. 
 
I will say, Mr. Speaker, that it also depended upon the size of the 
stabilisation payment.; It would depend on the size of a 
deficiency payment, which I’m sure the hon. Member recalls that 
we were after to a very large extent. It depends to a great deal — 
and I won’t pursue it any more than this and I’ll let him respond 
— on whether you’re accurate enough with respect to oil prices, 
and potash prices, agricultural prices, and interest rates at the 
time. 
 
And we had many forecasts, forecasts that were higher and 
indeed forecasts that predicted that we would have some relief in 
terms of both agricultural commodities like livestock and other 
prices, as well as interest rates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, and it’s the same one I asked before, and it is this. Were 
you, or any person responsible to you within the Executive 
Council, either cabinet minister or senior official, advised in 
writing or otherwise before October 20 that the provincial deficit 
for the year ‘86-87 would exceed a figure of approximately $500 
million? If the answer is yes, I would be happy for you to say so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already answered that. 
We received forecasts that showed that it could be larger or it 
could be smaller, depending on what we do. And we have three 
things at our disposal. We can either cut expenditures, or we can 
change the tax system, or in fact we can look at the international 
markets and say . . . I mean that’s your best guess and my best 
and our forecasters’. 
 
I could, if I might, Mr. Speaker, give an example. In 1982 we had 
a forecast — a forecast, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. member’s 
aware of it — that our 13 and a quarter program would cost us 
$400 million. And that was our best estimate on interest rates. 
Now as it happened, it only cost us $58 million. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

877 
 

Now we were obviously wrong with respect to our forecast on 
interest rates. We looked like it was going to be a terrible time in 
‘82; it was terrible. We said we’re prepared to eat that, and we 
were out, Mr. Speaker, about $350 million in terms of interest 
rate exposure. I say the same thing, Mr. Speaker,. We had 
forecasts, some of interest rates would decline rapidly, some were 
not as rapid, others would say: if you don’t do anything, you will 
find the combination of things could change the deficit. And I put 
them all together and I know what’s at my disposal. I know what 
I might be able to get from the federal government; I know what I 
might be able to do with respect to our own programs; I said the 
appropriate thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Premier, as you know, we’re not talking about an estimate made 
prior to the commencement of the fiscal year. We’re talking 
about an estimate made in the middle of a fiscal year. And you 
well know that the payment of deficiency payments, if it was 
going to arrive in March, would have made virtually no impact on 
the deficit — virtually no impact on the deficit. 
 
I ask you again, sir: are you asking the people to believe that your 
Department of Finance didn’t know in October within three or 
$400 million what the deficit would be five months later? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, that . . . Well two points. He 
raises that point that a deficiency payment wouldn’t make an 
impact on revenue and income tax and sales tax if it was paid in a 
five-month period. Now he knows that’s not the case. It could 
make a significant difference, and certainly a significant 
difference in terms of loosening up people’s attitude toward 
spending. And that’s the case. 
 
When we look at forecasts, Mr. Speaker, with respect to a deficit, 
I mean, that’s all they are. And in the middle of a term you’re 
going to say: what’s interest rates, what twill they be; what will 
be the price of grain; what’s the price of livestock; how much 
tourism will we have; what will be the price of oil? I can give 
you, Mr. Speaker, forecasts from agencies all over North 
America, and indeed, the world, that are at odds with each other. 
The Royal Bank, Econometrica, other people who have all kinds. 
And Yes, assuming the tools that you have before you as a 
government, you can forecast it will be up if you don’t change 
anything. It will be down if you increase taxes. If you hold it this 
way, Mr. Premier, it won’t vary much. If you do this it will go up, 
if you don’t do anything it might change, and here’s the line — 
our best guess. Well, I mean what it is in an estimate. And the 
best information that I had at that time, knowing what I could do, 
knowing what I might be able to get out of the federal 
government, knowing what I thought interest rates would be, 
knowing what others think it might be, was in that neighbourhood 
of one-half a billion dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier indicates that an announcement with respect to 
deficiency payments would have loosened up spending even if 
the money hadn’t come. Now there was an announcement. It 
presumably loosed up spending. It  

presumably, therefore, raised your tax revenues. Is that why the 
deficit was only $1.2 billion and not $1.4 or $1.5 billion had not 
that been the case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member of the opposition 
is fallen into the proverbial trap. The trap is: is the deficit of 
particular size or is the argument about whether there is 
variability. 
 
The truth is it’s difficult to forecast. That’s the fact. Now whether 
it’s going to be up or whether it’s going to be down is the whole 
question. Whether a deficiency payment of one-half a billion 
dollars or $1 billion or $3 billion would have an impact — of 
course it would, and that’s a variable you have to take into 
account. So certainly we’re better off having got the deficiency 
payment, but some other things were even worse. So we got 
lucky on one side, we got unlucky on another, and of course you 
end up with a deficit. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s the forecasting of all those together that 
makes the point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a new 
question to the Premier. And it is this, Mr. Premier: The 
Saskatchewan Department of Finance prepares a periodic status 
report — monthly, I believe, but perhaps more frequently — on 
the finances of this province. I used to receive them as Premier. 
The member for Regina North East used to send them when he 
was Minister of Finance. These status reports update the revenues 
and expenditures, and the deficit, as it is predicted periodically. 
Are you aware of those reports, Mr. Premier, and did you receive 
them in the course of 1986? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I receive information as the 
hon. member said that he used to receive information, and in 
1981-82 he received information and it was $1 billion out. And 
he wouldn’t allow this Assembly to vote on that budget. He 
called an election. He called an election and wouldn’t allow us to 
vote. 
 
All the estimates are there, and he was out $1 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. Well, he must have got that information from the 
member from Regina North East who obviously erred — erred 
very large — because it’s on the record, and we both have access 
to the record; it’s up to over $1 billion in oil itself. Now that’s an 
estimate by the minister of Finance. 
 
Well, the Minister of Finance gives his best guess on what 
interest rates are going to be, and whatever else is going to be. So 
I say to the hon. Member; my record and the Finance minister’s 
record are just as in touch as the former minister of Finance from 
the opposition, because he wouldn’t even let us vote on it, and 
obviously he was very, very wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll have an opportunity 
to deal with the Premier’s rhetoric in estimates. My question, in 
case you forgot it, sir, was: did you receive these periodic reports 
during 1986, supplied,  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

878 
 

I believe, by the Department of Finance to your office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, my office receives estimates 
and forecasts from Finance, from my own policy group, from 
Intergovernmental Affairs, from Energy, from Agriculture, from 
Econometrica, from the university, from all kinds of forecasts. I 
probably get a stack that high. Our people go through them. They 
provide all of this information in one place. They go through it 
and say — given the expectations of the people, the forecasts of 
groups in the grain business, the oil business, resources, interest 
rates, the banks, the international people — they’ll say, Mr. 
Premier, this is the information that provides you with most of the 
characteristics that you need. 
 
I look at those, as he did, and you take that information and know 
what you can do in terms of the variables you have at your 
disposal, and you make the appropriate decisions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
sure whether I put my question in a way that the Premier can 
understand it. Mr. Premier, my question was pretty simple: do 
you receive from he Department of Finance a regular — I believe 
monthly, but let’s call it regular report giving an update on the 
budget; giving an update on what taxes are collected and whether 
or not you are meeting your targets. And do you, sir, not look at 
those reports, at least in a cursory way, once a month to find out 
whether or not this province is meeting its financial targets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asked it — 
it was about October — he asked me if in fact I’d received more 
information that would say the budget was in excess of half a 
billion dollars. 
 
Well, in the month of October I might not have read as many 
documents as that I would on a normal time. As he recalls, we 
were in an election. Okay, I get all kinds of estimates; my 
officials get all kinds of estimates. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, 
whether on the campaign trail my hon. colleague was reading 
financial forecasts or whether he was out shaking hands. I can 
say, Mr. Speaker, during the election of this last October I was 
shaking hands, and evidently I shook a lot more hands than the 
member opposite. Maybe he spent too much time on fiscal 
forecasting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I would 
take it therefore, Mr. Premier, that you agree that you got those 
reports, since I take it you don’t deny that they’re prepared and 
you haven’t denied that you saw them — or at least they were 
available to you. Now if you shook hands, fine, but you were 
making fiscal forecasts. And the question that I want to ask you 
is: before you made that fiscal forecast of a deficit of half a 
billion dollars, did you not have available to you — which you 
may or may not have read — conclusive evidence that the 
forecast was  

wrong and that it was going to be much higher than that. Did you 
not have that information in hand? Did you not get it from the 
Minister of Finance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, by definition, when people 
are making forecasts they make assumptions that either this trend 
line will continue or assuming nothing’s going to change, ceteris 
paribus, it will stay exactly the same, then this is the conditions 
that you’ll have. 
 
Well, it’s an estimate, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it is, it doesn’t 
. . . there was nothing there that would assume how much a 
billion or two or $3 billion would do in terms of our revenue. 
There were not estimates that would . . .what would happen — at 
least, if you can pursue it — if you changed a tax system. I can 
show you estimates of what, if you modify a tax system, what it 
does to your revenue, what it’ll do to a deficit. You know that. 
 
Changes in terms of government expenditure — you’re quite 
aware — if you modify government expenditures, you’re going 
to modify the deficit. Now that’s my discretion. And I know, and 
only I know, as Premier, what you can do in terms of the ultimate 
decisions and what I might do or may not do under certain 
circumstances. 
 
I said it’s in the billion dollar range, half-a-billion dollar range, 
under the things that I know, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 
information that I’m provided with — a stack full of estimates, 
just the same thing as you have. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 

Proposed Tax Changes 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask just a very narrow 
question to see whether or not we can pin down some of the 
verbiage which the Premier is offering to us. 
 
He — and you heard him, sir, — said that if we change taxes it 
would affect the estimate of the deficit. Now, sir, would you mind 
telling us what taxes you propose to change which would have 
brought extra money in if you had changed the taxes between 
October and March. Please tell us. There was no legislature at the 
time. Please tell us what tax changes you had in mind to yield 
$700 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can recall — I believe 
it was a CKRM interview and an interview that I had when I said 
the deficit would be in the neighbourhood of half-a-billion dollars 
and Lorne Harasen, I believe, at the time says, well, what can you 
do to contain that? And I have. We can hold expenditures, 
manage better, or we can increase tax revenues, or we can do a 
combination of things that would increase economic activity. And 
I talked about that and people said, well, what are the 
alternatives? And we said, would you rule out taxes on this and 
that? I said I wouldn’t rule out anything in terms of tax changes. 
We’ve gone through them, already. We’ve just got finished 
introducing a flat tax, and you certainly  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

879 
 

were aware of it. And we removed the property improvement 
grant, and you aware of that. I campaigned all over the province 
saying that we needed a billion dollars in revenue for farmers, 
and you’re aware of that. So the issues were out there. 
 
And I can go back to 1976. You increased taxes on gasoline 
without the legislative even being in place — 3 per cent, a sliding 
tax. Income tax increases and gas tax with a 20 per cent sliding 
scale and there was no . . . the House wasn’t even in power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I 
hope it’s final, since perhaps we can get a simple answer. You 
said that Mr. Harasen indicated that you indicated to Mr. Harasen 
that the deficit would be about 500 million and he asked you what 
seeps you could take to contain that, and you outlined them. 
Could you indicate what steps you took to contain the $500 
billion deficit that led to a deficit of 1.2 billion five months later? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have just brought in a 
budget that put together the entire program to bring the deficit 
down dramatically. And we can go through it. The Minister of 
Finance has just explained in detail a series of modifications. And 
the opposition is quite familiar with them. They’ve been going 
around the province saying, well a deficit’s terrible, but they 
shouldn’t do anything about it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance has taken months and 
months and months in consultation with the public to review all 
the things in consultation with the public to review all the things 
that we can do. We’ve got a budget document here, Mr. Speaker, 
that goes through every single department and every single walk 
of life and puts together a budget that is significantly less in terms 
of deficit. And he spent a considerable amount of time and you’re 
asking me to . . . well I can read the entire budget to you again. 
But that’s all the measures that we’ve decided to do. 
 

SGI Employee Wage Freeze 
 

Mr. Trew: — Regina North, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. My 
question today is to the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance. On March 5 the Minister of Finance 
issued an economic statement which imposed a two-year freeze 
on all government employees’ salaries. I ask the minister: when 
did that wage freeze take effect at SGI, and does it apply to the 
corporation’s executive officers and out-of-scope staff as well as 
to the in-scope employees? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the hon. 
member, Mr. Lane on March 5 indicated that there would be zero 
and zero for all public sector employees. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Supplementary. If that wage freeze applies to all 
SGI staff, can the minister explain how the out-of-scope staff 
received a salary adjustment in the range of 7.6 per cent 
retroactive from April 1 when it was given, retroactive to January 
1, right to the beginning of the year? This was three weeks — a 
full three weeks after the Finance Minister’s announcement. How 
can you tell the unionized staff that they have to accept increases 
of nothing for at least two years when SGI’s management  

staff are receiving 7.6 retroactive, and isn’t that really a double 
standard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can just reiterate to the 
member that the zero and zero announced by the Minister of 
Finance will be in place for all SGI employees, in-scope and 
out-of-scope. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I want to be clear on this because I’m not sure I 
heard. Are you saying, are you saying — and I want you to 
answer for the record — are you telling this Assembly that there 
was no out-of-scope staff at SGI, they’ve received no salary 
increase since the Finance Minister announced the two-year 
freeze on March 5? Is that what you are telling this Assembly and 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — What I am telling the member opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan Government Insurance will 
participate in the zero and zero as announced by the Minister of 
Finance on March 5, 1987. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Further supplementary. Madam Minister, I don’t 
think you heard the question. The question was, quite simply: was 
there a wage increase granted to out-of -scope employees at SGI, 
April 1 of this year or any time this year, but in the order of 7.6 
per cent? Was there an out-of-scope wage increase, or was there 
not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance, in-scope and out-of-scope employees, shall participate 
in the two-year freeze implemented by the Minister of Finance on 
March 5. That clearly means that for the two years henceforth, it 
will be zero and zero for in-scope and out-of-scope employees. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Effective when? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, 
and to the hon. member, the Minister of Finance on March 5 
announced that there would be a wage freeze for two years and 
for all government and Crown employees. On March 5 he 
announced that there would be zero and zero in the next two 
years. And that is the policy that SGI shall follow. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Final supplementary. I want the minister to 
measure her words. You are saying, then, that SGI is following 
that zero per cent increase for the next two years and that, 
therefore, there has not been a salary increase for out-of-scope 
SGI employees this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — What I said, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. 
member’s question, is that on March 5 the Minister of Finance 
announced to the public that there would be a two-year wage 
freeze, zero and zero, and SGI, as a Crown corporation, shall 
participate in two years of zero and zero. 
 

Pharmacy Closure at Ile-a-la-Crosse 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my 
question to the Acting Minister of Health. Effective July 15 the 
only pharmacy in the northern community of  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

880 
 

Ile-a-la-Crosse will close. This is a regional pharmacy, Mr. 
Minister. This makes Buffalo Narrows, a return trip of 
approximately 100 miles, the closest pharmacy where 
Ile-a-la-Crosse residents can get medication. It also leaves the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse Hospital, which is a regional hospital, without 
night stocks of medication, and this means emergency medication 
will not be available. 
 
Is the minister aware of the town’s closure of this pharmacy, and 
what arrangements has his government made to provide the 
residents of Ile-a-la-Crosse with emergency medication if the 
planned closure goes ahead? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of any planned 
closure. I will take notice of the member’s question and have my 
colleague, the Minister of Health, look into the situation. 
 

Grant to Ile-a-la-Crosse Pharmacy 
 

Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker, and I direct this 
one to the Premier. Mr. Premier, the public accounts for 1985-86 
show that your government provided the owners of the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse pharmacy with a northern economic development 
grant of $60,000 to open up this drugstore in the first place, and 
drugstores at La Loche and Buffalo Narrows. 
 
My question, Mr. Premier: was the grant conditional, or can they 
just close down and pull out whenever the feel like it? How much 
of the $60,000 will be returned to the taxpayers since the owners 
have clearly decided to break their commitment to the residents 
of Ile-a-la-Crosse and that region? And how much money will 
you demand back from the owners on behalf of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a good question, and I 
will consult with the Minister of Health and take notice and get 
back to the hon. members at my first convenience possible. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Superannuating Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Superannuation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 

Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act, 
1985. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Time Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading a Bill to 
amend The Time Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Farm Security Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move 
second reading of The Farm Security Amendment Act, 1987. 
 
Without this amendment to the two sections of The Farm 
Security Act will expire this year. Section 2 will expire at the end 
of the year; section 7 will expire July 1 — yesterday. 
 
Section 2(1) of the existing Act provides that, during the years 
1984 to ‘87, inclusive, a vendor, mortgage, or collateral lessor, 
under an agreement for sale or mortgage, cannot take more than 
one-third of crop production in any one year under the crop-share 
agreement. 
 
Section 2 (2) provides that if, in each or any of the years ‘84 to 
‘87, the crop produced is less than the value of 10 bushels of 
number one CW red spring wheat, the farmer can present the 
current tax receipt to the vendor, mortgagee, lessor, and retain, 
from the latter’s share of crop, sufficient grains to cover the taxes. 
 
In the alternative, if he farmer fails to pay the taxes, the vendor, 
mortgagee, or lessor must pay the taxes, when so demanded by 
the municipality, an amount equal to what he has received from 
the farmer in that year. 
 
Subject to exception, section 7 of this Act provides that the final 
order foreclosure cannot be enforced against a homestead so long 
as it remains a homestead. 
 
The new legislation removes the time limits of section 2 and 
section 7 altogether, allowing these sections to continue 
indefinitely, along with the other provisions of the Act. 
 
With respect to section 7, the new legislation will be retroactive 
to July 1, 1987. 
 
The impact of section 2 of this Act is difficult to measure because 
crop-share mortgages, agreement for sale, which section 2 
protects, are not thought to be all that common. However, it’s 
important to maintain farm protection during this difficult time, 
and continuing section 2 will help those farmers under these types 
of arrangements. 
 
Section 7 is the protection with the wider application. It protects 
homesteads of all farmers unless an exemption  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

881 
 

has been specifically made. Protection of farmers’ home base 
continues to be very important to protect. This particular 
legislation was brought in 1944, and since 1944 has been 
extended for three-year periods each year since 1944 to 1987. 
 
What this particular amendment will do is not only will it extend 
it again, but it will extend it indefinitely, as opposed to extending 
it only for three years, then have to come back into the House and 
extend it another three years. So this will be to extend that 
indefinitely. It is part of a package of programs, Mr. Speaker, 
designed over a period of time to protect the farmer, protect the 
farmer in this case against foreclosure. I think it was an 
appropriate piece of legislation then; it’s an appropriate piece of 
legislation now. 
 
And with that I would move second reading of an Act to amend 
The Farm Security Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Farm Security 
Act of course we know was brought in 1944 by the CCF 
government, and it denied mortgagees the right to foreclose on 
homesteads. And actually it came to be known as the home 
quarter protection Act. And this Act still goes on, and it’s done a 
good job. But the problem has arisen that lenders routinely ask 
farmers buying land to agree to an exemption, an exemption from 
the Provincial Mediation Board. And with that the Act then offers 
little or no protection. 
 
We have a situation now similar to those that arose in the ’30s 
when this Act was brought in. And the time before the Act, for 
this minister’s reference, was similar to the times we have now. 
And therefore when the government came in ‘44, it did do 
something to rectify that. And as I said, it has done a good job. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in order to give this Act more thought and 
consultation, I would now beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Through you to the 
minister, I’d asked some questions of you on June 26 when you 
were last before the Committee of Finance, and since that time 
I’ve had a look at the legislation concerning developments within 
the province — it’s an Act respecting the Assessment of the 
Impact on Environment of New Developments. And in light of 
this legislation, Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, I’m 
asking you whether or not there was permit issued to Gainers, 
either by yourself, the Department, or the former Minister, the 
member from Kelsey-Tisdale, before Gainers started construction 
at the North Battleford  

location? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there was not. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Do you find that in contravention to the Act 
that I’ve just cited to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, we do not. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, if not, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the matter was reviewed at 
the time and was not deemed to be a development under the 
terms of the Act. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’d like to quote from you 
from section 8 (1). It’s concerning ministerial approval required 
and it reads as follows: 
 
Notwithstanding the requirements of any other Act, regulation or 
bylaw relating to any licence, permit, approval, permission or 
consent, a proponent shall obtain ministerial approval to proceed 
with a development, and no person shall proceed with a 
development until he has received ministerial approval. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would refer the hon. member to section 2 
of the Act and items the outline what is considered a development 
fall there under section 2 of the Act. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well then I think we should examine section 2 
of the Act, Mr. Minister. 
 
Section 2(d) “development” — and I believe that’s what you’re 
referring to. This is under definitions or interpretation of the Act. 
 
“development” means any project, operation or activity or any 
alteration or expansion of any project, operation or activity, 
which is likely to . . . 
 
And I’ll refer you to a little further down, and I quote, under (d)2: 
 
substantially utilize any provincial resource and in so doing 
pre-empt the use, or potential use, of that resource for any other 
purpose. 
 
Mr. Minister, they use water. They add solutions to the water. 
They expel the water, then, into the environment. I think that 
you’re in contravention of the Act, and someone within your 
department, or you, or the former minister should answer to this. 
 
I accuse you, Mr. Minister, of being in contravention of your own 
legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I want the hon. member to realise what he’s 
saying here. Gainers uses water. Yes, they do. In your home you 
use water. But you’re not deemed to be a development just 
because you build a home and use water. Gainers will use more 
water, but they still just use  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

882 
 

water purchased from the city. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So what you’re telling me then, Mr. Minister, is 
Gainers bacon plant is just another residence, as far as you’re 
concerned, in the city of North Battleford. Is that what you’re 
telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, that’s not what I said. I said that simply 
the fact that Gainers uses some water does not make him a 
development, the same as you using water in your home does not 
make you a development. That’s what I said. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, in your terms could you describe 
to me what a development is? In the meaning of the Act, what is 
a development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d advised that you apply all of the six items 
under section (d). And if Gainers were using all of the water that 
the province had available, then it might have been considered a 
development. But simply to come on stream on a city water 
system and use some water does not in itself make them a 
development. 
 
There’s a . . . .You know you have to draw some fine lines, and 
the department has made the decision that it was not a 
development. And I think if you read the six items under section 
(d), you probably will come to the same conclusion. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The department, Mr. Minister, doesn’t have the 
authority to make the decision whether or not it’s a development. 
It’s quite clear under the Act they need a ministerial permit before 
proceeding. And at that time, at that time, in the wisdom of the 
department and your closest advisers, if they decide that it’s not 
necessary, you can say the environmental impact assessment is 
not necessary and issue the permit, and then that’s your 
responsibility. But you can’t just allow developments to occur 
within the province without issuing a permit or ministerial 
approval for developments in fact to happen. 
 
And what I heard you saying is that Gainers is not a development. 
Is that true? First off, Gainers is not a development. I maintain to 
you, your department does not have the authority to override 
legislation. You’re the one that’s on the hook. If it’s not you 
personally, then it’s the member from Kelsey-Tisdale because he 
was the minister of the Environment at the time of the Gainers 
construction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the project that Gainers were going ahead 
with had been deemed to be a development — and it was not — 
but if it had been deemed to be a development, then it would have 
needed the ministerial approval. It was deemed not to be a 
development and therefore did not require ministerial approval. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could you give us an example, Mr. Minister, of 
a development that in the eyes of the department would require 
an environmental impact assessment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the hon. member would read under the 
Act, section 2(d) and all six of the items, those are the ones that 
define what a development is under the Act.  

And any one of those, if they come under that Act and are defined 
to be a development because of the method of defining a 
development — that’s the section of the Act that deals with it — 
if they come under those and they are defined then by those to be 
a development, then they would require. Otherwise they do not. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I go back to this again, to the act. 
Section 2(d): 
 
“development” means any project, operation or activity or any 
alteration or expansion of any project, operation or activity, 
which is likely to: 
 
And then it lists about six different examples of what would 
denote a development, that would describe a development. 
 
So are you telling me that if any one of these items are violated 
by a potential development, then there should be an 
environmental impact assessment done on that development? Is 
that what you’re saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: —I’m advised that if they contravene any one, 
individually or severally. And I might tell the hon. member that in 
clause (iv) it says: 
 
cause widespread public concern because of potential 
environmental changes; 
 
We haven’t had one letter concerning the development of that 
particular plan, not one question to the Department. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you for that information. It’s totally 
irrelevant, though. I ask you again very clearly: if any one of 
those six items listed under number 2(d) are in contravention of 
any potential development, does that then mean that there is a 
development and an environmental impact assessment should in 
fact be done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that’s right. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, thank you. We’ve determined that now. 
 
So then ink your opinion, or more accurately he department’s 
opinion, the gainers plant had no potential for violating any one 
of those six subsections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that, yes, that’s the case. They 
were not violating any one of those. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Oh. Well let’s look at section 2(d), number 3. 
Let’s look at that one: 
 
. . . cause the emission of any pollutants or create by-products, 
residual, or waste products which require handling and disposal 
in a manner that is not regulated by any other Act or regulation. 
 
Well, there’s fluids come into the plant — water. There’s 
substances added to the water; it has to be expelled. Why, then, is 
that not a violation of those six criteria that are set down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that they don’t even have  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

883 
 

to come to the department for the disposal of sewage when they 
tie in with an existing system. And they tied into the system at the 
hospital in North Battleford, which is regulated. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’m not so sure that it is regulated, in that 
particular lagoon. It’s on your Crown land; it’s not regulated by 
any municipal level of government; it’s regulated by the province 
of Saskatchewan. And I still maintain, even if you got away from 
this, you’re still required to issue them a permit before 
construction under An Act respecting the Management and 
Protection of the Environment, a completely different Act. 
 
And it’s section 17, under this Act, is entitled “Permits Required” 
. . . That we’ll look for that now. “Subject to section 18 . . . “I’m 
quoting from section 17: 
 
Subject to section 18, no person shall: 
 
(a) cause or allow any contaminant to be discharged, deposited, 
drained or released where there is reasonable possibility that its 
discharge, deposit, draining or release may change the quality of 
any water or cause water pollution. 
 
(b) notwithstanding the generality of clause (a), discharge, 
deposit or release any contaminant in surface water or along the 
banks or shores of surface water for the purpose of poisoning, 
killing or otherwise controlling weeds, algae or other organisms. 
 
or, 
 
(c) construct, install, alter, extend or operate any industrial 
effluent works; 
 
without holding a valid and subsisting permit that authorized him 
to do so. 
 
I would draw you attention to (c), which refers to the construction 
— “install, alter, extend or operate any industrial effluent works.” 
Is that not the case that’s happening at the Gainers plant in North 
Battleford? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I am advised that at the time that the project 
was being looked at and the Department of Justice was consulted, 
and under that section of the Act the department advised that 
because the drainage from the Gainers plant would go into the 
North Battleford industrial sewage connection, that there was no 
need for a permit to be issued by the department. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I disagree with you. I don’t think that you can 
stand there and honestly say that they don’t require a permit. I can 
even agree that you could waive — are you consulting with your 
officials now, Mr. Minister? I agree that you could, in fact, waive 
the right or the requirement that they do an environmental impact 
assessment. You could waive that right, but I think very clearly, 
under these two pieces of legislation that came in under your 
government, they require a ministerial permit to proceed with that 
development. We want to know why there was not a ministerial 
permit issued to authorize them your  

approval to go ahead with construction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would refer the hon. member to section 18 
of the Act, 3(b), and it says: 
 
Industrial effluent works that discharge industrial waste 
exclusively into sewage works operated by a municipality; 
 
The portion that they discharge into is that, in turn then goes into 
the hospital grounds. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I think you should check your 
accuracy with officials within your department. 
 
The section you quoted to me — you read it very well and 
accurately — the sewage works are not operated by a 
municipality. Those sewage works are the responsibility of the 
province of Saskatchewan; it’s on Crown land, and there may be 
some agreement that other industrial sewage or wastes go into 
that lagoon, but I believe that the lagoon is, in fact, your 
responsibility and not the responsibility of the municipality. 
 
And I think, again, I draw you back to getting away from the 
issue, and Gainers isn’t the only example, is what I’m afraid of. I 
use Gainers as an example because I think you’re very clearly in 
violation of legislation that came in under your government, and I 
want to get back to the fact that you have a responsibility to have 
issued a permit, or the minister at that time had the responsibility 
to issue a permit because of the possible environmental 
ramifications that could occur. 
 
And now we do find that in that lagoon the brine and whatever 
else in the water that is discharged from the plant causes another 
reaction, in fact, in that lagoon. And so somebody in your 
department is not their job, and I don’t know who that is, or are 
they so bogged down with work that they don’t have time to get 
on top of these things? You require a permit for such operations 
to proceed, and why haven’t you issued that permit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I advised the hon. member, at the time 
that the plant was being planned, this issue of sewage went 
forward to the Department of Justice, and they are the legal 
experts within our province. The advice that was received by the 
department was that because it connected to an existing 
municipal sewage system in an industrial park, along with many 
other businesses in that park, and in turn that industrial sewage 
connects in that one at the hospital grounds. So the original 
connection from gainers goes into the industrial park, which is a 
municipal sewage system, and then that park then in turn goes o n 
into the one on the hospital grounds. And because of that, there 
was deemed to be no need of us providing the permit. 
 
I’m advised by the member on the question that you raised with 
regard to corrective measures at the sewage lagoon that some of 
those corrective measures have been put into place now, and 
they’re still waiting to see whether they’re effective. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

884 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, that you 
have taken such rapid action to rectify the problem that was there, 
because it was very unpleasant for the people that lived in that 
area. 
 
But I find it very strange . . . I still want to go back to this thing 
about the permit. I find it very strange that your people in the 
Department of Environment and you and the former minister rely 
on Justice to interpret whether or not you should have 
environmental impact assessments. If it gets that technical, if 
there’s any question of whether there should be environmental 
impact assessment done or not, you shouldn’t do the bloody thing 
if there’s that much question. You shouldn’t have to run to Justice 
and ask them for a legal interpretation of the Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That isn’t what I said. I told you that we 
went to the Department of Justice with reference to the sewage 
and the connection of that sewage to the industrial park, and that 
was deemed not to require a permit. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you,. Mr. Chairman. The question 
following, I think, from the minister’s previous comments were: 
why did you go to the Department of Justice? Was it for the sole 
purpose of trying to find some technical loophole in The 
Environmental Assessment Act so you could let your buddy, 
Peter Pocklington, off the hook in North Battleford? Isn’t that 
why you went to the Department of Justice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that the hon. member’s comments 
that we were trying to protect Peter Pocklington, I think he 
protects himself reasonably well and he doesn’t need my 
protection. But on the other side, we go to the Department of 
Justice because they are the proper branch of government for all 
departments to go to for interpretation of legislation. This was a 
very complicated piece because it connected with municipal 
sewage and then later on onto the hospital grounds. And for that 
reason we go to the Department of Justice, and the decision that 
came was that they did not require the permit. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I agree with one statement that you make, 
that Peter Pocklington is certainly powerful enough to take care 
of himself, but I don’t think Paul Meagher was, and it seems to 
me that you get involved in making political decisions as to 
whether or not there’s an environmental impact assessment or 
not. You know, you’re picking on Paul — he has to do an 
environmental impact assessment after the fact. Why didn’t you 
let his development go ahead the same as Peter Pocklington’s in 
North Battleford? 
 
I think there’s some pretty independent value assessments, I 
would say, to say the least, placed on whether or not you do an 
environmental impact assessment. And I think that you have to 
go by the Act, and if there’s any question, regardless of how 
complicated the lagoon system, is, if there’s any question that 
there should be an environmental impact assessment done, then in 
fact it should be done. And I think that people in your department 
should be honouring that; they should be looking at 
environmental impact assessments if there’s any danger at all. 
 

But why then, can you explain to me, Mr. Minister, the double 
standard where Pocklington, Gainers, no environmental impact 
assessment necessary; Paul Meagher and the people with him all 
of a sudden need an environmental impact assessment, and 
they’re shut down? Why the double standard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: —The members throws around the term 
“double standard” very freely, and I think you ought to stop and 
realise what you’re saying.; To begin with, the Pocklington plant 
was dealing basically with the city. It was coming to the city 
under invitation of the city in co-operation with the city. The 
development that was proposed for Redberry Lake was going into 
a federal bird sanctuary if it were given the permission to go 
ahead. 
 
I read to you before that if it should cause widespread public 
concern before of potential environmental changes, that it would 
be considered a development. That’s section 2(d)(iv). The one at 
Redberry did cause considerable public concern, long before any 
bulldozer came on site at Redberry Lake. 
 
So we’re talking about two entirely different circumstances. The 
two don’t relate in any way. I think we made the right decision in 
both cases. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, what you’re saying to me is that 
it doesn’t matter; the only reason the Department of 
Environment’s there is, if there’s a large public outcry, then 
you’ll do something? I think the Department of Environment 
should be there to stop large public outcries, because people 
should have some confidence that our Department of 
Environment is in fact taking care of the environment. Shouldn’t 
that be the purpose of the department? 
 
Going back to the Gainers operation, I want to know if you have 
anyone in your department that could have predicted that brine 
would have broken down bacteria reaction in a lagoon. Do you 
have anybody in your department with that kind of expertise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We do have engineer in our department and 
can predict things, but in this circumstance the brine is one 
commodity that goes into that sewage system, but so do the 
drainage items from the other members of the industrial park. So 
I don’t know whether you should lay all the blame on any one 
industry within that industrial park. Probably the combination of 
a number of them contribute, but it would be most difficult, I 
think, for you or for anyone to make that statement that the brine 
was the sole cause of the smell from the sewage lagoon. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I think that, you know, if there’s problems 
there, I’m not blaming any particular business. I’m blaming you 
and your department for not honouring the Act, is what I’m trying 
to do. I’m trying to use that as an example. It’s not the most great 
concern that I have as a member of the legislature from that area. 
It certainly isn’t our greatest concern as an individual case on this 
side of the House. But it’s an example where you’re not doing 
your job. You’re definitely not doing your job. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

885 
 

What I ask you: is there anybody in your department that would 
know that the brine from the Gainers plant would stop the 
bacteria reaction in the lagoon? Does anybody know that in your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe I answered that question as clearly 
as anybody could. Yes, we do have engineers; and yes, we do 
have others within the department. But because it’s not only one 
industry that is dumping their sewage into that lagoon, it’s very 
difficult to make that assessment that it was the brine or any other 
one. 
 
I might also mention to the member that we did follow the Act. 
The interpretation under the Act, we followed it 100 per cent. If 
the member doubts that, he’s quite capable of challenging it in the 
courts of the province. But I don’t think that you would find, if 
you do to any of your legal people, that you will find that we have 
broken any terms of the Act in the development in the Gainers 
plant in North Battleford. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The intent of the Act. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Very right. The member from Regina 
Lakeview says, the intent of the Act, which I think is very 
important. And you’ve certainly broken the intent of the Act, 
because your department doesn’t want to take action on the 
environmental concerns within the province unless it’s some 
issue that’s a large public outcry. And public outcry is important 
even though, when you have 7,000 people demonstrate here in 
the legislature, your Premier says it’s not important. But if that’s 
all you rely on is public outcry, then your department and the 
Department of Environment in the province, how can people 
have confidence in you as the Department of the Environment if 
you just wait until public outcry before you proceed on any 
activities? 
 
I’m a little aghast to say that . . . for you to say that it might be 
any one of a number of things going into the lagoon system that 
caused the breakdown in the bacteria action, it’s, I think, even for 
those that are not of sound scientific mind would know that salt 
kills things,; it kills the bacteria action. That’s mainly what the 
brine is that’s going into the lagoon system. and certainly if that 
was being pumped onto a farmer’s field or some growing area, I 
would hope that your concern would be a lot greater than what 
you’ve shown us that it is over some people who can’t stand the 
stench and the smell. And you must admit that there’s some 
problem there because now you’re taking remedial action to 
correct it. 
 
And the bottom line, Mr. Minister — and I think I’ll go back, 
defer to my colleague from Regina Rosemont — but the bottom 
line is that that’s not the big issue there. It’s important to the 
people who have to put up with it. But I think that you need to 
take a very close look, Mr. Minister, when developments are 
going ahead, that those developments receive your ministerial 
approval. I think that that’s required. They don’t have to 
necessarily go through the environmental impact assessment 
because you, and within the wisdom of your officials, can in fact 
make the decision that they aren’t in contravention of the Act; 
that it’s environmentally safe; there’s no public outcry; no 
concern. Fine. Issue your permit. 

 If there is a problem though, the buck comes back and stops with 
you as minister. If, in your wisdom of the department officials, 
there is an environmental impact assessment required, then you 
do that. And once the conditions are met and all the concerns are 
met, then issue your permit to them and make sure that they’re 
honoured in there. But I think that it’s very shoddy work of 
whoever’s responsible in the Department of Environment for not 
taking a much closer look at environmental impact assessments in 
the province. And I think there’s far too much value judgement 
that takes place as to which one should, and which one should 
not, have environmental impact assessments. 
 
And from now on, Mr. Minister, if you want myself and likely 
some other members this side of the House to have respect for 
you, I would at least be in a position, if I were you, to be issuing 
permits for those developments to go ahead so that we have some 
confidence your department’s at least looking at it. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, the member takes quite a side-swipe at 
the staff and the department. I believe that the legislation that we 
have before us outlines what a development is, and it does it very 
clearly. We have followed that outline as closely as anybody 
could follow an outline and demand environmental impact 
assessment from anybody that falls within the area defined as a 
development. 
 
(1515) 
 
I might also go a little further and suggest to the member that if 
these are not the right terms to outline a development in, then the 
former government — the New Democratic Party, when it was in 
power, wrote the Act — if they didn’t define development well 
enough, the talk to the leader of his party now, because he 
evidently made a mistake if it doesn’t suit you. 
 
But the people in my department do a very thorough job, and they 
review every enterprise that comes and seeks permission to go 
ahead. And we are demanding environmental impact assessments 
by many,. many people. And I believe the general outcry that we 
heard from Redberry indicates again that we made the right 
decision — that there was a development there that was going to 
need to be watched very closely. The numbers of letters that I had 
prior to the time that the bulldozer started to work at Redberry, 
and the number of letters I’ve had since saying, yes, you did the 
right thing to stop it, I think that indicates that it is a development 
and that it, yes indeed, must have an environmental impact study 
before it can go ahead. 
 
So I don’t appreciate the slur that you throw at the staff of the 
department. They’ve done a good job and I think are continuing 
to do that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I think one final little series of questions, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m not slurring your whole department, I’m slurring 
whoever is responsible. It’s mainly the minister, and if you’re 
directing the department, you require permits to go to 
developments that have any possibility of contaminating the 
environment. You’re not doing that. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

886 
 

Development, you say, was not well enough defined by the New 
Democrats. Well I’d say it’s your interpretation of development 
in this Act because my interpretation of it is, is that you have to 
issue a permit. You didn’t do that. You went to the Department of 
Justice, right? You went to the Department of Justice for 
interpretation. Show us that interpretation. I’m asking you: will 
you give us that interpretation? Table it today here in the 
legislature. I’d like to see that interpretation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The department of Justice interpretation was 
with regard to the permit for sewage, not to the decision of 
whether or not it was a development. 
 
I think you were quite clear on that; we were in the other Act at 
the time we talked about the Department of Justice. So that was 
the area, it was with regard to the connection to the sewage and 
the sewage going on into the lagoon on the hospital site. So that 
was the area that they went to the Department of Justice for a 
decision. There is a written decision in the department, but it’s 
not customary for departments to table that kind of information in 
the legislature. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, that 
leaves us in a little bit of a quandary. We heard before you say 
that you went, or somebody in your department went, went to the 
Department of Justice in order to get a determination whether or 
not the Peter Pocklington plant in North Battleford . . . you’re 
shaking your head, no. That was the question: whether or not the 
Peter Pocklington plant in North Battleford was a development 
within the meaning of the Act. Now you’re retracting your 
statement and saying, no, it wasn’t a development within the 
meaning of the Act; that you only went to the Department of 
Justice in reference to its connection with the sewer in the North 
Battleford sewage system. What I want to know is this: who 
initiated and where was that initiation taking place? From which 
. . . Was it the assessment branch that initiated going to the 
Department of Justice to try to find some way of getting Peter 
Pocklington and his plant off the hook? Who went to the 
Department of Justice to get the determination? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d like the hon. member to recall what we 
were discussing at the time that we talked about Justice. And the 
member was requoting really from section 17, and I quoted back 
to him from section 18 of an entirely different Act than The 
Assessment Act, and it’s an Act respecting the Management and 
Protection of the Environment. That’s the act we were talking 
about; that’s the Act that the legal interpretation was under. 
 
We were not at that point talking about whether or not the 
Pocklington plant was considered a development. That was 
earlier. But the judicial decision was made under this Act, and 
under section 17 and 18. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’ll ask the question fairly straightforward. Why 
did the department go the Department of Justice? Were they 
looking for loopholes to let Pocklington off the hook? Is that the 
reason they went to do it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I guess the simple answer is no. 

Mr. Lyons: — Could you please tell us why they went to the 
Department of Justice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, I explained that earlier — that because 
it was a complication of the sewage going into a municipal 
sewage in an industrial park first, and then later going from that 
industrial park sewage into the hospital sewage grounds. Those 
two cause it to be a somewhat different circumstance. The 
department wanted to be sure that the decision they made was 
right, and that the interpretation of the Act was right, so they seek 
interpretation from the Department of Justice. That’s not 
uncommon in government. It’s done all the time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Then the decision of the department that you’re 
referring to was the decision not to issue a ministerial permit. Is 
that the decision that you’re talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes. The decision was that, because it went 
into a municipal sewage system, that the permit was not required 
from us. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And the reason that the permit, in the estimation 
of your officials, was that it id not fall within the purview of a 
development as defined by The Environmental Assessment Act. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. You’re jumping from one Act to the 
other, and perhaps the member should have one of each in his 
hand, and then he’d understand it easier. That had nothing to do 
with the development side of it. It had simply to do with the 
sewage side of it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well I understand what the sewage side is. It 
comes from Pocklington’s plant into the municipal sewage 
system, and then onto the sewage lagoon at the Saskatchewan 
Hospital. 
 
Your department at some point in time in the past made a 
decision that said two things: a ministerial permit is not required; 
and we will not require Peter Pocklington to submit an 
environmental impact statement. Were those the two decisions — 
because there were two decisions and we’re dealing with both 
Acts — were those the two decisions that your department took? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Under the assessment Act, under section . . . 
The Environmental Assessment Act, under section 2(d) and the 
six points, those are the points that are used to decide whether or 
not it’s a development. 
 
When it came to the decision with regard to the sewage, then you 
move to the other act, which is an Act respecting the 
Management and Protection of the Environment. And if you 
would like to read section 17 and section 18, they define. And 
under those two sections of that Act, the Department of Justice 
advised us that no permit was needed from the Department of 
Environment. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I understand what you’re saying in regards to the 
sewage, although I would submit, quite frankly, that it’s a 
technicality, that in fact that the sewage lagoon is operated on 
property not within the jurisdiction of the municipality, but that 
the final resting place of the effluent  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

887 
 

from Pocklington’s plant ends up in the facility which is not a 
municipal facility, and then is strictly precluded from The 
Environmental Protection and Management act, the sections 17 
and 18 which you are referring to; and that, in fact, because the 
effluent ends up in the sewage lagoon, it falls within the purview 
of the Act. 
 
And I believe the member from North Battleford is correct in his 
assertion that what you and your department have done, and 
particularly what the minister that preceded you has done, is used 
a technicality — used a technicality in these two Acts — to get 
Pocklington and his guys off the hook 
 
You have yet to answer the question: why was the Department of 
Justice approached in the first place? What reason could there 
possibility be to go the Department of Justice when you know 
there was going to be a development, and the parameters of the 
development were outlined; why did your department go to the 
Department of Justice looking for that technical connection 
between the municipal sewer, the provincial sewage lagoon, if 
you like, and Pocklington’s plant? Why did they go to that if not 
for one reason, and that’s to let Mr. Pocklington off the hook? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well I believe I’ve answered the same 
question two or three times for the hon. member. And I told you 
the reason that we went for a decision. With regard to the sewage, 
the development decision had been made before that; that it did 
not under the Act constitute a development. So when we come 
into the sewage, because it was complicated, because it involved 
the city sewage system in the industrial park and then moved on 
into the hospital grounds, they wanted clarification as to where 
we stood under that type of legislation and this particular 
circumstance. 
 
You go to a department of Justice because it has a group of 
lawyers with much expertise in law, and they interpret the law of 
the province. Under their interpretation it was deemed that we not 
required to issue a permit. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. If you want to get into . . . if you’d like to 
get into sort of dealing with those technicalities, I refer you to 
section 2(d)(iii), An Act respecting the Assessment of the Impact 
on the Environment . . . The Environmental assessment act, as it’s 
become to be known. And it say, Mr. Minister, that: 
 
“development” means any operation, project . . . (or, pardon me) 
project, operation or activity or any alteration or expansion of any 
project, operation, or activity which is likely to: (go to the third 
part) 
 
(iii) cause the emission of any pollutants or create by-products, 
residual or waste products which require handling or disposal in a 
manner that is not regulated by any other Act or regulation: 
 
And we’ve gone through that in terms of the sewage. But the key 
point here and the key word in that section (iii) is: “cause the 
emission of any pollutants.” We look a little further down in the 
act and we see, under pollution: 
 

“pollution” means (the definition of pollution) alteration of the 
physical, chemical, biological or aesthetic properties of the 
environment, including the addition or removal of any 
contaminant that (and we go down right to the bottom): 
 
(iii) is harmful to wild animals, birds, or aquatic life; 
 
Now we have a situation in North Battleford in which the waste 
products of the packing plant, owned by Peter Pocklington, is put 
into a municipal sewage system which is then emptied into a 
sewage lagoon which is not under the municipality. The brine, as 
the member for North Battleford has pointed out, has been 
harmful to the aquatic life in that sewage lagoon — and if we 
want to be technical we’ll use the bacteria as aquatic life that live 
in that sewage lagoon — and in fact has been harmful to that, and 
has then caused inconvenience and has raised some general 
outcry and general concern in North Battleford. 
 
(1530) 
 
And I would submit, Mr. Minister, that even under the definition 
of the Act, under the definition of the Act that Peter 
Pocklington’s plant would be classified as a development. I know 
darned well that we would classify Peter Pocklington’s plant as a 
development,. because we know what the spirit of this Act is. and 
the spirit of this Act is very plain: it’s to protect people from 
developments which will affect the environment. 
 
And what we’ve seen in your case, and what we’ve seen from 
words from your own mouth, that you and somebody in your 
department is utilising the Department of the Environment, 
utilising The Environmental Assessment Act for political 
purposes to get people like Peter Pocklington off the hook. 
Because it is the spirit and it is the intent of this Act, as you very, 
very well know — your predecessor may not have known, but 
you very well know — that it’s the spirit of this Act to protect 
Saskatchewan people from developments like the Gainers plant, 
when they could cause harm to the environment. 
 
They have caused harm to the environment. We have a prima 
facie case of that, where there was a situation that existed prior to 
the plant dumping brine into municipal sewage system,. to a 
situation after the plant began dumping brine into the municipal 
sewage system. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, in this regard is this: in light of 
what we know, in light of the fact that it is going to cause the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan some considerable resources to clean 
up the mess made by the Pocklington plant, do you believe that 
your predecessor made the correct choice? Do you believe that he 
made the right decision in not looking more closely at this plant 
and not requiring a ministerial permit to be issued and, in fact, not 
requiring an environmental impact statement? Do you believe 
that the former minister made that . . . (inaudible). 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve been through this 
several times; I don’t know how many times he would  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

888 
 

like to go back over the same ground. 
 
The people that made the decision that this was not a 
development, as it is spelled out in the Act, would have been the 
same people that would have made the decision had the former 
government been in power, because it’s the same people in that 
assessment division. I am advised that they would have made the 
same decision regardless of who was in power. And from that 
point of view, I guess, perhaps what you are saying about us 
using it for political purposes is a bit wrong. 
 
I would like the hon. member also to know that if there are 
problems develop at the lagoon, my department does have 
authority to step in and demand corrective measures, and that’s 
what we are doing at this point. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I can appreciate that, and as the 
member for North Battleford pointed out, we appreciate the 
speedy response in bringing that to your attention. 
 
But that’s not the problem. The problem that we’re getting at here 
is that somehow environmental concerns have dropped to the 
bottom of the priority barrel in dealing with your government. 
And that was the assertion we made at the beginning of this 
estimates; that’s the assertion we’re making now. And as we go 
along, we will see case after case after case of that being the case. 
 
But I’m a little bit disturbed. I’m a little bit disturbed when I hear 
you say that the decision that we made then, or would have been 
made by an NDP government, was a decision that would have 
been made now. 
 
It’s my understanding that the minister is responsible for making 
decisions in the department, and not the department officials, and 
that the buck stops at the minister’s desk. The question I had 
asked you before was this: do you agree that the decision made 
by your predecessor was, in light of what we know, in light of the 
fact that the development has caused problems in North 
Battleford, do you agree that that, in fact was the correct 
decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Absolutely, I agree that it was the correct 
decision as you interpret the Act. The Act spells out what a 
development is. That one did not fall under that Act as a 
development; it does not register as a development. And yes, the 
minister did make the right decision. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Sop you’re saying that it is the view of you and 
your department that when any time anybody wants to put in a 
development, that provided that there is no general uproar; 
provided that you can get away with it; provided that you can 
sneak it under the back door; provided that you don’t get caught 
after, that it’s the right decision. You didn’t listen to what I said. I 
said: in light of the fact, in light of the fact that we had a 
development in North Battleford which has caused pollution 
problems in North Battleford, pollution problem in North 
Battleford, you still agree — you still agree with the decision 
made by your minister despite the fact that it’s caused problems. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, I do. And I believe that we have  

sewage lagoons that have caused odour problems around the 
country before. This is not the first one by any means. The 
department has gone in to initiate things that will bring about a 
solution to the problem that’s being experienced. I believe that 
the aeration systems that were developed in Moose Jaw provided 
a solution when their lagoons were causing trouble. With all 
probability,. the aeration system will clear the problem that’s 
occurring in North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Could you provide us with an estimate of the 
costs to now introduce aeration systems in the North Battleford 
sewage lagoon. What’s it going to cost the problems, given the 
fact that your predecessor didn’t carry out his job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that because prompt action was 
needed, we wouldn’t have the detailed costs that was expended to 
cover that. The costs will likely surface in the property 
management corporation when they are coming forward. And 
perhaps it’d be more appropriate to ask under those estimates. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, did you receive a report, as Minister 
of the Environment, from officials in your department which 
dealt with the problems at the North Battleford sewage lagoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we . . . as I advised you on our last day 
in the House. Yes, my department may be aware of it, but not 
until that day. It was a fairly a new occurrence. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, they made you aware on the last estimate 
day of the problem. You hadn’t received a report prior to that. 
And you’re saying now that within the report there isn’t even a 
broad estimate of what the costs are for the remedial action to be 
taken. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the department was aware a 
day or two ahead of the time that we were in estimates. I was not 
aware. But the cost estimates were not called for. The temporary 
trial solution was put in place, and the cost estimates are still not 
available to us. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Do you have . . . Could you outline for us what 
are the temporary solutions that your department tends to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there have been two 
circulation pumps at that lagoon for some time, but they were not 
run continuous. What they’ve done now is to add additional 
outlets that will operate from those pumps, and the pumps will be 
run continuous. So that’s the basic change. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — This is a technical question and I don’t expect you 
to know the answer to this. The additional outlets, are they 
additional outlets on the pumps through the circulation 
machinery, or are they outlets out of the lagoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They would be more aeration nozzles 
connected, and they would run into the lagoon to cause air to 
circulate. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, so the department hasn’t added any  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

889 
 

new machinery or hasn’t taken any actions which would add 
additional costs other than the costs of running the pumps? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They had to supply the additional outlets that 
went into the lagoon. The same pumps will operate the additional 
outlets, so they haven’t added any new pumps — strictly the 
additional nozzles that are required to put more air into the 
lagoon. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — We’re dealing with the lengths of pipe that have 
got nozzles on them. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that would be basically correct. I’m not 
sure whether it’s large pipe, small pipe, or what the style is. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I appreciate that fact. You have absolutely no idea 
of what the cost of adding the additional outlets onto the pumps? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. I have no idea at this time of what that 
cost would be, and the costs will come forward to the property 
management corporation. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’ve just got two more questions in regards to the 
problem in North Battleford. First of all, and I asked you back on 
last estimates day when or how the decision not to demand an 
environmental impact statement was transmitted to yourself — 
was transmitted. Was it by verbal report or written report? At that 
time you said you’d refer to your minister, or refer to your 
officials. I wonder if you could tell me at this point in time when 
the decision not to do an environmental impact statement was 
made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there was no written 
transmittal. It was a verbal discussion within the department first, 
and then transmitted to the minister. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, you’re saying that the decision to make . . . 
pardon me, that the decision not to do an environmental impact 
statement for the Gainers plant was made verbally, without 
written documentation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that you have to first realise that the 
decision isn’t made that we don’t do an environmental impact 
assessment. The decision is made that we do an impact 
assessment when it is required. There’s no decision needed if 
we’re not going to do one, so if we decide to have one done, 
that’s the decision that is made, and then it’s transmitted to the 
proponent. 
 
In this case, we were not seeking to do an environmental impact 
assessment, so there was no need really of a transmittal to the 
proponent. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m not asking about the transmittal to the 
proponent. I’m saying that you had a meeting — there must have 
been a meeting somewhere in which someone said, hey, we don’t 
have to do an environmental impact statement. 
 
It’s my knowledge of government that those kinds of decisions 
aren’t made by one person in a department, whether it’s the 
environmental assessment branch, that that decision is not made 
— that that, in fact, would have  

to be transmitted. There would have to be some kind of 
memorandum coming from the branch to the minister’s office 
that say, it’s our opinion that an environmental impact statement 
is not needed in this particular case. 
 
Are you saying that there was no transmittal, written transmittal, 
of information from the environmental assessment branch to your 
office in this case? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I want the hon. member to realise that it’s 
the proponent, the person who’s going to do the project within the 
province, who must make the decision of whether or not an 
environmental impact statement is required, and he can come and 
seek that advice from the department. He can take the legislation 
and to his own legal profession. Whichever way he chooses, the 
decision within the department would not necessarily have to 
come across in writing. A minister meets with the deputy on a 
regular basis. Meetings within the department are help on a 
regular basis within every division of any department, and you 
don’t always have written communication back and forth unless 
there’s need of written communication. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister for the . . . I’m looking at 
section of the Environmental Assessment act. It says: 
 
For the purposes of administering and enforcing this act and the 
regulations, the minister may: 
 
(a) conduct research with respect to the environment, assessments 
or statements; 
 
(b) conduct studies of the quality of the environment . . . 
 
(c) gather, publish and disseminate information . . . 
 
(d) appoint committees . . . 
 
(e) make any examinations, tests . . . that he considers necessary; 
 
(f) with the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, enter 
into an agreement with any government or person with respect to 
the environment, assessments or statements. 
 
This Act makes it clear that the initiative for requiring proponents 
of new developments — that initiative rests with the minister. I 
just heard you say that it’s the proponent makes the decision. 
 
So let’s put it . . . And I don’t believe I just heard you say that, 
although I did hear you say that. In other words you’re saying, in 
the case of the Gainers plant in North Battleford, it’s Peter 
Pocklington who makes the decision whether or not to do an 
environmental impact statement. That’s what you just said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I told the hon. member that it is the 
requirement of the proponent to evaluate, for his own purposes, 
whether or not an environmental impact  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

890 
 

statement is required. Many times they will come and seek that 
assistance in making that decision from the staff in the 
department, or come to the minister and consult. 
 
But it is the responsibility of the proponent to make that initial 
assessment. I wish the member would suggest under which of 
these sections of section 5 he felt that it was the responsibility of 
the minister to have done something different. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I suggest that you, sir, in all due 
respect, read the Act. You will see, running throughout the whole 
Act, there is a spirit, and there is a spirit which is embodied in the 
words of the act. And that spirit says that the role of the Minister 
of Environment is to protect the environment in Saskatchewan. 
 
And in terms of dealing with the protection of the environment in 
Saskatchewan, he is going to require proponents of developments 
to carry out things like environmental impact statements, or he’s 
going to require proponents of developments to submit to himself 
in the legislature or to his office, data that’s necessary — 
information which is necessary for the minister to make that kind 
of judgement. 
 
There is nothing in the Act — there is nothing in the Act that says 
that Peter Pocklington has the right to go ahead, build a plant, and 
to decide whether or not he’s going to have an environmental 
impact statement. 
 
If you look at section 8 of the Act, section 8 of the Act talks about 
“ministerial approval required.” And I want you to look at section 
8 of the Act in light of the statements that you’ve been making 
here today. 
 
Section 8(1) says: 
 
Notwithstanding the requirements of any other act. 
 
“Notwithstanding the requirements of any other Act,” right? This 
Act remains supreme, reigns supreme in deciding who shall or 
who shall not submit an environmental impact statement, and 
who shall or shall not determine what is a development. No other 
Act. This reigns supreme above all other Acts in this regard. It 
says: 
 
Notwithstanding the requirements of any other Act, regulation or 
bylaw relating to any licence, permit, approval, permission or 
consent, a proponent shall obtain ministerial approval to proceed 
with a development, and no person shall proceed with a 
development until he has received ministerial approval. 
 
That’s what it says. Now you’ve made the argument, sir, you’ve 
made the argument — well, this isn’t a development; that this 
really isn’t a development. 
 
The question I guess I have to ask is: how did Peter Pocklington 
find out that this wasn’t a development? How did Gainers find 
out that this wasn’t a development within the meaning of the Act? 
Did you or did you not write to Gainers and tell them: you don’t 
have to put forward an environmental impact statement? Did you 
or any person  

in your department do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — You know, you can read section 8, but you 
should have gone on and read section 9, as well. I guess we come 
back to the original discussion that we’ve had today. 
 
The decision is made whether or not it’s a development. If it is 
not a development, the other parts of the Act then apply 
differently. So under the terms defined in section 2(d), those six 
points, this was not classified as a development. The way that Mr. 
Pocklington or anyone else would find out would be to go to their 
legal profession, outline what they’re proposing to do, have it 
looked at by a legal person, and the interpretation of that section 
of the Act then applies. If there’s any doubt, then they can come 
to us and we will be involved at that stage. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, that’s one answer. I don’t read the Act that 
way. I think that section 9 and section 10, that you’re playing a 
very, very strained interpretation upon that section of the act. But 
let’s suppose, for example, that that’s what the Act means from 
your point of view. 
 
Did Peter Pocklington or any official of Gainers approach the 
Department of the Environment prior to, during, or after the 
completion of his plant in North Battleford, to request a ruling 
from the department whether or not his plant qualified as a 
development under the meaning of the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that officials from Gainers met 
with officials from the department and explained to them what 
they were proposing to do. With the way the Act would apply, 
they were advised that it would not be classified as a 
development requiring an environmental impact statement. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now, well, Mr. Minister, you give me the date 
upon which the officials from gainers met with the officials from 
the Department of the Environment, and the date which and the 
means whereby the decision that you’ve just said — the decision 
that it’s not a development within the meaning of the Act. I want 
two things. I want to make it clear. I want the dates on which the 
officials from gainers met with the department officials; and I 
want the date which Gainers was notified that their plant was not 
a development within the meaning of the Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the department don’t have 
that date here, but they would have it in the department if they 
could bring it back for you, probably this evening, whenever. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder if I could have a commitment that it will 
be brought back so that you can hand that it to me by 7 o’clock 
tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They’ll attempt to have it tonight. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Can they give you assurance that it will be here 
by 7 o’clock or in the immediate vicinity of 7 o’clock? 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

891 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — They advised me that they would try and 
bring it for 7 o’clock. That’s the best assurance I can give. 
 
Mr. Lyons: —All right . . . (inaudible) . . . that assurance. I 
appreciate that assurance because . . . I find it very interesting 
though, Mr. Minister, the tack that you’re taking in regards to 
your interpretation of the Act. Because it’s not the interpretation 
that the previous government had in regards to environmental 
matters — that this type of thing is just a . . . it’s inconceivable 
how a Minister of the Environment can say to us here that it’s the 
proponents of developments who decide whether or not that 
development is a meaning within the Act. and that’s what I 
thought I heard you say here today quite clearly, quite clearly. 
 
But I think we’ll turn now to, until we get the other information 
back from your department officials, another issue that regards 
the whole procedure of assessment and some of the assessment 
problems that have arisen, and that’s Redberry Lake, and my 
colleague from North Battleford had alluded to the problems at 
Redberry Lake. 
 
I guess the first question I want to ask you was: when was it that 
the Redberry Lake development of the former member from 
Prince Albert, Mr. Meagher, and his partner, Mr. Mamchur, when 
was it that they first approached the Department of the 
Environment seeking approval for their development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the first contact came at an 
interdepartmental committee meeting in January of 1985, and the 
department of Tourism was one that was involved. Three were a 
number of departments: Parks was there; our department was 
there; there were several. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. It was some time in January of 1985 the 
issue was first raised. Was it raised by any of the officials of the 
departments involved in that meeting, or was it raised by Mr. 
Meagher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that it was discussed at that 
interdepartmental committee meeting and was raised . . . the issue 
of the possible need of an environmental impact statement was 
raised by Mr. Walker. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Sorry, Mr. Minister, I didn’t get the name. Are 
you saying it was raised by Mr. Meagher? I didn’t hear you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Walker. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder if you could tell us how Mr. Walker 
came into the possession of that information. Was it through 
reading news reports? Or was he approached by any department 
officials? Or was he approached by any of the proponents for the 
development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The proponents, Mr. Mamchur and Mr. 
Meagher, were at the meeting to describe tot he departments, all 
of the departments that were present,  

what their proposal was. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Was there an answer given to Mr. Mamchur and 
Mr. Meagher at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The whole issue was discussed at that 
meeting and, as it related to the bird sanctuary at Redberry, it was 
indicated to them that it was quite possible that there would need 
to be an environmental impact assessment, and they 
acknowledged that fact. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now, I just want to make this clear. Mr. Meagher 
and Mr. Mamchur . . . You’re saying Mr. Meagher and Mr. 
Mamchur, at that time, in January of 1985, acknowledged the fact 
that they would have to make an environmental . . .submit an 
environmental impact statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, they didn’t acknowledge that they 
would make an environmental impact statement. They 
acknowledged that there may be a necessity for it, because of the 
bird sanctuary, but they didn’t acknowledge that they would do 
the statement at that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m not asking whether they acknowledged that 
they’d have to do it. Obviously, from what’s happened in history, 
is that they take the position that they didn’t have to do it. 
 
I just want to make it clear, just make it clear to the House, that 
they were informed by officials at this meeting that they would 
possibly have to submit an environmental impact statement based 
on the fact that there was the existence of the bird sanctuary at 
Redberry Lake. Is that a reasonable interpretation to place on 
what happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that possibility was raised with them at 
that meeting. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder if you’d be able to indicate to me — or 
indicate to the House, I should say — whether or not they were 
. . . were they prepared to do that environmental impact 
statement, or whether or not they asked the officials present at 
this meeting when a final decision would be made, as to if they 
would have to submit the environmental impact statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I want to draw to the attention of the hon. 
member that the question that we are discussing is being appealed 
to the court, so we’re limited, both him and I, as to how far we 
can discuss it here, and I think we’ve reached about that limit. 
 
I will give you this answer to your last question, though — that 
there was no request from the proponent for us to give him a date 
on when we would give him an answer of whether or not he 
needed to do the assessment. So that was not a thing that he 
asked, nor was it something that we promised to give at that point 
in time. But I believe we would be unwise to go into great detail 
on this particular one because it is in the appeal process before the 
courts of Saskatchewan at this time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m fully 
aware of the fact that the proponents of the Redberry  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

892 
 

Lake development, Mr. Mamchur and Mr. Meagher, are 
appealing the decision made by your department. I don’t believe, 
however, that the questions that I’m asking and will continue to 
ask for the next while will have a bearing on whether or not you 
made the right decision, or your department made the right 
decision. And I think that . . . believe that that’s the basis upon 
which the appeal is being challenged in terms of law. 
 
What I’d like to ask you is that, at the January meeting of 1985 at 
which this issue was discussed, was the Environment minister at 
that time present at that meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that he was not. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Were there any members of executive Council at 
that meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff do not recall whether any others 
were there. They were sure that the Environment minister wasn’t 
and I guess that’s the only department I can speak for. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — To the best of your staff’s ability for recollection, 
were those present at the meeting at which they attended on their 
capacity as representing the Department of the Environment; 
were there any other people at this meeting, other than Mr. 
Mamchur and Mr. Meagher, who were not officials of the 
department, normally attend at this type of interdepartmental 
meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’re going back some two and one-half 
years, and it’s a little difficult to recall exactly who was at the 
table. So my staff are not aware and do not recall whether 
someone else was there or not. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Did any member of your staff take minutes of that 
meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff were not responsible to take the 
minutes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I take it, Mr. Minister, that somebody took 
minutes at that meeting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe one of the other departments did, 
but we did not. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Did your staff receive copies of the minutes of 
that meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, they have copies. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — On those minutes, am I to presume that there was 
a list of those who attended the meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — He says he can’t recall whether the names 
are there, but they usually are. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Do I have to go through this, or can I ask you to 
submit the list of names that were given to your department of the 
people who were present at the meeting attended by Mr. Meagher 
and Mr. Mamchur in January of 1985, at which they were 
informed of the decision that they would possibly have to . . . that 
they  

would possibly have to file an environmental impact statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The staff will look at the minutes tonight, 
and if they’re there we’ll bring you the list of the people who 
were present at the meeting. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Just skipping ahead a little bit. The original 
meeting at which the proponents of the Redberry Lake 
development met with your officials was, I believe, you said 
January of 1985, and I’d appreciate it if you could provide me 
with the date in January. I think that will be on the minutes as 
well. 
 
When was it . . . when did you make the decision — you as 
minister — make the decision that an environmental impact 
statement would be required of Mr. Mamchur and Mr. Meagher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It was before my time as minister. Is was 
possibly August of 1985. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I want to get this really quite clear. You are 
saying that sometime around August of 1985 that the Department 
of the Environment made the decision that an environmental 
impact statement would be required of the development at 
Redberry Lake, the proponents being Mr. Mamchur and Mr. 
Meagher. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’re not exactly certain of that date. 
Perhaps it would be best if we confirm the date to you because, 
you know, when you go back to 1985, it’s very difficult to recall 
that kind of detail. So if it would be satisfactory, we could 
confirm the date in August, if it was August, or the date of that 
meeting. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — That’s fine, provided that we get the . . . you 
know, within the next day. It’s safe to say then that eight months 
after the original meeting with Mr. Mamchur and Mr. Meagher, 
that the department had made a ruling, or the minister, I guess — 
because as you said, the buck stops there — the minister made a 
ruling that an environmental impact statement would be required 
by Mr. Mamchur and Mr. Meagher. Is that the fair and reasonable 
way of putting the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I am advised that at that time the minister 
made that decision, yes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Was that decision, was that decision 
communicated to Mr. Mamchur and Mr. Meagher at on or about 
the same date that in fact the decision was made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The decision was communicated from the 
department to Mr. Mamchur by letter. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So we have the letter going to Mr. Mamchur. 
What date was the letter sent to Mr. Mamchur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would have to get that information. The 
information we have here is . . . It doesn’t go back far enough to 
be clear on that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. Will you undertake to table that material in 
the House tomorrow — the date in the letter to Mr. . . . from the 
department to Mr. Mamchur? 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

893 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’ll do our best to bring it back, possibly 
this evening. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Minister, on . . . Can you tell us now 
on what basis that the decision made in August of 1985; what was 
the basis that the department made the decision requiring Mr. 
Meagher and Mr. Mamchur to file an environmental impact 
statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It was the interpretation of section 2(d) of 
the Act that spelled out the requirement, because of the project 
they were proposing. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. Section 2(d) of the Act. Which subsection 
of section 2(d) of the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised it was sections (i), (iv), and (vi). 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — For the record, you’re saying that the department 
made its decision to require Mr. Paul Meagher and Mr. Boris 
Mamchur to file an environmental impact statement based on the 
fact that a development means any project, operation or activity,. 
or any alteration or expansion of any project, operation or activity 
which is likely to: 
 
(i) have an affect on any unique, rare or endangered feature of the 
environment; 
 
(ii) cause widespread public concern because of potential 
environmental changes; 
 
Did I understand you to say: 
 
(vi) have a significant impact on the environment or necessitate a 
further development which is likely to have a significant impact 
on the environment. 
 
It was those three sub-clauses that in August of 1985 was used as 
the basis for making the decision determining that: (a) it was a 
development, and (b) that it required an environmental impact 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that was the answer I gave you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — After this, and I assume for the assumption on or 
around August of 1985 when Mr. Mamchur was informed by 
letter that the environmental impact statement would be required, 
did the department receive any correspondence, from either Mr. 
Mamchur or Mr. Meagher, that: one, objected to the necessity of 
filing an environmental impact statement; tow, or acknowledge 
the fact that an environmental impact statement was going to be 
required by the department; or, three objected to the decision 
made by the minister with or without outlining grounds for that 
objection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We advised the proponents of the need to 
file an environmental impact statement and advised them that we 
would advertise publicly that the statement was required. They 
asked us at a meeting; they  

asked the department not to advertise until they had made the 
decision of whether or not they wanted to go ahead with the 
development or not. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Minister the . . . You say that they 
asked at a meeting that you not be advertised. When was that 
meeting? Could you tell us when that meeting took place; who 
was present at that meeting; and if, in fact, any other meetings 
had taken place between officials of your department and any 
other department officials and Mr. Mamchur or Mr. Meagher, 
between the time that this meeting that you’ve just told me about 
that took place, and the January ‘85 meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The information was transmitted at the same 
meeting in August that we spoke of earlier, and the meeting was 
called specifically to decide whether or not an environmental 
impact statement was required, and the decision was made and 
transmitted to them at that time. 
 
I’m advised that they had no other meetings right around that 
time, but rather that they had had some telephone conversations 
with Mr. Mamchur. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. Just on the meeting — the meeting that 
took place with Mr. — was Mr. Mamchur present at that 
meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: —Yes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Was Mr. Meagher present at that meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, he was not. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Was it a meeting with just Department of 
Environment officials, or were any other official from any other 
department there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’ll bring you that. That’s the same list 
that we were speaking of a few minutes ago. The list of the 
people that were at the meeting will be brought forward for you 
so you have a list of all of them. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I just want to make sure that this is the same 
meeting that you talked about earlier on. In other words, there 
was a meeting in January at which the proponents of Redberry 
Lake put forward the ideas for their development. There was a 
meeting in August at which the decision — and I take it this is 
what you’re saying — is that the decision of the Department of 
the Environment was then transmitted to the proponents of the 
development. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The decision had been actually made prior to 
that time, but at that meeting the decision was transmitted. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — The decision was made by the minister in respect 
to that proposal prior to this meeting in August that we’re now 
talking about. How much time lag between his decision and this 
meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that it was probably a week or 
less, but about one week. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

894 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Okay, I’d like, then, the date on which the 
decision was made by the minister, and the date of this meeting. 
And you’ve already offered to supply me the dates for the 
meeting. I’d like the date now at which the decision was made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think you had asked for that prior, and it 
will be provided. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — thank you, Mr. Minister. Now you mentioned that 
there were several telephone calls between Mr. Mamchur and, am 
I to take it was officials of the department, or were there 
telephone calls to the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff are not aware of whether the 
minister received any calls. The calls that they refer to were to the 
department. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now I’m not asking whether your staff are aware 
of any calls that went to the minister. I’m asking whether you’re 
aware of any calls that went to your predecessor, in regards to 
Redberry Lake, from Mr. Mamchur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry I wouldn’t be privilege to that 
information. I was not in that department at that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now, Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that 
cabinet ministers log phone calls. Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Some may do and some don’t. Personally, I 
don’t. I don’t know what the previous minister did. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So you’ve got no record; you’re telling us that 
you’ve got no record of when people call you or what people call 
you. Does anybody in your office have any records as to when 
incoming calls are made, because I know very well that you don’t 
receive calls directly to yourself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My secretary would have some records of 
when the calls come in, and I suppose the phone bills are the 
other record, but I don’t know which calls Mr. Mamchur or Mr. 
Meagher may have made to any minister. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I find it convenient, at least not necessarily for 
yourself, at least for the former minister in this regard. I guess the 
question I’m asking you: would you have any written record, or 
would there be any files in your department, which would 
indicate calls made by Mr. Mamchur to the former minister? 
Would there be any written record whatsoever of those phone 
calls? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not aware . . . I don’t have the same 
secretary that was there in Environment before, so I wouldn’t 
have access to that kind of information. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I guess I’m to interpret from what you’re saying, 
Mr. Minister, is that nowhere in the files in your office are there 
any records kept of phone calls made between Mr. Mamchur and 
your predecessor. Am I to assume that that’s what you’re saying? 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m saying to the hon. member that I’m not 
aware of any records that were kept. There may be records kept; 
I’m not aware of them. We could check if you like, but I really 
would have a difficult time, I think, tracking down back into the 
last — like into ’85, that’s quite awhile ago. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder if the minister would undertake to have 
one of his staff people, in fact, check out the records, the files, 
regarding Redberry Lake development and so on, in regards to 
phone calls made to the minister by Mr. Mamchur or Mr. 
Meagher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I doubt very much if that kind of record 
would be still within my office, going back to ’85. So we could 
look, but I wouldn’t want to promise the member that I would 
bring anything back. 
 
I think the important part of the discussion that we’re having is 
that a decision was made, and that a decision was transmitted, 
and we’ve agreed to bring that forward. I believe the information 
that you’re asking for now is a bit erroneous. And I don’t really 
see that I should promise to go and do that much detailed work, 
because I don’t think it has really that much to do with the 
decision. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, I beg to disagree with you, Mr. Minister. 
We have a court case before the court that, in fact, questions what 
went on between proponents of a development, i.e. Mr. Meagher 
and Mr. Mamchur, and the actions of the former minister of the 
Environment, and now your actions. So I think that, in fact, that 
you will find those — as you’ll see as time goes along — the 
relationship between the proponents to the development and your 
department will take on some significance. And that you’ll see, in 
fact, that communications between Mr. Meagher and Mr. 
Mamchur and your department and your predecessor may, in fact, 
play a bearing in the whole matter. 
 
Be that as it may, I would ask you once again whether or not you 
will instruct one of your staff people to determine whether or not 
you have any written records of telephone calls made between 
Mr. Mamchur or Mr. Meagher and the former minister of the 
Environment in regards to the Redberry Lake development, 
between January of 1985 and the day that the decision to demand 
an environmental impact statement was made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that I answered that question fairly 
straightforward — that I was not prepared to do that. 
 
And I believe the member, in his comments indicated that this 
kind of information that you’re now seeking could very well be 
involved in any court case decisions that are finalized in the next 
short while. So I believe it’s really not proper that you seek that 
information, or that I give it. So I’m not going to give it at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, the fact that it may be 
involved, the fact that it may be involved doesn’t absolve you of 
the fact that somehow you may be trying to hide phone calls or 
documentary evidence regarding a controversial decision — one, 
by the way, in which I agree; I think you did a good job in 
making that decision, and I’ll say that publicly right here. You 
and your  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

895 
 

department did a good job in shutting down that development. 
And in fact, in my point of view, Mr. Mamchur and Mr. Meagher 
have lost all further rights, given their arrogant attitude toward the 
department. So I’ll commend you on the fact. I’m not attacking 
you for what you did, sir. I am saying . . . You can take that as a 
compliment. It will be one of the few you will get, let me tell you. 
It will be one of the few 
 
But what I’m trying to get at, sir, I think is fairly straightforward. 
kW had a meeting back in January of 1985 at which the 
proponents of the Redberry Lake development indicated what 
that development was, and which you tell me departmental 
officials told them at that time that they would probably have to 
submit an environmental impact statement. We have then, all the 
way up to the spring of 1987, more than two years; of a sudden 
we’re faced with the kind of foofraw that went on at Redberry 
Lake. 
 
(1630) 
 
And I think the people of the province deserve to know what 
went on in the intervening time, particularly in regards to the fact 
that if you say that in August of 1985 a decision was made to 
require that environmental impact statement, why was it that the 
minister of rural affairs; why did he issue a permit which would 
allow this thing to go ahead when we’ve already seen that The 
Environmental Assessment Act says that in fact this Act shall rule 
above all others, regardless of what the Act says, what the 
regulations say, or what the by-laws say? What I want to know is 
that why did it take so long for you to make that decision or to 
shut down that development; wasn’t the decision communicated 
to the members of cabinet by your predecessor? I see your 
predecessor sitting there. Didn’t he,, sometime between spring of 
1987 and August of 1985, communicate to the Minister of Rural 
Affairs that this project shouldn’t go ahead and that it was going 
to require an environmental impact statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to the member that we would 
give him the information of when the date on which the decision 
was made and the date which the meeting was held, that would 
transmit that decision, and who was present. I think, beyond that, 
I would prefer not to go down the garden path and give out 
information that’s going to affect a court case, either pro or con. 
 
It’s not proper, as members of the legislature, to discuss in great 
detail issues that are before the courts. So I think with the 
information that I’m providing you, I think that’s as far as we 
should really go on that issue. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, we are not here discussing the 
issue which is before the court. We are here discussing actions 
taken previous to the launching of any court case; we are here 
discussing and trying to get information from yourself regarding 
actions that were taken prior to the launching of any court case; 
and we are not discussing the merits, we are not discussing the 
merits of the appeal by the proponents of Redberry Lake. So I 
think that I’m perfectly within the parliamentary tradition, and 
also perfectly within my rights as a member, and also as a critic, 
asking you questions regarding the decisions  

made by your predecessor and also made by your department. So 
I don’t accept your argument on that. 
 
In other words, I not going to let that, I’m not going to let that 
issue . . . I’m not going to let this issue slide by on the pretext that 
something . . . that an appeal is launched before the courts. Okay? 
I’m not letting that go by. 
 
You said you had a meeting; you had said you had a meeting in 
August at which the proponents of the Redberry Lake 
development were told that an environmental impact statement 
would be necessary. You told us that they were advised by letter. 
You then said that the proponent of Redberry Lake development 
asked the department not to advertise . . . asked them not to 
advertise the fact that — the usual ad for an environmental 
statement, on the basis that they were going to reassess their 
position in regards to development. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that’s what I told you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Were there any further representations made to 
your department after this contact in which the proponents of the 
development said, don’t advertise? Were there further 
representations made to your department by either Mr. Mamchur 
or Mr. Meagher in regards to the Redberry Lake development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the issue lay dormant for a 
long period of time, and until such time as my department would 
receive an environmental impact assessment, or an advice that 
they were going to go ahead with the development, there’s really 
no involvement by the department. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — When you say it lay dormant, am I to take it then 
that what you’re saying is that you, your predecessor, or any 
official of the Department of the Environment was not 
approached after the August meeting by either Mr. Mamchur or 
Mr. Meagher. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There were contacts made periodically by 
telephone of specific information from the department that was 
provided by the department. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So the issue didn’t lay dormant. In fact, there was 
an ongoing relationship between the proponents of Redberry 
Lake and your development. So the issue didn’t lay dormant. 
Why did you say it lay dormant? I mean it’s not laying dormant 
when they are there asking for information and they’re making 
that kind of contact. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There were no major meetings, there were 
no major decisions required., there was no indication from the 
proponent that they wanted to proceed to develop. So, yes, the 
issue did lay dormant, but at times they asked for information 
from the department. They didn’t make a decision to go ahead 
with the development. So the issue laid very dormant for a long 
period of time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m not going to argue over semantics in the 
question of dormancy. I guess if something you think is  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

896 
 

dead keeps on breathing and twitching, I guess that’s your 
definition of rigor mortis — that’s fine. 
 
In regards to those telephone calls that you’ve just mentioned, 
after the August meeting, were these telephone calls made to your 
officials? Were they made by Mr. Mamchur or Mr. Meagher or a 
combination of both? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the only contacts that were 
made after August ‘85 were made by Mr. Mamchur to the 
department. Mr. Meagher was not involved at any time until the 
current year. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I just want to get that straight, Mr. Minister, 
because that’s one of the issues of point. You’re telling the 
legislature that Mr. Meagher was not involved ink any of the 
dealings of the Redberry Lake development. Is that what you’re 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, that’s not what I’m saying. What I said 
was that the only contacts with the department made between 
August — I believe it would be; we’ll wait until we can get the 
actual date of that meeting — but from that meeting, the only 
contacts made with the department from then until this year were 
made by Mr. Mamchur. That’s all I said. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — The only contacts prior to this meeting in August 
. . . only contacts made with your department, were they made 
only by Mr. Mamchur, or did Paul Meagher make any contacts 
with your department in regards to the Redberry Lake 
development prior to the decision being made sometime around 
August? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that Mr. Meagher was only 
involved in the initial January 1985 meeting. After that, he was 
not involved in any of the meetings. It was Mr. Mamchur that 
was involved from that time on. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Minister, I hear you say that Mr. 
Meagher was not involved with any of the meetings after the 
initial meeting in January 1985. Did Mr. Meagher make any 
contact with the Department of the Environment through writing, 
telephone, or any another method outside of meeting, in his 
capacity as a proponent, within the meaning of the Act, of the 
Redberry Lake development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff say that not that they’re aware of, 
during that whole period. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — If there was any contact made, would you . . . is it 
your opinion that there would be some kind of record of contact 
having been made between Mr. Meagher and your department, 
given Mr. Meagher’s status as a member of the Legislative 
Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there are no records that 
they can recall of him having contacted the department during 
that period of time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m certainly not going to question 
the veracity of your statements in that regard. But I’m a little 
curios to hear the words “recall”, “recall”. Now, this has been a 
political issue for the last while in  

the province. It’s one that’s before the courts. It’s one that’s been 
given prominence in the press. It appears to me that it would be 
one that you would normally expect to come before the House at 
estimate time, and that you would have background briefing by 
your ministers or by your officials, and that your officials would 
have this information at hand. 
 
When you say your officials can’t recall, are you telling us that 
those records do not exist, or that they can’t recall if they exist or 
not? And if they can’t recall, is there any way that you’ll 
co-operate with this House by having your officials check back in 
the Redberry Lake file — for want of a better term — to see, in 
fact, if there were any contacts made between the Department of 
the Environment and Mr. Meagher between August of 1985, in 
regards to the Redberry Lake development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My officials say that there was no contact 
between January and August of 1985 by Mr. Meagher. But 
they’re not aware of any contact prior to ‘85 either. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — well, if that’s what your officials tell you, Mr. 
Minister, that’s fine, because you weren’t there, and I know you 
weren’t there. So obviously he wouldn’t be making the contact 
with you. He’d be making it with the member from 
Kelsey-Tisdale if he was making any personal representation on 
behalf of the development. 
 
(1645) 
 
Going back to this period of dormancy. When was it that this 
dormant period came to an end in terms of the Department of the 
Environment? In other words, when did this issue become active 
in terms of the Department of the Environment? Was it when the 
bulldozers began their work at Redberry Lake, or was it at any 
point prior to that time — between August of 1985 and bulldozer 
time, this spring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me just say to the hon. member that the 
issue is very much before the court. And I believe that we’ve 
given the information that it’s really possible to give. I can just 
tell you t at it was reactivated during the year 1987. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Reactivated during the year of 1987. Mr. 
Minister, was this reactivation brought about prior to the 
commencement of construction activity at Redberry Lake or was, 
in fact, the reactivation of this issue a consequence of the 
activities of Mr. Mamchur and Mr. Meagher, in terms of driving 
the bulldozers into Redberry Lake? Was it prior to the bulldozers 
going, or was it because of the bulldozers going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe the only answer that I really should 
give on that is that it happened during 1987. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I can appreciate the quandary you 
are in, which is why I’ve been kind of beating around the bush on 
this. So let’s not beat around the bush on it. You made a decision 
to halt the Redberry Lake project. That decision was made by 
certain actions, I would submit, not yourself, but I’m submitting 
this, was made  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

897 
 

because the proponents of the plan took certain actions to begin 
their project, i.e., they started the bulldozers going at Redberry 
Lake. 
 
You have submitted that during the period after August of 1985 
until some time in 1987, in other words, over a period of a year, 
with the exception of a period of time when the proponents of the 
development said that they wanted to not advertise because they 
were going to make up their mind on this issue, that between 
August of ‘85 and some time in 1987, there was no activity in 
regards to, from a departmental point of view, in regards to what 
was going on at Redberry Lake. And that it was only at some 
time in 1987 that you began to take action as the Minister of the 
Environment in regards to the proposed Redberry Lake project. 
 
The question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: were you advised by 
any of your department officials, or anybody else in this province, 
that in fact the Redberry Lake project was going to go ahead, and 
that in fact preparations for Redberry Lake were in the process of 
being made prior to — prior to — the day at which you took 
action to begin to stop the development at Redberry Lake? Were 
you advised by anybody that Meagher and Mamchur were going 
to go ahead with the development, prior to you taking action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would have to say no to the hon. member, 
that the information was never relayed to me that they were going 
ahead with any development. And when I was advised that the 
bulldozers had gone in and started work at Redberry, we 
immediately proceeded to put a stop to that action because the 
environmental impact statement that was required had not been 
filed. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Yes, I understand that; I understand that, Mr. 
Minister. My question, however, was: were you or any of your 
department officials advised of the fact that the Redberry Lake 
development was going to go ahead and that preparations were 
being made in Redberry Lake, on the site? Did anybody tell you 
or your department officials, or was this all sort of done behind 
the backs of everybody in the province and nobody let your 
department know what was going on? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There was nobody that gave us advance 
notice that that bulldozer was going in to go to work. We were 
advised immediately by people who were very close to the 
Redberry site. Immediately that the bulldozer came, we were 
advised, but we weren’t advised prior. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well is it not true, Mr. Minister, that there were 
reports in the press prior to the bulldozer starting up at Redberry 
Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There were reports, all kinds of reports, but 
we were not advised by anyone that there was a development 
going to begin — reports that came from the papers as you recall, 
or permits granted by other departments, that sort of thing. But 
until the environmental impact assessment was done, our 
department would not give permission to go ahead, so he did not 
have clearance at any time. 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Well I guess we’re getting to the point of this line 
of questioning, Mr. Minister, is that there were reports in the 
press that there was ongoing contact between ;your department 
from January of 1985, when the project was first laid out, until 
the bulldozers were going; that there were telephone 
conversations between officials in your department after August 
of ‘85, when the decision to shut the . . . or to require an 
environmental impact statement was made; and that there were 
reports in the press that there were these telephone calls. Didn’t 
you think that, as the Minister of Environment, that perhaps you 
should direct one of your officials to find out what was going on 
at Redberry Lake prior to the bulldozers starting up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that the information was coming 
forward to the press, that type of information was very much in 
the eyes of my department. But there was no indication that the 
development was going ahead — none. The proponent was 
talking to everybody, but he was not talking to the Department of 
Environment at that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well again, Mr. Minister, and I want to refer back 
to what the member from North Battleford said. Your job isn’t to 
sit there like a bump on the log while the world falls around about 
you, and while the environment gets degraded about you. 
 
The Acts that are laid out in this province, The Environmental 
Assessment Act and The Environmental Protection and 
Management Act and the other Acts for which you are 
responsible, but particularly The Environmental Assessment Act, 
is a pro-active piece of legislation. It says that the minister has a 
responsibility to protect the environment. And it confers upon 
you, sir, a great many responsibilities. 
 
And then it also confers upon you a great many powers under 
which you can carry out those responsibilities. It says, quite 
bluntly, that if you think something’s going to happen, you get 
your tail in there and you find out what’s going to happen, and 
you act upon it to protect the environment; you don’t sit like a 
bump on the log; you don’t sit like nothing’s going on; you in fact 
act to protect things. 
 
As I say, you acted — you acted to protect Redberry Lake — fine 
and good. This was after the project was under way; this was 
after the project under way. This is after you knew about it. This 
is after that. you admitted yourself that you knew the project was 
under way, because you read it in the papers and . . . (inaudible) 
. . . I believe you just said that Mr. Meagher and Mr. Mamchur 
were talking to anybody else but you. 
 
Well don’t you think that you have some responsibility to take 
some initiative to deal with these kinds of issues as they arise? 
You said you didn’t have to when it was . . . the question of North 
Battleford and the Pocklington plant. Here we come to Redberry 
Lake, and it’s the same attitude. You minister sits there and 
doesn’t protect the environment. 
 
Don’t you think you have some responsibility to go ahead  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

898 
 

and initiate actions on behalf of yourself, your department, and 
the people of this province, in dealing with the environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would like to advise the hon. member that 
there was no development taking place until that bulldozer pulled 
on the site. And you know how quickly I acted, and the project 
was stopped immediately. Nobody could have acted any quicker 
than that. You cannot act before something happens, because you 
have no authority to act. 
 
You know, there was no development, there was no indication 
that there was going to be a development. There was a lot of talk. 
But as you realise, this item had been dormant for a long period 
of time. There were a lot of discussions, but there was no 
indication that a firm development was being proposed to go 
ahead. 
 
And I believe it was a surprise to the people at Redberry and to 
many people when that bulldozer came on site. Immediately that 
we heard it was on site we put a stop to the project, and I think 
that was the job of the department, and we carried it out. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I really think that we’ve got 
two entirely different roles of the Minister of the Environment in 
this case. The fact is that you knew since January, 1985 that there 
was a proposal to develop Redberry Lake. We had a kerfuffle . . . 
there was a kerfuffle in the Legislative Assembly over the role of 
Mr. Meagher, and the propriety of Mr. Meagher, in developing 
that project. 
 
we had, from your own admission, a series of contacts and 
conversations between officials in your department and the 
proponents of that development, right up to the fact that they 
began to drive the bulldozers. By your own admission, in your 
own very words, you said that there were lots of discussions 
going on. The fact was, Mr. Minister, something had happened 
prior to the bulldozers going. 
 
There is a whole history to this project. And what I am 
submitting, sir, and I am submitting that it’s not just this project 
but it’s the North Battleford project, and there will be other 
projects as we go along and examine the same thing, that your 
government and your role as Minister of the Environment is, one, 
not to protect the environment, but to sit there and wait until 
there’s a public outcry or until things happen, and that you’re not 
taking your responsibility, despite the fact that you had all this 
knowledge and despite the fact that you have some of the best 
officials in Saskatchewan dealing and working with your 
department. When are you going to take the chains off their 
hands? When are you going to start acting like a minister for this 
province; when are you going to act as a proponent for the 
environment and go ahead and protect the people of this 
province, and protect their environment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think the hon. member  

understands the way that the Act applies. The decision is made by 
my department that there must be an environmental impact 
statement filed, and then it’s the responsibility of the proponent to 
file that statement. The fact that he didn’t file a statement is the 
reason that the project was stopped. As soon as he put the 
bulldozer on the site, we proceeded to stop the project. that’s the 
process. We followed the process exactly. The proponent did not. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister . . . .(inaudible interjections) . . . I 
think I’ve got a minute and a half, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Minister, in regards to the statement that you just made, that 
in fact that as soon as you knew anything about it you took 
action, as soon as something happened. Don’t you agree that you 
and your departmental officials knew about the Redberry Lake 
development from January of 1985, from the time the bulldozers 
went on, and that you didn’t take an initiatory role? Let’s ask this 
question: did you or any members of your department, because 
you were the minister at this time, did you or any members of 
your department phone Mr. Mamchur and ask what the intentions 
of the proponents of the Redberry Lake development were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I personally phoned Mr. Meagher and 
advised him that an environmental impact statement was 
required. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


