













































October 23, 1987 Hansard


 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3483 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

four people seated in the west gallery this morning. They are 

Robert Coulter, Midge Mack, Ken and Marge Olson, friends of 

mine from the city here who’ve come to see how their tax dollars 

are being spent on this 102nd day of the sitting of the legislature, I 

believe. I’d ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming them 

here. 

 

Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly 12 guests from the Yankee Ridge — 

it’s a social and charity club from Wilcox, Saskatchewan. If they 

would stand and be recognized, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They have an interesting history. The club was started in 1921, 

some 66 years ago, and is named for a school built in 1905 called 

the Yankee Ridge School, which was 15 miles south of Regina. 

And of course most members would know that many settlers in 

that area came from the United States. They’ve been active in the 

area for many years, and have contributed to numerous charities 

and have made a real contribution to the area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all hon. members to join with me in 

welcoming the members to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 

the House, through you, a constituent of mine, a man who has 

made great contributions to the field of education in Prince Albert 

and district, Mr. Larry Syverson. 

 

Hon Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

United States Trade Subsidies 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Yesterday in this House, 

Mr. Minister, on the question of subsidized wheat sales by the 

Americans to some of our most important customers, you 

disregarded the concerns of Joe Clark that we put forward as 

rumours. Mr. Clark is now going to Washington to see George 

Shultz to lodge a complaint about this. And he says: 

 

“It is being protested because it poses a threat to future 

sales,” external affairs minister Joe Clark said Thursday. 

 

A threat to future sales. I ask you, Mr. Minister, do you have the 

same regard to this apparent American breach of trust as does the 

Minister of External Affairs, Joe Clark? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say my regard is for 

farmers and agricultural people, not only in Saskatchewan but 

indeed in western Canada. My regard is to make sure that they get 

enough money to compete with subsidies. My regard is to make 

sure that we stop the American subsidies wherever possible, to get 

them to agree to stop subsidies. On those two points, Mr. Speaker, 

I will be going to Washington myself to convince Americans to 

stop the export subsidies. I’ll begin doing that next month. 

 

I’ve sent a telex to Mr. Clark, Minister of External Affairs, to 

make sure that he advises Americans that we don’t like the 

subsidies and that the subsidies should stop. So I can say on both 

counts, Mr. Speaker, that I am encouraging the federal 

government to provide us with more money to compete with the 

subsidies, and at the same time encouraging our people and 

Americans, particularly Americans and Europeans, to stop the 

subsidies altogether. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, when 

an agreement is breached, there’s no agreement in my books. 

When the Americans have tripled their enhancement program, 

you’re talking to them about cutting back support for subsidies. 

 

Will you now do the honourable thing and withdraw your support 

for this agreement until such time that we see some response for 

the Americans toward Canada, dealing fairly with our customers 

across the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps we could respond to 

this, very briefly, with an appreciation of what we face today and 

compare it to what we faced in 1929. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1929 when the stock market crashed, 

governments, particularly in the United States, passed legislation 

that said that they would not trade with others. They doubled the 

tariffs — they doubled the tariffs. As a result of doubling the 

tariffs, after the stock market crash — don’t trade with people — 

there was massive unemployment not only in the United States but 

all across western Canada, all across the nation. Across the 

western world the reaction to a stock market crash was: put up 

tariffs, don’t trade with people, and it led to the biggest and largest 

depression in the history of the world — the developed world.  

 

Mr. Speaker, now when we see a stock market crash we see severe 

economic conditions. The NDP are saying, don’t trade with 

people, put up tariffs, just walk right into a recession. They don’t 

care about all the jobs in potash, all the jobs in uranium, all the 

jobs in towns and villages. They don’t care about agriculture. All 

they say, Mr. Speaker, is just put up tariffs, as they did in 1929 and 

1930, and put everybody out of work. 

 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3484 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don’t understand the economy. They don’t 

understand the Depression. They don’t understand the crash. They 

don’t understand what to do about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question 

to the Premier. Will the Premier acknowledge that, at least in the 

minds of most economists, what caused the recession and 

depression in the 1930s was the very thing that is happening now 

in the United States, an increase of tariffs and the retreat from 

multilateralism, the making of a fortress North America and the 

retreat from multinationalism, which you are advocating and 

which will, indeed, cause distress not only to Canada but to all the 

world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I mean, this is the nub of what 

the country will be debating for now decades. Now let me, just as 

briefly as I can . . . In 1929 we had the stock market crash. Two 

things took place in the United States: one, they raised interest 

rates up. They thought that would solve it and obviously that led to 

further problems. 

 

And secondly, they passed the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act in 1930 

that more than doubled tariffs — more than doubled the tariffs. 

Now what does that mean? That means you can’t trade with other 

countries. The result was world trade stagnated and declined. U.S. 

imports dropped from 70 per cent from 4.4 billion to 1.4; exports 

dropped from 5.2 to $1.6 billion. And you had massive 

unemployment all across Canada as well as the United States and 

the trading world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you have a stock-market move now and you 

have people in Canada or the United States saying that we should 

put up tariffs, it is absolutely absurd. The thing you do is reduce 

tariffs and trade with people and lower interest rates — just the 

opposite. 

 

The NDP doesn’t understand the implications of high interest 

rates, and they wouldn’t deal with them, and they don’t understand 

the high implications of high tariffs. That’s exactly what leads to 

depression and recession. 

 

So we are saying, bilaterally and multilaterally — our suggestions 

to the Prime Minister and to the President of the United States — 

multilaterally and bilaterally, reduce the subsidies, reduce the 

protectionism. In every forum, in Japan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 

you are saying that, Mr. Premier. But do you believe for one 

minute that if Canada enters into a free trade agreement with the 

United States we will not have to increase our tariffs against 

Japanese and European goods, as surely as the United States is 

increasing their tariffs. They are going to increase their tariffs. 

Nothing that you do will stop that. To get us into fortress North 

 

American will mean that we will cut ourselves off from Japan and 

Europe. You know it. Why do you recommend that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, they have dug themselves a 

very, very deep theoretical and academic and real hole, because 

they are saying when two countries agree to lower their tariffs, 

either in Europe or in . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me just 

respond to the hon. member. Just let me respond carefully so that 

the opposition understands. When you reduce the tariffs between 

countries in Europe, in the European Common Market that is 

consistent with GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 

in reducing tariffs world-wide. When you reduce tariffs between 

Canada and the United States, it’s a bilateral agreement consistent 

with reducing tariffs world-wide. 

 

Why would anybody argue if two countries or if 12 countries in 

Europe reduce their tariffs between each other that it is adding to 

tariffs some place else? It doesn’t follow. You’re looking and 

you’re grasping for any single argument that you can find to say, 

don’t deal with Americans; don’t trade with them. 

 

That’s what happened in ‘29, that’s what happened in 1930, and 

that’s what led to the Depression, Mr. Speaker. The key is, the 

world needs an example. It needs an example of reduced tariffs 

and reduced protectionism, not the example of go hide and take 

your toys and don’t play with anybody else. It needs just the 

opposite to what you’re talking about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Premier, your argument makes sense only if you believe the 

United States is going to reduce its tariffs vis-a-vis the rest of the 

world. 

 

I am asking you: do you believe that in the next, let’s say, 48 

months, the United States is going to reduce its tariffs vis-a-vis the 

rest of the world, or increase them? Because I assure you that what 

they do, we will have to do, if we enter into an agreement with the 

United States. Tell us: do you believe the United States is going to 

reduce its tariffs vis-a-vis the rest of the world? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I hope people will really 

follow and look at the proposed logic of the opposition member. 

He is saying that the United States is going to turn more 

protectionist, therefore we should turn more protectionist and that 

will make the world better. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! Order, please. Order 

please. The Premier is attempting to answer the question. If we get 

into debate back and forth across the  

 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3485 

 

Legislative Assembly . . . you cannot do that, so please allow him 

to carry on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I think that we can agree the leaders . . . the 

Leader of the Opposition and I can agree . . . we can be as calm in 

here as possible to debate this very important issue. 

 

To be free does not mean to be alone. It means that you reduce 

your tariffs world-wide, with your neighbours and with others. 

Because we decide to reduce our tariffs with Japanese or we’ve 

decided to reduce our tariffs with Americans does not then follow 

that we would not be freer with other people. I mean, if you took 

your logic to the largest extent, you would not have a tariff 

agreement with anybody because then you would be free. That 

makes no sense, makes no sense. 

 

Look at what Prime Minister Hawke . . . Prime Minister Hawke 

has just tabled yesterday in Geneva his ten-year and ten-point plan 

to reduce tariffs to zero. The President of the United States at the 

GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) agreements has 

said they will reduce their tariffs to zero. He says we need an 

example of two countries, large trading countries, that can reduce 

their tariffs to zero and the subsidies to zero. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Speaker, that’s the example the world 

needs. It does not need isolation. It needs the courage to say, I will 

trade with less subsidy and less tariff and that’s precisely what 

we’re offering. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I ask you, sir, this very precise question. 

Do you believe that in the next 48 months, or any comparable 

people, the United States is going to lower its tariffs vis-a-vis the 

rest of the world? And do you believe that if they raise their tariffs, 

Canada can follow any other course than to raise its tariffs if we 

are in a free trade agreement with the United States? Two 

questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that there is any 

doubt that there is protectionism in the United States. There’s no 

doubt about it at all. It’s the biggest world battle that’s going on 

right now with respect to what they’re doing with respect to 

protectionism and their subsidies. They are in a very ugly mood, 

and for five years we have been saying we want to get them off 

their protectionist kick wherever possible, and if we can cut a deal 

so our tariffs will go to zero, it will be good for us because we’ll 

be exempt from anything that goes on there, and we can provide 

an example for the rest of the world. 

 

I fail to see the logic, Mr. Speaker, that if United States applies 

tariffs to Japan, that Canada would have to apply tariffs to Japan. 

We have a bilateral deal with the United States and a multilateral 

arrangement with people all over the world, Mr. Speaker. And 

he’s saying we might as well just raise our tariffs or be alone, 

because if you add more tariffs it would be good for people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just add finally . . . Mr. Speaker, just let me 

make the point . . . let me make the point, Mr. Speaker: people all 

over the world, they don’t . . . Well, 

Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to listen because they’re finally 

starting to learn something about trade. 

 

If I can add, when you have a bilateral agreement between two 

countries and your tariffs go to zero and you have an opportunity 

to export and import back and forth between the two countries, it 

also increases the opportunity you have with other countries, not 

decreases it — it increase it. You’ve got it precisely backwards. 

 

We need an example world-wide to reduce tariffs, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s why we’re going to support this bilateral deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Impact of Proposed Educational Council 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And it concerns, Mr. Speaker, his planning to 

create the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology. 

 

Mr. Minister, at the same time as you were abolishing the 

collective agreement and the seniority rights of every employee in 

the technical institute and urban community college system, you 

were establishing an interim governing council to run the 

super-institute for seven months. That council, Mr. Minister, is 

made up primarily of your departmental staff, and it has the power 

to fire employees and delete positions now that employee seniority 

rights are gone. 

 

My question to you, sir, is this: in light of the fact that the interim 

governing council is mostly made up of your departmental staff, is 

this council not a vehicle for you to extend your reign of terror for 

another seven months on a group of employees, 142 of whom 

you’ve already fired, and the remainder of which have now no 

collective agreement or no seniority rights to protect them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s unfortunate for 

the very fine and dedicated educators that work in the four 

campuses and the four community colleges that will become part 

of the Saskatchewan Institute of Science and Technology for some 

members to in fact create fear and uncertainty and insecurity when 

there is no need for that. I don’t think those educators are well 

served by that kind of fear-mongering and rumour-mongering, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I went to those institutes and met with something in the order of 

1,200 of those educators and staff, Mr. Speaker, at those four 

institutes a couple of weeks before the Bills were tabled in this 

House. What I learned there was this, Mr. Speaker: the same kinds 

of rumours that the member opposite is proffering up this morning 

were rampant then. There was some view that somehow, when the 

legislation in this legislature was passed, there would be more 

lay-offs, just as he’s suggesting. And I said to them, and I 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3486 

 

say to this House today, and I say to all of those educators and that 

staff across this province, Mr. Speaker, when this Bill passes or 

when these Bills pass, there will be no lay-offs. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, perhaps the 

minister can explain why the collective agreement of all those 

employees has been abolished. 

 

But I have a new question for the minister, Mr. Speaker, and it 

concerns his actions to abolish the certification orders by which 

community college and technical institute staff in this province 

chose to join the trade union of their choice. The instructors and 

staff at the Westside Community College in Beauval voted this 

summer to join the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 

Union. I have here, Mr. Minister, a copy of the certification order 

and a copy of the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board ruling 

dated September 15 establishing that union as the legal 

representative of the employees. 

 

My question to you is this: you’ve claimed you want employees to 

be able to choose whether to belong to a union or not, but these 

instructors at Beauval, Mr. Minister, just made this choice. Why 

are you now telling them that they have to choose all over again? 

And does this example not highlight the real intention of your Bill, 

which is to undertake union busting and the erosion of employee 

rights under the pretence of an education Bill when this is really a 

rewriting of the labour laws of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What the hon. member fails to realize, 

Mr. Speaker, is exactly what this legislation is all about. This 

legislation creates the new Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology. There were four community colleges 

involved before and four institutes. Now we have a single institute 

— a single, new, educational institute. These people will no longer 

be employees of government, Mr. Speaker. They will no longer be 

part of the broad spectrum of government. They will work for an 

educational institution — not unlike those people who work for 

universities, an educational institution. 

 

This new educational institute has new goals and new mandates 

and new objectives. And don’t you think, Mr. Speaker, that it 

would be fair to those employees to have, as they always have in 

this province, the right to decide how they shall be represented and 

by whom they should be represented. That is the position, and we 

will stick by that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, will you not acknowledge that it’s standard practice in 

this province that whenever employees are transferred from one 

institution to another, their union rights go with them; their 

collective bargaining agreement goes with them; that you are 

making a special exception of these employees by denying those 

rights to 

them, and in so doing you’re demoralizing the instructors in the 

institutes and the colleges of this province and therefore reducing 

the quality of instruction that’s offered in the class-room as a result 

of the poor morale that you are creating. Do you deny that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What is being kept patent and will 

always be the case of this province, Mr. Speaker, is that employees 

have the legal right to choose how and by whom they want to be 

represented, and this Bill keeps this intact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I address this question to the 

Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, not only are you grabbing 

power from the local communities through a protracted extension 

of your interim governing council made up largely of your 

political appointees, but you continue the power grab process 

through appointing a puppet board to your technical institutes. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you deny that you are using an education Bill to 

seize total control of the urban community colleges and technical 

institutes by controlling the board’s budget, by controlling the 

institute’s program, and by refusing to allow for independent, 

locally elected boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, what we hear this morning 

is on one occasion an opposition member referring to the new 

institute and the creation of that institute as a reign of terror, and 

now another member talking about somehow that I or our 

government is going to seize total control. 

 

Well what is happening as it relates to governance at this new 

institute? Those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, less than six 

months ago in the province in Prince Albert said the current form 

of governance where institutes are an arm of the Department of 

Education must go. We can no longer tolerate our institutes being 

run out of the Regina head office, the department of advanced 

education. 

 

Now we make the changes, Mr. Speaker, we make the changes 

and then they say, oh, you’re trying to grab power and centralize. 

Well I ask you and all people across this province, how does 

setting up a board of directors, like a board of governors at the 

University of Saskatchewan, fall into the category of seizing total 

control and a reign of power? It works at the University of 

Saskatchewan, it works at the University of Regina, and it will 

work at the new institute of applied science and technology, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what will work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, your proposal is 

a power grab. Your proposal is to abolish the urban community 

colleges and replace them with one appointed, powerless board. 

Our proposal is to make provisions for independent boards, the 

majority of whose members are elected. 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3487 

 

Do you not agree that this structure would provide for better input 

from students, instructors, and local community groups? And in 

view of the consistent and reasoned opposition to your single, 

appointed model, Mr. Minister, will you now do the right thing 

and accept our proposal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, there were a number of 

models that one could have moved to in terms of a new form of 

governance. What we were all agreed on is that the present form 

was unsatisfactory. We had 8 institutions, 9, 10, 11 even, if you 

look at the entire structure. Very difficult for them to plan and 

have some co-ordinated approach in so far as how adult education 

should look at this level as we move towards the year 2000. I think 

the opposition will agree, with this model you get co-ordination. 

 

We will have province-wide representation. We have already 

given the commitment that those four centres where we had the 

community colleges and the institute campuses shall have 

representation on there. I have already tended with the faculty the 

notion that I would entertain at least the notion to have a faculty 

representation on there, as would I entertain the notion of having 

student representation. By every measure, Mr. Speaker, this is 

going to be an institute for the 21st century and will continue to 

keep us ahead of, literally, the rest of the world when it comes to 

adult education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-hunting Corridors in the North 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question 

to the Premier, and it deals with no-hunting corridors which your 

government has created along roads and highways in northern 

Saskatchewan — corridors which violate the treaty rights of 

Indian people to hunt on unoccupied Crown land. In a letter to 

you, Mr. Premier, on October 2, Chief Thomas Iron of the Canoe 

Lake Indian band wrote, and I quote:  

 

I think this is nothing but a . . . 

 

If the Attorney General would just sit down and listen, I’d like to 

get this question on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think this is nothing but a racist reaction by government 

officials aimed at the native population in the North. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you stop this policy which violates the treaty 

rights of many northern people, and which denies them the right to 

hunt for food for their families along hundreds of miles of 

northern corridors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

understanding — and the minister, I believe, can provide more 

details — but when you have traffic corridors, when you have cars 

and trucks, and particularly truckers that are travelling back and 

forth on highways, you don’t want 

people with high-powered rifles too close to the highways, just for 

safety reasons. I mean, a rifle will carry a long ways, and if you 

have people that can hunt along the highways or shoot across the 

highways, it’s not as safe as it could be, Mr. Speaker. And my 

understanding is that when you have truckers going back and forth 

hauling goods and services, and cars, then it’s a safety measure to 

make sure people don’t get hurt or get shot, frankly. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Time has expired. Time has elapsed. Order, 

please, Order. Order, please. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to provide for the Division of 

Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of Members 

of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move first reading of a Bill to provide 

for the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the 

Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 46 — An Act 

respecting the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks have 

elapsed since we last debated this Bill. And in the intervening time 

period I have had the privilege of meeting with many technical 

institute and community college instructors around this province, 

as well as public interest groups who are interested in education. 

And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that those groups almost 

unanimously condemn this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 46 is one of the most unfair and deceptive pieces 

of legislation ever to come before this Assembly. Under the 

auspices of being an education Bill to establish one super-institute 

by amalgamating the four technical institutes and community 

colleges in Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Regina, and Moose Jaw, Bill 

46 is in reality primarily a Bill designed to rewrite the labour laws 

of Saskatchewan and to sacrifice the rights of employees in our 

institutes and community college system in the process. 

 

Not only, Mr. Speaker, does this Bill, under the allusory guide of 

creating an autonomous board to govern the urban institutes and 

colleges, this Bill in fact sets up a bureaucratic hierarchical 

structure and an appointed board that can only act with ministerial 

approval. Far from granting real autonomy to the so-called 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3488 

 

super-institute, as the Minister of Education claims he’s doing, the 

minister is establishing a structure that he can control completely 

while claiming publicly that responsibility for decision making 

rests with the super-institute board. 

 

The Minister of Education says that we are entering a new era and 

providing a new direction for post-secondary education in 

Saskatchewan. But I say, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill does not 

represent a new era at all. It is simply an extension of the attack on 

professional educators and public servants that this government 

initiated this spring when it fired 142 technical instructors and 

staff. 

 

Bill 46 has very serious and immediate implications for the quality 

of instruction we can expect in Saskatchewan post-secondary 

classrooms. After the widespread firings and forced early 

retirements imposed by the government this summer, morale in 

Saskatchewan’s technical institutes and urban community colleges 

was already very low. The content of this Bill simply compounds 

that problem, Mr. Speaker, even further, and poor morale 

inevitably has negative spin-offs in the classroom. 

 

Quality of instruction is ultimately being sacrificed by this 

government as a result of its continual efforts to attack 

professional educators. Instructors and staff have every reason to 

be dismayed, Mr. Speaker. I want to summarize what Bill 46 does 

for their rights and their job benefits. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, seven certification orders that established the 

rights of community college employees to be represented by 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union are abolished; so 

are the union privileges by technical institute faculty and staff. 

 

It is the law in this province by way of section 37 of The Trade 

Union Act that when employees are transferred from one 

institution or business to another, that their right to continue being 

represented by the union of their choice is transferred with them. 

But the Minister of Education in Bill 46 is choosing to single out 

technical institute and community college employees to make 

them an exception, Mr. Speaker, and to assert that the law does not 

apply to them. Time and time again this Bill specifically exempts 

employees of the institutes and the community colleges from 

protection under section 37 of The Trade Union Act. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, under the Bill, collective agreements that 

have been bargained on behalf of faculty and staff are abolished. 

Now the Minister of Education will be able to implement 

unilaterally what he was unable to bargain collectively as minister 

responsible for the Public Service Commission. This Bill could 

potentially pave the way for set-backs in employee working 

conditions and job benefits. Once again, this is all being 

accomplished by the government ignoring the laws of the land, 

putting aside The Trade Union Act and, Mr. Speaker, asserting the 

government’s own “devine” rule. 

 

With the abolition of collective agreements, Mr. Speaker, goes 

employee seniority rights. People who’ve worked for the institute 

system for 15 or 20 years are being told 

under this Bill that recognition of their seniority is gone. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what sort of a situation does this Bill present 

itself with? First of all, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation in which 

the government chooses to set up an interim governing council to 

operate the new super-institute for a period of seven months. And 

who’s on that interim governing council, Mr. Speaker? It’s 

primarily made up of the minister’s own departmental staff. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that interim governing council, first of all, will 

obviously have the power to delete staff positions and to fire 

employees, but this time those employees, as a result of this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, will not have a union to represent them. They will 

not have a grievance procedure that can be followed. Their 

seniority rights will be gone; people who’ve worked 15 or 20 

years in the system have no seniority protection under this Bill. 

The Minister of Education is nodding his head. I say to the 

Minister of Education, if he wants to assure the employees of this 

province that their seniority will be recognized, then all he has to 

do is put that in the Bill, because when the collective agreement 

goes, employees’ seniority goes. 

 

The minister, who’s also minister responsible for the Public 

Service Commission, Mr. Speaker, knows that full well. And if he 

wants to protect employee seniority, then he can vote for the 

amendment that we will be making, that places protection for 

employee seniority in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation, as I was mentioning, where this 

interim governing council will assume power, and it will have the 

right not only to delete positions and to attack employees whose 

seniority and collective agreement has been abolished but it will 

also, Mr. Speaker, have the power the arbitrarily transfer 

employees, instructors, and staff of the technical institute system 

from one bargaining unit to another. 

 

That is unprecedented in this province, and it gives you and your 

departmental staff complete control, Mr. Minister, of the new 

super-institute for a period of seven months. It’s an opportunity for 

you to put your stamp on this institute and then to turn it over to an 

appointed board that you establish, who will essentially, Mr. 

Minister, already have had their dirty work done for them by your 

interim governing council and your Department of Education 

staff. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the alarming things about this 

piece of legislation. But it doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. Not 

only, Mr. Speaker, does this Bill abolish the certification orders 

and the trade union rights of employees in the super-institute, not 

only does it abolish their seniority rights. Mr. Speaker, and their 

collective agreement, but it also chooses to undermine other job 

benefits they have. 

 

I want to give another example. All employees, Mr. Speaker, by 

virtue of the fact that they belong to SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union), have a long-term disability 

insurance plan. And as a result of this government arbitrarily 

abolishing their memberships in Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Union, they no longer have a long-term disability 

insurance plan. 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3489 

 

We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, when we get to 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill, will be introducing in 

another amendment to ensure that those employees are protected 

under a long-term disability insurance plan, and again I’ll invite 

the Minister of Education to support that amendment when the 

time comes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is, in effect, an attempt by this government 

to rewrite the labour laws of Saskatchewan under the auspices of 

an Education Bill, because never before, Mr. Speaker, has this 

kind of arbitrary attack on the employees of an institution been 

launched by a government in this province.  

 

An Hon. Members: — You’re all wet. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education has 

just said that I’m all wet in my remarks. But I say to him, Mr. 

Speaker, he’s not only Minister of Education, he is minister of the 

Public Service Commission. He understands exactly what he’s 

doing under this Bill. He’s the man who just laid off or forced 

early retirement upon 2,000 public servants in this province. And 

now, Mr. Speaker, that same man is continuing his attack on 

professional educators in Saskatchewan, and I say to him, shame. 

And all members on this side of the House say that it’s a disgrace, 

it’s disgusting. And I say to the Minister of Education that it’s time 

for him to withdraw his Bill from this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

Allow the hon. member from Saskatoon University to make his 

remarks without intervening quite as often. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for calling the 

Minister of Education to order. Mr. Speaker, I want to comment 

on some of the other unusual labour provisions in this Bill. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education who’s also, as I 

mentioned, minister of the Public Service Commission, is in effect 

trying to impose upon the employees of the technical institute and 

community college system, by legislation, what he was not able to 

accomplish when, as minister of the Public Service Commission, 

he bargained collectively with those employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all, he is establishing in law what the 

bargaining unit shall be for the new super-institute in the event that 

the employees at the super-institute sign up union membership 

again and receive a new certification order to be represented by 

SGEU or by some other union. The minister is taking the 

unprecedented step, Mr. Speaker, of laying down in law what the 

bargaining units for the new super-institute shall be, when he 

knows full well, Mr. Speaker, that it is standard practice in this 

province for the Labour Relations Board to make that decision, 

Mr. Speaker, and not for the Minister of Education to make that 

decision. 

 

And not only is he deciding what the bargain unit shall be, Mr. 

Speaker, but he is giving the new super-institute board, and in the 

first seven months his interim governing 

council, the power to arbitrarily decide what bargaining unit 

individual employees shall be in and to transfer them from one 

bargaining unit to another. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Balderdash. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — The Minister of Education says balderdash. He 

knows full well that the provisions of this Bill clearly establish 

what the bargaining unit shall be, and allow for individual 

employees to be moved from one bargaining unit to another. That 

is unprecedented. 

 

And the Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker, shakes his head. But, 

Mr. Speaker, he continues to mislead the people of Saskatchewan 

about the nature of this Bill. I’m going to look forward to being 

able to ask him direct questions in committee, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 

see then, Mr. Speaker, whether he denies this, because I think 

clearly he will not be able to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are not the only unusual provisions. This Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, also goes on to specifically lay out who can be in the 

trade union, in the event that employees unionize again, and who 

cannot be. It specifically states who shall be in the managerial 

group and who shall not. 

 

That again, Mr. Speaker, is never done by legislation in this 

House. That is always done by the Labour Relations Board. The 

minister knows that, and what he is doing here in this Bill is 

arbitrarily overruling the powers and the authority of the Labour 

Relations Board in this province. And he is making a special 

exception for community college employees and technical 

institute employees, and he is essentially continuing the attack that 

he started this summer when he fired 142 of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He has said, Mr. Speaker, that there’ll be no lay-offs the day after 

the Bill becomes law. What I want to see, Mr. Speaker, is whether 

there will be any lay-offs seven months after this Bill has become 

law. That will be the test, Mr. Speaker. That will be the real test, 

and I will be very interested to see what the results of that will be. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve made reference to a number of the 

unusual provisions with respect to the contravention of trade union 

legislation and labour law in this province. And that alone, Mr. 

Speaker, is reason enough for members of this Assembly to vote 

against Bill 46 because I want to point out, Mr. Speaker . . . and 

we will have a legal opinion which I will be bringing forward in 

Committee of the Whole to substantiate it. 

 

But upon seeking legal advice, Mr. Speaker, we are informed that 

the Minister of Education could have brought in the new 

super-institute without requiring legislation before this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. He could have established the new super-institute 

and amalgamated the community colleges and technical institutes 

without legislation. I’m not saying that that would have been 

advisable, but he could have done it. 

 

What he could not have done without legislation, Mr. Speaker, is 

violated the labour laws of this province and 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3490 

 

brought forward a Bill that specifically exempts the employees of 

the institutes and the colleges from The Trade Union Act. That’s 

what he could not have done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that that is the number one reason 

for this Bill. It is specifically being brought down to exempt the 

employees of the institutes and the colleges from The Trade Union 

Act and other labour legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on some of the other issues 

that Bill 46 raises because in many ways, Mr. Speaker, what we 

have been seeing in the province of Saskatchewan in the past few 

months, and what we continue to see with Bill 46, is the kind of 

attack which the British Columbia Socred government launched 

on its employees in the post-secondary education system in which 

hundreds of them were laid off, in which their collective 

agreements and their trade union rights were eroded. We are 

seeing that same kind of strategy now, Mr. Speaker, being applied 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister of Education has tried to claim, Mr. Speaker, by way 

of Bill 46, that he is establishing a new era in which a new 

super-institute board will be created that is an autonomous board, 

that will now be able to act, Mr. Speaker, according to the 

Minister of Education, in the same way that the University of 

Regina and the University of Saskatchewan boards of governors 

are able to operate. Well I say to the minister that that is also a 

very, very false notion. 

 

The minister if not setting up an autonomous board, Mr. Speaker. 

He’s not setting up an autonomous board at all. Instead, Mr. 

Speaker, what the minister is doing is setting up a board that he 

will continue to exercise complete control over, and anyone who 

reads Bill 46, particularly section 7, will realize immediately that 

the minister has not passed on the authority, full authority, to the 

new super-institute appointed board at all. What he’s done instead, 

Mr. Speaker, is set up a board that he will be the ultimate 

controller over. 

 

I want to read section 7, Mr. Speaker. It says: 

 

The minister may: 

 

(a) establish policies in consultation with the institute and 
give direction for post-secondary education and training 

to be provided or undertaken by the institute; 

 

The minister may: 

 

(b) co-ordinate programs and activities in the continuing 
education area between the institute and government . . . 

(That’s reasonable.) 

 

The minister may: 

 

(c) give directions to the institute on programs, courses, 
functions or activities to be provided or undertaken or 

discontinued by the institute, 

including core program specialties to be provided at any 

campus of the institute, and where they are to be 

provided or undertaken; 

 

And the minister may: 

 

(d) establish policies or procedures for the approval of 
programs, courses, seminars, or . . . instruction to be 

provided . . . 

 

And the minister may: 

 

(e) give directions to the institute on educational, 
operational, administrative, management or other 

standards or procedures to be established or maintained 

by the institute . . . 

 

The minister may: 

 

(g) give directions to the institute on fees to be charged by 
the institute; 

 

The minister may: 

 

(h) direct the institute to acquire any property or services or 
any category of property or services that it may require 

from or through the (Saskatchewan) Property 

Management Corporation; 

 

And the minister may: 

 

(i)  require the institute to provide to him any (reports,) 
information, financial or expenditure plans . . . that he 

may request. 

 

And above all, Mr. Speaker, here is the clincher: 

 

The institute shall comply with any directions or (any) 

requirements given or made by the minister pursuant to 

subsection (1) within any period that the minister may 

require.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what section 7(1) and (2) of this Bill in effect 

do, Mr. Speaker, is clearly establish that the Minister of Education 

is in complete control of the super-institute. He can go so far, Mr. 

Speaker, as even to determine the fees that the institute may 

establish. He has complete authority with respect to the 

establishment or the deletion of programs at the super-institute. He 

has complete authority, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the budget 

that the super-institute may establish. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, under section 26 of this Bill, that 

the board of the super-institute may only undertake its financial 

budget for the year with the approval of the minister, and they may 

only borrow money with the approval of the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not an autonomous board. This is a board that 

is, in effect, a puppet board. It lacks the autonomy that the board 

of governors of the University of Regina or the University of 

Saskatchewan would have. It in effect leaves a large degree of 

control with the Minister of Education or anybody that he chooses 

to appoint from his department to exercise that control, Mr. 

Speaker. And 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3491 

 

in that sense, this board and this legislation do not represent what 

the Minister of Education has claimed that they represent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on a third element of this 

legislation which is very disturbing to me. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is the decision that the PC government has taken to establish one 

centrally appointed board to govern the technical institutes and the 

urban community colleges of this province instead of, Mr. 

Speaker, adopting an alternative model that was favoured strongly 

by students, by technical institute instructors and staff, and 

community college employees in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 

that was a model that adopted a more decentralized approach and 

that favoured the establishment of elected boards rather than one 

centrally appointed board. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to contrast the model that the New 

Democratic Party is putting forward, a more decentralized model 

of local governments and elected boards, with the model that we 

have in Bill 46 which is for one centrally appointed board that will 

largely be made up, Mr. Speaker, of the government’s own 

political supporters, with no doubt two or three professional 

educators who are respected in this province added to the board as 

well, and perhaps, if the minister is serious, a representative from 

either students or faculty. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House are of the view 

that the Government of Saskatchewan ought to be establishing 

autonomy for the technical institute and community college 

system, but ought to be doing it by way of four boards, locally 

elected boards, one in Regina, one in Saskatoon, one in Prince 

Albert, and one in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. Each of these boards 

in their respective cities would be responsible for the operations 

and governance of the local community college and technical 

institute in that community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the model that we propose, Mr. Speaker, we believe would be 

much more responsive to the interests of community groups 

concerned about adult education, much more responsive to local 

employers in the respective communities that the institutes serve, 

and much more responsive to the needs of faculty, students, and 

staff who work, or are engaged in studies, at the respective 

post-secondary education institutions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our proposal is that the Minister of Education 

ought to establish these four local boards and that these boards 

ought to be structured in the following way. The majority of 

members of the boards would be elected, Mr. Speaker. And first of 

all, there would be an elected representative from the students at 

the local community college and technical institute on the board. 

Secondly, there would be an elected representative from the 

faculty of that institute and college on the board. Thirdly, there 

would be a representative, an elected representative of the alumni, 

the former students of that institution on the board. 

 

And then in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, a local community 

council would be established in each of the four communities that 

I made reference to. And that community council would be made 

up of organizations 

that are interested in adult education, Mr. Speaker, and would have 

representatives on there from everything from the Métis  society 

through to the chamber of commerce. Any organization in the 

community that was interested in adult education and the 

operations of the local college and institute would be eligible for 

membership on this council, Mr. Speaker. That council in turn 

would elect four or five members to sit on the local board that 

governs the institute and community college, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the elected representatives would be made up of members of 

the council and, in addition to that, elected representatives from 

the faculty, from the students, from the staff, and from the alumni. 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, there is a need to ensure that local 

employers are represented on the board, and that should be done 

either by ministerial appointment or by having local employers 

become members of the council and in turn, through the local 

community council, be elected onto the local board of governors, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, it is necessary for each local 

board to have a province-wide perspective as well as a local 

perspective. We want this board to be responsive to local 

community needs, but we also, Mr. Speaker, want the board to be 

responsive to the needs of the province as a whole. Because 

whether it be Kelsey Institute, or Wascana Institute, or 

Saskatchewan Institute . . . the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Technology at Moose Jaw, or NIT (Northern Institute of 

Technology) at Prince Albert, each institute in each community 

college must endeavour to serve the needs of the province as well 

as the needs of the community that they are in. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is for this reason that we propose that the 

Minister of Education appoint three or four members on to each 

local board — members that will live around Saskatchewan, that 

will come from all walks of life, and that will be able to bring a 

provincial perspective to the work of each institute, as well as 

having the local perspective through the elected function, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s our view that this model would be far more 

desirable than the model that the Minister of Education has put 

forward. This model would provide faculty and students with a 

real say over program decision at the local institute. This model, 

Mr. Speaker, would allow local employers and employers in the 

region that the institute and college serve to have real input into 

new program initiatives that ought to be taken. 

 

(1100) 

 

We have heard time and time again around this province that what 

faculty and students and staff in the community college and 

technical institute want is some kind of say, first of all, over 

program decisions that are made in their institute, and secondly, 

over the way that money is spent in their institute. 

 

For instance, Mr. Speaker, if someone who is an instructor in one 

of the laboratories or one of the industrial art shops at a technical 

institute want to go out and buy a new piece of equipment, and it’s 

. . . They want to be able to go and get approval for that purchase 

locally, Mr. Speaker, 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3492 

 

where they can do it quickly and go out and get the piece of 

equipment purchased rather than have to wait for some 

bureaucracy that’s based in Regina to make the decision about 

whether they can go out and buy that piece of equipment. And, 

Mr. Speaker, under the model that the Minister of Education is 

bringing forward in Bill 46, all that will happen is that the 

bureaucracy that makes the decisions is going to be changed from 

the Department of Education in Regina to one central appointed 

board and its staff based in Regina. And that, Mr. Speaker, is not 

going to make for a more responsive educational system at all. 

 

So it’s our view, Mr. Speaker, that decisions about the local 

budget, decisions about staff hiring, and decisions about program 

development and program priority are best made at the local level 

and ought to be made by a local board. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not our view that all things governing the 

technical institutes and community colleges ought to be decided at 

the local level. There are some things that need to be decided at 

the provincial level, and I want to give members of the Assembly 

and members of the public an example of what I mean. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, we have to overcome the problems of 

credits and courses that are taken at one technical institute not 

being transferable to another institute. The Minister of Education 

has no excuse, Mr. Speaker, for that situation existing. He has had 

full control over the institutes for the past five years, and yet he 

has not created a situation in which credits and courses are 

transferable between institutes. But, Mr. Speaker, provision for 

this does need to be made at a central level, either by way of action 

by the Department of Education or by way of action by some 

central co-ordinating council made up of representatives from 

each of the locally elected boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other things that need to be done centrally. 

It’s our view, for instance, that a collective agreement with the 

employees ought to be negotiated centrally. It ought to be 

negotiated either between the Department of Education and the 

trade union representing college and institute employees or, Mr. 

Speaker, it ought to be negotiated between some central 

co-ordinating council representing the four boards and the 

respective trade union of the employees, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that we want to see a situation in 

which the rights of employees to be represented by SGEU are 

transferred to this new structure, and that the collective agreements 

that all employees have in the institute and college system are also 

transferred to this new structure that we are proposing, that the 

seniority rights and the disability insurance coverage that all 

employees have are transferred as well,, Mr. Speaker, to this new 

structure. So we would have a situation in which the collective 

agreement was still negotiated on all central basis. 

 

And obviously, Mr. Speaker, another decision needs to be made 

centrally, and that is a decision about what the global budget for 

each institute shall be and what new programs each institute is 

allowed to initiate because, Mr. 

Speaker, we do not want to see a situation in this province where 

the institutes and colleges are unnecessarily competing against one 

another. And surely the decision about the global budget that each 

institute has, has to be made on a central basis. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are in essence proposing that either the 

Department of Education continue to make these decisions that 

I’ve outlined as they do now, or that a co-ordinating council with 

two representatives from each of the four local boards be 

established to make these decisions. And it would be appropriate, 

Mr. Speaker, for the Minister of Education and the Department of 

Education to also have a couple of representatives on this central 

co-ordinating council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of model that we propose, a model 

that provides faculty staff, students, local employers and 

community organizations with real input into educational decision 

making which they cannot possibly have with one centrally 

appointed board; and on the other hand, a provision that ensures 

that the decisions that need to be made on a province-wide basis, 

in the interests of the province as a whole and from a provincial 

perspective, continue to be made centrally either by the 

Department of Education or by a central co-ordinating council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s our vision of what the technical institute and 

community colleges decision making model ought to be. And you 

can see, Mr. Speaker, that it is in very sharp contrast with the 

model that the Minister of Education has provided us with in this 

Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many other things that could be said 

about this Bill, but I think that most of them are best left to 

Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker, but I want to clearly 

indicate at this point that members on this side of the Assembly 

will not be supporting Bill 46. We see it, Mr. Speaker, as one of 

the most unfair and deceptive pieces of legislation that has ever 

come before this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, therefore, I wish to 

read the following motion, seconded by my colleague the member 

for Prince Albert: 

 

That Bill 46 not now be read a second time, because: 

 

1. It fails to develop a governing structure for the community 
college and technical institute system that will provide for 

adequate faculty, staff and student input and that will be 

responsive to community needs; 

 

2. It fails to respond to the wishes of many members of the 
educational community to have local governance and 

elected boards made up of representatives from interested 

community groups, employers, faculty, students, staff and 

alumni; 

 

3. It is a flagrant union busting measure under the auspices of 
an education bill; 

 

4. It abolishes the collective agreements, (the) seniority rights 
and the long-term disability 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3493 

 

benefits held by institute and college staff, and in doing so 

serves further to demoralize instructors and staff, thus 

damaging the quality of education available to students; 

 

5. It fails to grant real autonomy to the new institute board 
but instead makes provision for the minister to exercise 

complete control over all aspects of the new institute’s 

operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member for Prince 

Albert. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the 

motion put by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 

University. And in opposition to this Bill which is Bill 46, the 

institute Bill, I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is not a 

good Bill. 

 

My colleagues and I have had the . . . spent a great deal of time 

examining this Bill and its consequences. I’ve heard many 

representations from people who are affected by this Bill. And 

I’ve had the opportunity to listen to many people — educators, 

administrators, people in the community, students, people with 

board experience, people who have accumulative hundreds of 

years of experience. And I must say that outside the hard-rock 

Tories who still believe in Brian Mulroney, and outside of your 

political paid employees, out of the dozens of people that I’ve met, 

I’ve only met one who genuinely believed that this was a good 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bad Bill. It’s bad because it does little or 

nothing for education, and its introduction is causing grief around 

the province. This is not an education Bill; it is a political Bill. It 

does not address the problems of educators as much as it addresses 

a political agenda. 

 

What is this Bill 46? What is it that Bill 46 does? Well first of all, 

Mr. Speaker, it centralizes power over the entire urban community 

college system and all institutes at Prince Albert, Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. And I say that’s political because it 

takes away from local input. It takes away the community input, 

and it takes away from the input on the parts of the students and 

the staff. 

 

This Bill, secondly, has resulted in the reducing of the offerings of 

personal development classes, and I say that’s political. The 

minister is deciding for the people what they should take and what 

they shouldn’t take. 

 

Thirdly, this Bill sets the stage for user-pay education, and that’s a 

political move. We on this side have always believed that the best 

way to stress the importance of education is to have low tuition 

rates — low tuition rates, not the same as that instituted by private 

institutions. 

 

And fourthly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill disrupts the instructional 

process through forcing a loss of employee contract benefits. And 

I say that’s political. You are breaking a contract. You are using 

political power to break a contract — a contract between the 

government and the employee, and instructors as employees. 

 

Because you have delivered a political Bill, Mr. Minister, I am 

saddened. I am saddened because I know that the 

people who work with the institutes and the community colleges, I 

know what they’re feeling. They are feeling manipulated. They are 

feeling used. They feel their professional experience gained from 

years of dedication is being disregarded, ignored, and deliberately 

avoided. 

 

People in Saskatchewan who have put their hearts and their minds 

to work and to evolve a community college system, an institute 

system, suddenly see an outsider, a Tory politician turned 

Education minister, bring in his agenda under the disguise of an 

amalgamation Bill. And I say this with all due respect for your 

office, Mr. Minister, this is not a good Bill. It is a bad Bill for 

education. It is a politically motivated Bill. It does not build on the 

strengths already achieved in Saskatchewan, instead it aims to 

change the course of Saskatchewan education to Tory education. 

That’s what makes it a bad Bill. 

 

I want to elaborate on each of the four points I mentioned. But first 

let’s recall what the government says it wants to do. The minister 

has repeatedly stated he wants to prepare for the year 2000, that 

we are in a changing world, that we must adjust to new technology 

and to earning a living. 

 

(1115) 

 

These pat phrases, Mr. Speaker, are harmless enough, and some 

people even find them inspiring to hear a little futuristic jargon. 

But let’s look at the action, let’s look at the action that’s built right 

into this Bill, Bill 46, The Institute Act. The first thing it does is 

centralize all of the institutes and community colleges under the 

direct power of the minister with a cosmetic puppet board. It 

concentrates the ultimate decision making in the hands of one 

person, the minister in charge. 

 

Yes, it does make provision for a board and it says in section 11 

that the board shall manage and conduct the business affairs of the 

institute. But it also instructs the board to report to the minister, 

and I want to read from page 5 of the Act, Mr. Speaker, section 11 

(page) 5, says: 

 

The board shall: 

 

(f)  promptly on the conclusion of each meeting of the board 
or any committee of the board provide to the minister a 

copy, certified by the secretary of the board, of the 

minutes of the meeting and any resolutions and bylaws 

passed at the meeting. 

 

It also instructs the board to comply to all of the directions from 

the minister. And I want to quote directly from the Act in this 

respect, Mr. Speaker, section 7(2) from page 4, and it says here: 

 

The institute shall comply with any directions or requirement 

given or made by the minister pursuant to subsection (1) 

within any period that the minister may require. 

 

This section gives the minister ultimate power, but also leaves 

budgeting approval in the hands of the minister, Mr. Speaker, 

budget approval. And I read to you from page 11 of the Act . . . of 

this Bill, from page 11, section 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3494 

 

20(2), and it reads: 

 

The minister shall review the budget submitted to him 

pursuant to subsection (1) and may approve the budget or 

may, after consultation with the board, require the board to 

revise all or any part of the budget in any manner that he 

considers. 

 

That means, Mr. Minister, that the board does not get a global sum 

and then appropriate it according to the way it seems that they 

would feel it would be the just way. It really means that the board 

has to try to satisfy the minister, item by item. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this is a puppet board. Further to this, it is an 

appointed board and not an elected board, and that is one of our 

objections to this. And I want to go to page 9, and enter section 

9(1) into the record, this section, Mr. Speaker, which talks about 

how the manner of the board is appointed. It says: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council shall appoint a board of 

directors for the institute consisting of not less than 10 and 

not more than 20 members. 

 

And I read that as section 9(1) from page 4. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this is a board with no real authority. This 

appointment system, and those items that I read, make it into a 

puppet board dancing to the strings pulled by the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that may be what the minister envisages as a future 

for our youth who graduate in the year 2000, but it differs greatly 

from the vision for the people of Saskatchewan, and it differs 

greatly with my vision for the year 2000. The last thing I want to 

see in the post-secondary education system, the second-largest 

education system in Saskatchewan, is to have it controlled by one 

person. That’s not my idea of educating for administrating into the 

future. 

 

When it comes to control of our public institutions, the people of 

Saskatchewan want a system that is run by the people in the 

community and for the people in the community, and not by the 

government. They don’t want a system where the government 

pulls the strings at the top and the puppets below are seen to 

dance. 

 

Just think about it for a minute, Mr. Speaker. How many people in 

this Assembly or in Saskatchewan would be prepared to give the 

powers, those same powers, to the minister, over our kindergarten 

to grade 12 schools? Would you accept a system where our 

children from kindergarten to grade 12 education and their 

education would be controlled by a minister with a single puppet 

board? Would anybody accept that? 

 

How would the people of Saskatchewan react? How would the 

people of Saskatchewan react, Mr. Minister, if the minister 

grabbed the power from the school boards, and the school boards 

had to react in any manner that the minister chose, and he had a 

complete veto over all budget items? It goes without researching 

that Saskatchewan residents would not accept such a thing in 

K to 12 education, yet the minister is consolidating this power in 

that manner in post-secondary training, Mr. Speaker. And I say it’s 

wrong. I say it’s scary, and it should not be done. 

 

The question arises then, why does the minister insist on being the 

puppet master of this board? And I believe the answer becomes 

clearer when we consider the other three effects of this Bill, the 

three effects being, reducing the offerings of human interest, 

personal development, and lifelong learning classes; setting the 

stage for user-pay education; and breaking of the 

employee/employer contract, in other words known as union 

busting. 

 

First, one — by reducing the offerings of personal development 

classes and lifelong learning opportunities. We had a system 

where the people in the communities around Saskatchewan had 

made conscious decisions. They made the decisions on how to 

improve the quality of their lives, and one of the ways that they 

decided was to engage in adult education classes of their choice. 

 

It caught on around the province like wildfire. People from all 

walks of life — whether they be shoe-makers or truck drivers or 

home-makers, teachers, business men, or business women — met 

in halls and in church basements, and they met there to learn new 

things that they wanted to learn, learning for the purpose of 

gaining a greater understanding of our culture, of developing our 

culture, and of learning about life itself. They were developing 

personal skills in areas they had always wanted to pursue but had 

hitherto been unable to. 

 

But what does this minister do? He cuts these classes from the 

sponsorship of the community colleges. He wants to control what 

you and I learn. He presumes and has the arrogance to say no. No 

tax money for Ukrainian or Scottish dancing, no tax money for 

learning cabinet-making or ceramics or photography or crafts or 

arts, or skill development in those areas that he regards as frills. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I want to say two things about that. Many a 

person in Saskatchewan has experienced a revitalization and a 

therapeutic benefit through the classes you have put a stop to. And 

secondly, many a small entrepreneur got his or her start, or his or 

her inspiration, or have opened a small business because of an 

opportunity they had to take art or learning to produce other 

products that have come up for sale. And this collective benefit 

has even added to attracting tourists to our province. 

 

I want to turn then to the second thing that this Bill provides for 

that I think should not provide for, and that is it makes provision 

for the minister to set up for a user-pay system. The minister gave 

himself the power to fix and determine the fees for any of the 

instruction, and this is taken right out of section 7(1). I ask the 

minister, are the days of the $1,000 per year tuitions gone from our 

technical institutes? Are you trying to put in some type of a level 

playing field so that the fees that they pay, going to the technical 

institutes, will be the same as the fees that they now have to pay, 

going to private institution, or to institutions in the United States 

which are closer to 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3495 

 

$4,000 tuition per year? 

 

This would make post-secondary education beyond the reach of 

many people. It will be inaccessible to many who now look at 

education as their only way to be successful. Then if that is not the 

reason, Mr. Minister, I would like you to explain why you want 

this article in the Bill. 

 

The third big problem with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the problem 

that my colleague from Saskatoon University has elaborated on, 

and that is that it takes away the contract benefits that the 

employees now have with the technical institutes, and it makes 

provision for decertification of those employees and it forces them 

to recertify. They already had those choices, Mr. Speaker — they 

already had those choices. 

 

But now what it’s done, this Bill, in disguise as an education Bill, 

has overridden section 37 of The Trade Union Act. And it also 

overrides the role of the Labour Relations Board to determine the 

scope of collective bargaining, and it permits the indiscriminate 

transfer of employees from one bargaining unit to another. It gives 

the minister provision to move employees, indiscriminate 

provision for him to move from the public service to the institutes. 

 

Again the minister, through this implementation of this section, 

indicates that he wants to be a puppet master, and this time pulling 

the strings of the employees. Why did you not face that as a 

political issue head-on, I ask this government? Why did you do it 

this way? You’re doing more harm to education than good by 

introducing this type of union-busting tactic into an education Act. 

 

The friction and the tension and the resentment on the part of 

employees demoralize the entire staff and, as a result, it’s reducing 

the efficiency of education service delivery. If your agenda was 

any good, Mr. Minister, you should have clearly and openly 

consulted and come to an agreement with the employees. But you 

chose instead this cowardly route. You chose the back door to 

carry out your political union busting. That’s deceitful and the 

employees know it. You’re using an education Bill to do your 

political transformation of employee/employer relations. That’s 

dishonest and that’s why this Bill is so distasteful. That’s why 

there is so little support for it outside the members sitting opposite. 

 

You had an alternative, Mr. Minister, and I’ve told you about it in 

estimates, and my colleague from Saskatoon University has 

outlined it in detail today. You would be wise to scrap this Bill, 

Mr. Minister — scrap the Bill and start anew. 

 

(1146) 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 16 

 

Blakeney Kowalsky 

Prebble Anguish 

Shillington Goulet 

 

 
Koskie Lyons 

Tchorzewski Calvert 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Simard Trew 

Solomon Van Mulligen 

 

Nays — 27 

 

Devine Martin 

Duncan Toth 

McLeod Sauder 

Berntson Hopfner 

Lane Petersen 

Taylor Swenson 

Smith Baker 

Swan Gleim 

Hodgins Neudorf 

Gerich Gardner 

Hepworth Kopelchuk 

Hardy Saxinger 

Klein Britton 

Pickering  

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 27 

 

Devine Martin 

Duncan Toth 

McLeod Sauder 

Berntson Hopfner 

Lane Petersen 

Taylor Swenson 

Smith Baker 

Swan Gleim 

Hodgins Neudorf 

Gerich Gardner 

Hepworth Kopelchuk 

Hardy Saxinger 

Klein Britton 

Pickering  

 

Nays — 17 

 

Blakeney Kowalsky 

Prebble Anguish 

Shillington Goulet 

Koskie Lyons 

Tchorzewski Calvert 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Upshall Trew 

Simard Van Mulligen 

Solomon  

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 47 — An Act 

respecting Regional Colleges be now read a second time. 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3496 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

say that members on this side of the House support the central 

thrust of Bill 47, which is the offering of expanded technical 

institute programming and community college programming 

throughout rural Saskatchewan. We support, Mr. Speaker, the 

notion of offering first- and second-year university classes in rural 

communities to be delivered through the proposed regional college 

model that the government is putting forward, and we support the 

notion that expanded technical institute programming ought to 

also be delivered in rural communities through the regional 

college model. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is unclear from this Bill and what is unclear in 

the sense that the minister has given no indication of his financial 

plans with respect to the funding of such programs, is whether the 

moneys will be in place to assure that first- and second-year 

university courses and technical institute courses can be offered in 

rural Saskatchewan through the regional colleges without, Mr. 

Speaker, sacrificing the quality of education at the University of 

Regina, the University of Saskatchewan, and the four technical 

institutes as we currently know them. 

 

If the Minister of Education is talking about putting new money 

into the system to provide university and vocational school 

courses in rural Saskatchewan, then we commend him for that. If 

he is talking about eroding the budgets of the University of Regina 

and the University of Saskatchewan and the technical institutes 

even further in order to offer this extension programming, then we 

say that that will be a set-back to education in the province, and 

although it may enhance rural accessibility it will be at the expense 

of the core programs offered in our major urban centres. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in addition it will result in second-class programming 

being offered in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So the key to the success of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is not the 

legislation as we see it, but rather the question of whether a 

government that has steadily eroded the education budget in the 

last couple of years is now going to be prepared, Mr. Speaker, to 

come forward with substantial amounts of new funding to allow 

for this rural extension initiative to be successfully put in place. 

And that is the key with respect to the Bill. But we support the 

basic principle, Mr. Speaker, of the Bill, which is to enhance the 

thrust of post-secondary education in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unlike Bill 46, Mr. Speaker, which is simply a 

blatant attack on the collective bargaining rights, the trade union 

rights, the seniority rights of employees in the urban community 

colleges and technical institutes, Bill 47, Mr. Speaker does not 

single out rural community college employees, and does not 

exempt them from the laws of The Trade Unions Act in the way 

that Bill 46 does to urban community college employees. 

 

Bill 47, Mr. Speaker, does make provision for rural employees in 

the community college and technical institute system to retain 

their union status, and it also makes provision for them to maintain 

their collective 

agreement. And therefore we also feel more favourably disposed 

to Bill 47, Mr. Speaker, on that account. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we have three important and fundamental 

objections to Bill 47, and I want to outline those now. These, Mr. 

Speaker, are not objections with respect to the basic principle of 

the Bill, but they are substantive objections to the way in which 

the legislation has been drafted. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, we object to the government’s conscious 

initiative to delete community interest courses from the mandate 

of the rural community college system. We’ve debated that matter 

in this legislature before. I only want to say today, Mr. Speaker, 

that the minister has consciously left the impression with the 

people of Saskatchewan that the community interest courses that 

were being offered by the rural community college system were 

somehow adding a financial burden onto that system, Mr. Speaker. 

The minister has somehow left us with the impression, and 

attempted to leave the public with the impression, that the 

community interest courses were costing Saskatchewan taxpayers 

a good deal of money. This, Mr. Speaker, was not the case. 

 

I invite the minister or any other member of this House to go to the 

rural community colleges of this province and to inquire about the 

financing arrangements for community interest courses, and that 

member will find that in the large majority of cases in rural 

Saskatchewan, community interest courses, Mr. Speaker, whether 

they be in the area of health care or in the area of agricultural 

machinery repair or whether they be such courses as cooking and 

ballroom dancing, were for the most part being offered on a 

break-even basis, Mr. Speaker 

 

These community interest courses were not costing the taxpayers 

money. They were primarily being paid for by the users of the 

courses, but they were being co-ordinated by the community 

colleges. And that, I think, Mr. Speaker, is the important point to 

make, that the community colleges were playing a co-ordinating 

role and role as the central resource for putting on these courses, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as a result of that, the loss of these community interest 

courses mean that many rural communities who had community 

college courses being offered in that community this spring do not 

have community interest courses being offered there this fall, nor 

do they have any other community college courses being offered. 

In other words, there are many rural communities that have 

completely lost all their courses being offered by the community 

college because the only courses that were being offered were 

community interest courses and they are now no longer part of the 

mandate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister is yelling across: 4 per cent of the 

courses offered. And I want to say to the minister that this is a 

calculation based on the number of hours of study. And this is just 

one of the ways, Mr. Speaker, in which the minister opposite has 

misled the public because he’s tried to leave the impression that 

these were 4 per cent of the courses. Well that’s not the case. 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3497 

 

What has happened, Mr. Speaker, is that more and more the 

community college system has gotten into adult basic education, 

which is good. But the students in adult basic education are 

full-time students putting in 35 or even 40 hours a week. Mr. 

Speaker, the people taking community interest courses are taking 

them for two or three hours a week, so naturally the number of 

hours that are associated with community interest courses are 

much less than the number of hours associated with adult basic 

education. 

 

(1200) 

 

But the point, Mr. Speaker, is that many rural hamlets and small 

rural communities in this province didn’t have adult basic 

education courses or university courses or vocational institute 

courses being offered in their communities, and they won’t have 

after this Bill passes. But they did have community interest 

courses being offered in their communities, and they were an 

important source of enjoyment and education and socialization in 

those small rural communities. And that provision, that part of the 

mandate of the community colleges, is now gone. 

 

And I say to the Minister of Education that this part of the 

community college mandate wasn’t costing the taxpayers of this 

province very much, not very much at all. In most cases, these 

courses were being run on a break-even basis. There’s simply no 

good reason for the Minister of Education removing these 

community interest courses from the mandate of the community 

college system, because what the minister is saying when he does 

that, Mr. Speaker, is that is no role for education for enjoyment 

and pleasure and for learning just for its own worth in the new 

mandate of the system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister is instead saying that the mandate of this system 

ought to be job-oriented, work-oriented only, training for a job. 

We don’t support that change in the mandate, Mr. Speaker, and we 

say there is no good reason, financially or educationally, for the 

Minister of Education to make that move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second point that we object to in Bill 47 is much 

the same point that I made with respect to Bill 46, and that is, Mr. 

Speaker, that we believe the time has come for the rural 

community college boards to be elected boards and not appointed 

boards, in the same way that we are of the view that in the urban 

centres the technical institutes and community colleges would be 

better governed by a locally elected board rather than by one 

centrally appointed board as envisioned by the minister. 

 

And as was the case in Bill 46, we believe that the faculty and staff 

who work for the community college system ought to have an 

elected representative, at least one elected representative, on the 

local community college board, in the same way that under Bill 46 

we proposed that local faculty and local staff in the community 

college and institute system ought to be represented on boards in 

Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert and Moose Jaw. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s our view therefore that we would be better 

served by a board of perhaps 10 people in each 

regional college that the minister proposes; that the majority of 

those members ought to be elected. If the minister wants to 

appoint a couple of people to round out the board or to bring a 

particular perspective to the board, he’s welcome to do that. We 

have no problem with that. 

 

But we believe that the minister would be well advised to follow 

the very successful model of the Prince Albert Regional 

Community College, in which the majority of board members 

were elected. And no one can deny that was the community 

college in Saskatchewan that was the most responsive to local 

needs, that was most responsive to students and faculty at the 

college, and that was most responsive to community organizations 

and employers that were interested in adult education, Mr. 

Speaker. And we believe that the Minister of Education would be 

well advised to apply that model to rural Saskatchewan and to the 

new regional college boards that he is establishing. 

 

So we call for elected boards with representative elected from a 

local community council made up of employers and community 

organizations that are interested in adult education. And in 

addition, Mr. Speaker, we call on the minister to make provision 

for elected representative of community college staff to be also on 

that board. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is the second area in which we disagree with 

the Bill that the Minister of Education has brought down. And on 

each of those scores, Mr. Speaker, we will be introducing 

amendments into this Assembly during Committee of the Whole 

to have the points that I’ve made inserted into the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a third objection to this Bill, and that is, Mr. 

Speaker, the provision that is made under this Bill to abolish the 

collective agreement and the trade union rights of members of the 

community college system who work in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

For some inexplicable reason, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Education has chosen to maintain and recognize the trade union 

rights of rural community college employees in rural 

Saskatchewan, but is saying to members of the community college 

staff in northern Saskatchewan that their trade union rights are not 

to be recognized under this Bill, that their seniority rights are not 

recognized under this Bill, and that their collective agreement is 

not recognized under this Bill. 

 

And I ask the Minister of Education to explain to members of this 

House, Mr. Speaker, how it is that the employees of Beauval at the 

West Side Community College are . . . who just decided to join 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union in July, Mr. 

Speaker, and who just had their certification order approved by the 

Labour Relations Board on September 15, why it is that those 

employees should have to vote once more, Mr. Speaker, on 

whether or not they want to belong to a trade union. 

 

Those employees have already made that decision, and this 

Minister of Education is saying to those employees that their 

decision is invalid. He is using legislation in this Assembly to 

specifically deny them the rights that they have just won, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is sheer and unadulterated union busting, and it 

is clearly not in the 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3498 

 

best interest of those employees. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we therefore call on the Minister of Education 

to withdraw the provisions of this Bill that deny northern 

employees their collective bargaining rights and their trade union 

status. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on some of the other 

reservations we have about this Bill from the point of view of its 

trade union provisions. Like Bill 46, Mr. Speaker, any employee 

who is transferred from a unionized college to a non-unionized 

college cannot take their trade union rights with them — once 

again, Mr. Speaker, in violation of section 37 of The Trade Union 

Act. 

 

This provision is contained in section 33(2) of this Bill — the 

Minister of Education or the local boards have the ability to 

transfer college employees from one college region to another, and 

should those employees be transferred from a unionized college 

region to a non-unionized college region, their right to be 

represented by SGEU and their collective agreement is lost. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we object to section 33(4) of this Bill, 

which abolishes the certification orders in the urban community 

colleges of this province. I’ve already outlined the arguments that 

we have in opposition to this when we were debating Bill 46, Mr. 

Speaker. We strongly object to this provision of the Bill, and once 

again we will be moving an amendment to strike that provision 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also object to the fact that under this legislation, 

as was the case will Bill 46, there is no provision for people whose 

jobs are abolished or deleted in the urban community college 

system to move into the public service. The Minister of Education 

is denying the employees who worked for Saskatchewan’s 

technical institutes, and who worked for Saskatchewan’s 

community colleges, to be able to move into the public service if 

their job in the college or institute system is being abolished, Mr. 

Speaker, And we also object to that. 

 

It has been standard practice, as I’ve mentioned in this House 

before, that when employees are transferred from one institute to 

another, that their trade union rights are transferred with them, and 

that their collective agreement is transferred with them. And it has 

been standard practice in this province, as was the case even with 

the employees that were transferred out of the public service and 

into the water corporation, that they were entitled, if their job in 

the water corporation was deleted, to apply for a job back in the 

public service. And that right is being denied to them under this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are some of the objections that we have to this Bill. There is 

one final objection that I want to make reference to and that, Mr. 

Speaker, is our objection to the decision by this government to 

amalgamate the three northern community college boards into one 

board, Mr. Speaker. The new boundaries that the Minister of 

Education has generally set for the regional college boards are not 

sensitively drawn up. 

As has been noted in previous debates in this House, when the 

boundaries for areas such as Prince Albert and Moose Jaw were 

drawn up, the rural areas immediately around Moose Jaw and 

immediately around Prince Albert are no longer serviced by those 

community colleges. They will now, Mr. Speaker, have to be 

serviced by regional colleges — community colleges that are very 

distant from those rural areas immediately around the urban 

centres that I just made reference to. That’s an unwise move by 

this government. There’s no reason why someone who lives just 

outside of Prince Albert should have to deal with the community 

college that is based 60 or 70 miles away from them, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s just foolishness. 

 

In the same way, Mr. Speaker, we object to the move that this 

minister has made to amalgamate the three northern community 

colleges into one. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that those three 

northern community college boundaries accurately reflected 

communities of interest in the North and trading patterns in the 

North, and there is little to be said for, again, a move towards 

centralizing decision making into one board that will be appointed 

by this government. 

 

So we believe that the Minister of Education, and the people of 

this province, and the Legislative Assembly, would have been 

much better served by maintaining the three northern community 

college boards as they were, establishing them as regional 

community college boards and allowing them to offer university 

and technical institute programming in the same way that the rural 

regional college boards are being allowed to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are some of the items that we object to in this 

Bill. Nevertheless, we support the central thrust of this Bill and, 

therefore, since the second reading vote is simply based on the 

question of whether or not the opposition supports the basic 

principle of the Bill, which is in this case offering first- and 

second-year university and technical institute training in rural 

Saskatchewan, on second reading we will be supporting Bill 47. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make some comments in 

regards to Bill 47. 

 

I would like to make comments, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the 

issue of the governance and control of the new Northlands Career 

College. I would also like to talk a little bit about the staff morale 

and also programming and also some implied thrusts in the Act in 

regards to programming. 

 

First of all, in regards to control and governance, I think it’s very 

clear from the outset that the Act itself gives more power and more 

control to the government. That is very clear. It takes power away 

from people and moves it to the minister. In other words, what we 

have is a situation where we have a power-hungry Education 

minister wanting to wrest control of education from people in 

northern Saskatchewan to himself at a greater scale than ever 

before in the history of northern adult education. 

 

I will point two examples to that. The first example is this. 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3499 

 

In the new Act it states that there will be an appointed board. One 

of the clear things, one of the clearest messages I gave to the 

minister earlier on this year was that northern people were tired of 

appointed systems which were controlled especially by the 

minister or the government. 

 

(1215) 

 

They wanted to move in a new era of adult education where the 

control would be from the people. The people could elect their 

members and they would be given the chance to be responsible for 

adult education. This was a clear message that I gave to the 

minister earlier on before he created this Bill. But the minister of 

course has complete disrespect for the people of the North. The 

minister feels that the people of the North are not ready to govern 

their adult education institutions. The minister feels that there is no 

way at this stage in history that we could move to a more 

responsible elected system of adult education in the North. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just ask the Gabriel Dumont Institute how 

they feel about our . . . 

 

Mr. Goulet — I would say, Mr. Minister, to the minister that is 

talking about Gabriel Dumont Institute right now, that the same 

issue is there. He tried to wrest power from the Gabriel Dumont 

Institute, but it was only because the board resisted and brought 

the minister to his senses that a more proper SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

agreement was made, because initially they wanted to do away 

with the Gabriel Dumont Institute board. The people stood up, and 

luckily for a change in that one instance, the minister was brought 

to his senses and he listened for a moment. 

 

But getting back to the control in regards to northern control, 

that’s the real key issue. We’ve had it for many, many years where 

we have stated that’s the direction to go, and that by only giving 

the people the responsibility could development occur. You can’t 

have the government hovering over your head and telling you 

what to do in every case. You have to allow the people the 

autonomy to govern themselves in their adult education 

institutions. And that was a clear message that I gave to the 

minister. But I guess he does not recognize this sensitive and 

important question as far as the North is concerned. Continually, 

we have insensitive practice, you know, through what has 

happened this year and also in terms of this new Bill in regard to 

northern control. 

 

I would say this, as far as the minister is concerned. I think he is 

stuck in the Dark Ages of the past. We were moving in the 

direction of greater responsibility and control in the North. The 

minister moves to less control. 

 

In regard to the boards, we had 22 board members in northern 

Saskatchewan. The minister’s proposal is that he could cut it as 

low as four, and he will only agree to a maximum of 10. That’s 

one-fifth to less than one-half of what it was before. There’ll be a 

lot less community representation from the many communities 

who demand good, solid adult education programming in their 

communities. That is lost. 

What the government is proposing is, and I look at this new Bill 

. . . And I was in tune with the other Community Colleges Act. As 

a former principal of the La Ronge Region Community College, 

and also having taken part in the development of adult education, 

especially in the community college area for a three-year period, I 

well recognize what the Act was. And sure, we knew there were 

restrictions in the former Act in two cases, and we were trying to 

talk to the ministers and say we should be granted more autonomy 

in regards to, you know, the ministerial control. 

 

But I see this new Act and it’s amazing. We start with control. 

Everything is subject to the minister. I haven’t seen an education 

Act of this sort for a long time. Here we have section 4. Even 

dealing with regional areas it’s controlled by the minister, and of 

course he did that unilaterally by moving three areas and putting 

them into one. The minister has final and firm control on that, and 

he also has control on section 11 in regards to employees and also 

the remuneration and salary of it that really . . . what will the 

future of collective bargaining mean in the North. I mean section 

11(b) has it under the control of the minister. 

 

There is also a control element in regards to the setting of the 

direction of the colleges. The people no longer set the direction in 

regards to northern education — the minister does. That again is a 

question, you know, greater control. 

 

When I look at section 14(a) and so on, there’s a lot of aspects of 

even property control. I mean, why don’t you have that under the 

autonomy of the colleges? You look at other . . . section 15(1), (2), 

(3), section (4) on overspending, section 15(3) on budget. You can 

even fire the board any time from section 15(5). If they overspend 

a little bit on their budget he can fire the board — just like that. He 

has the power to do that. 

 

He has the power to do auditor . . . shades of the auditor Bill that 

we are talking about in this legislature. We have section 19 on an 

inspector. We have section 21. I can go on and on. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have never seen such great government and 

ministerial control in the history of the education Acts in this 

province, and this pertains to the community colleges in this 

province. So I as a community college person and a former 

employee and principal, we’re always concerned about that, but 

now we see that it is even worse. And this is a government who 

promised up and down that they would go for more local 

autonomy and local control and community participation. It was 

said left and right, but now they are moving in a direction of more 

direct ministerial control on the budget, even controlling salaries 

of the employees so that the board cannot have autonomy in that 

decision making. There will be really no collective bargaining per 

se. We were concerned about that aspect before, and so on. 

 

One aspect also in regards to the community college employees, 

which will be the new Northlands Career College employees is 

that it strikes me as a bit ridiculous when the process of 

certification was taking place just last month in regards to 

certifying the people in Westside 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3500 

 

Community College to the SGEU, that the minister disallows that 

now, that it is not considered. 

 

There is no historical continuum from what happens from one 

month to the next. There is absolutely no planning from this 

minister. He has absolutely no concept of transition, and I really 

feel that a lot more consideration should be paid in regards to the 

transfer of employees from the former three colleges to the new 

colleges. It’s not very clear in regards to the Act, especially in 

regards to section 32(5) which says that: 

 

. . . the Northlands Career College is not bound by: 

 

(a) any order of the Labour Relations Board with respect to 

(the transfers) . . . 

 

So that some clarification needs to be made by the minister in that 

regard. Also, when we talk about the transfers from the rest of the 

community colleges and the institutes, my understanding is that 

they may be able to be transferred into the northern areas, and 

there needs to be greater classification from the minister as to 

whether or not, you know, that it’s true. But again there is 

contradictions in the Act which says that “it is not bound by.” 

Nothing is bound by in regards to the recognition of the rights of 

the employees. So that’s an important point. 

 

And as we look to any development, the employees, the 

instructors, and you yourself, Mr. Speaker, as a person who has 

been working in the education field, educational change comes 

from the practitioners, the people who work on a daily basis with 

the students. The essence of change also comes from that. And 

unless there is good morale and good support and good 

recognition from their input and their consultation, the impact is a 

downward trend on morale. A lot of people feel very highly 

uneasy about the situation. 

 

And as a result, a lot of the concern in regards to the dealing with 

the new government and their power and control becomes an 

important problem that they have to deal with, along with the daily 

aspects of dealing with the special situation of education in 

northern Saskatchewan. I mean there is tremendous enough 

problems in dealing with curriculum change and dealing with the 

aspects of revising curriculum in the North without having to 

worry about a power-hungry minister in this province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The other aspect I would like to mention a little bit is this: that I 

felt, Mr. Minister, that there was a little bit of a stress in the Bill in 

regards to programming, where he definitely looks at private 

business in regards to the North. 

 

And I looked at other aspects of the . . . The same central thing 

occurred with the development of SIAST, where he says that 

SIAST will be managed in part using modern private sector 

management techniques. And the same ideology of open for 

business and private sector involvement, greater . . . 

 

I mean to a certain degree that needs to happen in the adult 

education system. But the Premier and also the Minister of 

Education are going a little bit overboard in this aspect. The 

control of education at the community 

level is not only one of business people. Business people are an 

important aspect of it, but they’re not also the only ones. There are 

people who build the schools that are there. The workers in the 

community that are an important aspect of the development, they 

know exactly what the level of training is required throughout, but 

there is absolutely no mention of that. 

 

There is also the special aspect of the cultural and social realms of 

northern Saskatchewan — the impact of the Indian-Métis 

community in northern Saskatchewan. The minister is . . . seems 

to be moving in a direction of getting only advice from the 

business people, but he won’t get advice from Indian-Métis people 

in northern Saskatchewan or all of the various levels of workers in 

northern Saskatchewan. He doesn’t even get the advice from the 

people who teach the courses at the community college level. 

Instead he completely disregards those. 

 

And I feel very strongly that the minister has to move in the 

direction where he really consults with the educators; he really 

consults with the community people and not only the business 

sector; that he really consults with non-native people as well as 

Indian-Métis people in the North, and that’s very clear, and that 

has to come out in more clarity as he applies this Bill in the future. 

 

But because of his narrow-mindedness, and because of the . . . say 

of the open-for-business strategy in the past six years, Mr. 

Speaker, I am a little . . . I shudder a little bit now that he’s going 

to apply the same concepts. The same disastrous six-year concepts 

that we’ve had in our economy he going to apply the same thing in 

the educational establishment. And I feel, and I shudder to think 

what impact that will be in regards to education. That’ll really put 

us back in the Dark Ages. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I . . . as an educator, has been raised in 

regards and looked at the development of northern Saskatchewan, 

am making these comments to make sure that the minister indeed 

takes the positive approach. I wished he would make a change and 

get an elected board in the North. Recognize the importance. Pay 

your respects to the people of northern Saskatchewan. Give them 

full autonomy and responsibility. 

 

When changes are made in regards to employees, fully consult 

them. The educational practitioners are the most important and 

fundamental aspect of change in the educational scene. And if you 

completely disregard them, there is low-level morale. We want to 

create a positive thrust in that area, and hopefully, as we move into 

the future to bring forth this new Bill, we could move in that 

direction. I certainly hope that the minister can change his 

approach and start dealing more effectively with the practitioner. 

 

(1230) 

 

The other aspect, I hope that the minister is not stuck on a 

narrow-minded, open-for-business strategy in the educational 

establishment and comes out with a two-pronged approach that I 

hear, you know, via Maggie Thatcher from England, where you 

try and stream your vocational into academic and vocational 

education. I 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3501 

 

hope that he’s not moving in that direction on his 

open-for-business strategy, because that seems to be what is 

implied in the adult education world in Britain at the present time, 

which means that the control is wrested from the community level 

and that different important groups in the community — such as, 

you know, the workers who build the schools and the roads and 

the infrastructure of the community — are involved also in the 

process of improving the dynamics and the development of 

education, that the practitioners are also in the same way. 

 

So with these, I hope that the minister takes it to heart and takes 

these recommendations in a positive manner, so that when he 

applies the Bill, when he actually votes for it and he moves in that 

direction, that education is not only business-oriented; it’s got to 

be people-oriented as well, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that the 

minister finally grasps that concept. And I hope that he changes 

the control also, and I hope to see that as we debate this Bill in the 

future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

address a few words on Bill 47. They’ll be no more than that. 

 

I want to say that, as my colleague from Saskatoon said, that we 

will be voting for the Bill. 

 

The provision of university courses in rural areas has long been a 

goal of many rural areas. I recall 15 years ago in Moosomin 

presenting a brief to a university commission. We wanted 

university courses in Moosomin. It’s long been a goal of rural 

people. 

 

I regret so say, Mr. Speaker, that the laudable goal has been badly 

tarnished by some of the provisions of this Bill, and I want to refer 

to them. I want to echo what my colleague from Cumberland said. 

I don’t pretend to be as articulate or as knowledgeable as he about 

northern affairs. 

 

I do recall a couple of years ago having a round . . . we called them 

round table discussions on family stress. One of the hearings was 

held in northern Saskatchewan. The then member from 

Shaunavon, the present member from Elphinstone, and myself 

were the commission. I recall spending a good deal of the morning 

talking about adult education. The former concept had been one of 

the bright lights of northern Saskatchewan prior to ‘82. There was 

room for improvement, but it had been one of the success stories, I 

gather. What happened since then to NORTEP (northern teacher 

education program) was not one of the success stories. I hope that 

the comments made by the member from Cumberland are taken to 

heart and services to those people who so badly need them are 

restored. 

 

I want to make a comment with respect to the collective 

bargaining provisions. I say to the member from Weyburn and the 

minister, this is just not an acceptable way to treat people. The 

member from Weyburn and the member from Melville and the 

member from Yorkton have almost a tradition of ignorance with 

respect to collective bargaining. They don’t know what it is. They 

don’t know 

the origins of it. They don’t know how it works. All they know is 

they’re against it. The member from Melville made that 

abundantly clear in his comments yesterday to the SFL 

(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour), that they do not understand 

what collective bargaining is. 

 

Collective bargaining and a union is a voluntary association of 

people who voluntarily get together, who voluntarily remain in 

association for the purposes of bargaining their rights and their 

conditions of employment with their employer. It is not some sort 

of a gangster-dominated eastern organization which enslaves 

workers. Nor, Mr. Speaker, is it an organization which is able to 

seek unfair advantage for its members. 

 

To listen to the members opposite talk about big eastern union 

bosses, I’d like to hear them name one that they think operates in 

this province. To hear them talk, one would think that the trade 

unions which represent employees in this and other areas are 

dominated by gangsters, exist solely for the interests of the big 

eastern union bosses, and they’re doing irreparable damage to the 

Saskatchewan economy. None of that is true — none of that is 

true. 

 

This particular section, and the section in Bill 46, are as violent a 

transgression of the rights of people with respect to collective 

bargaining as I have seen. These sections, which in a few sections 

sweep away the rights of people, are just not acceptable. This is 

not an acceptable way to deal with people in a democratic society. 

And if this government opposite doesn’t know that, they’re going 

to be replaced by a government that does understand that. This is 

just not acceptable to the public of Saskatchewan, and that’s true 

whether you live in Regina, or whether you live in Coronach, or in 

Semans. 

 

It is part of the fabric of Saskatchewan people that we may 

disagree with people that live in other parts of the province and 

their demands, but we all expect everybody to be treated fairly. No 

one can pretend that this section represents a fair treatment of 

those employees. We will, Mr. Speaker, be saying a good deal 

more about this in Committee of the Whole when we get there. 

 

I want to express one other comment, and that has to do with what 

I regard as the virtual death of adult education in this province. 

When these colleges were originally set up, they were set up . . . 

and the philosophy was that learning a lifelong activity. It’s 

something that we do when we’re young, but it’s something we 

need to do when we’re adults. We need to . . . 

 

And Hon. Member: — Do you disagree with that? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — No, but I think the drafters of this Bill did. 

When you take away . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I wonder if 

the member from Weyburn might contain his comments until his 

closing remarks. You’ll get an opportunity to do that. I find the 

member from Weyburn neither humorous nor helpful, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Obnoxious. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Obnoxious is quite a good word. 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3502 

 

Mr. Speaker, the loss of courses, whether it be auto mechanics for 

housewives, whether it be artistic courses on artistic endeavours 

— ballet or basket weaving, whatever your tastes may be; whether 

it be introducing adults to the use of computers, this is basically 

what adult education is about. We aren’t going to attract an 

endless number of adults into courses which are career oriented. A 

great many adults, and that’s particularly true in rural 

Saskatchewan, already have their careers mapped out for them and 

they’re not likely to change. 

 

What the concept of lifelong education means is that we should be 

able to follow interests that we have. If I happen to develop a 

sudden interest in auto mechanics — and it would be very sudden, 

it doesn’t exist in any large measure at the moment — but if I were 

to develop that there should be a scope for that. There should be 

scope for people to learn about things that are of interest to them. 

That’s largely going to disappear and these regional colleges will 

be, to a far larger extent than they have been, career orientated. 

But that is needed. 

 

We also need that broader concept of teaching people and giving 

them an opportunity to learn things which are of interest to them 

which may have no real bearing on their careers as such. It just 

enriches and enlivens their lives. 

 

With that I say again, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not going to be 

opposing this. We are going to be introducing some amendments, 

and we shall see after the amendments what our position will be. 

Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 51 — An Act to 

Provide for the Imposition of Taxes on and the Collection of 

Taxes from Certain Purchasers of Certain Fuels and to 

Provide for Rebates of Taxes to Certain Purchasers be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak on Bill 

51 which is the Bill which will in effect increase the gas tax from 

zero to 7 cents a litre on every purchase of fuel in this province. I 

find that the timing of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, is quite unusual. We 

hear from every member of the government that the opposition is 

delaying the sitting of the legislature. Well I want to point out to 

the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, that the introduction of 

the . . . and the announcing of the gas tax was made on June 17, 

which was sitting day number 22 in this legislature. 

 

It took the government not one week or two weeks or five weeks 

or six weeks to get this Bill tabled so we could debate the issue 

and discuss the pros and cons of the implementation of this gas 

tax. Rather, Mr. Speaker, it has taken over 60 sitting days from the 

time they announced the tax increase until the time they 

introduced this Bill — 60 sitting days. It was introduced on day 

number 22. The first reading of this Bill was not undertaken until 

October 7, which was day 92, which was 70 days actually, Mr. 

Speaker, which is in total over four months. And the second 

reading never came until late last night. You have the government 

again making an accusation that is totally 

unfounded, making an accusation which has no truth to it at all, 

trying to mislead the public of this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want the people of this province to understand 

that this is not an unusual tactic of the government opposite. The 

government of this province has continued to mislead people in 

terms of every commitment they’ve made prior to elections, 

during elections, and even after election campaigns. I see in the 

Leader-Post yesterday, Mr. Speaker, an article where the Premier 

says: 

 

. . . he is seriously considering steps to limit the amount of 

time spent in the legislature discussing the provincial budget. 

 

This is what he is quoted as saying. 

 

The provincial budget was introduced in the legislature June 

17 (he says) and still has not been approved by the legislature 

. . . 

 

How can we approve the estimates when it takes 70 sitting days, 

four months after the announcement of the budget, to introduce a 

piece of legislation which makes the budget an honest budget, in 

the sense of passing a law in order to collect taxes. What kind of 

silly statement is this by our Premier? Making a suggestion that 

the opposition is taking too much time to conduct the opposition’s 

business in this House. 

 

One of our responsibilities to hold this government accountable on 

the actions that they undertake. The action they’ve undertaken in 

this last budget was to increase the fuel sales tax from zero cents a 

litre to 7 cents a litre. 

 

(1245) 

 

And they have not been called accountable until last night and this 

morning. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

Saskatchewan recognize this is another example of something that 

they have indicated in public that they are doing, when in fact it’s 

the opposite of the truth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fuel tax in my view is an unfair, cruel, 

bureaucratic nightmare. What this government has done is they 

have promised, when they eliminated the gas tax back in 1982, 

never to reimpose the gas tax as long as there was a Conservative 

government in this province. The Premier himself made that 

commitment just outside this legislature in May of 1982. What we 

have seen as well, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier and the other 

Conservative members around this province going around — and 

other members in the country going around to various meetings, 

speaking to various newspaper or radio and television people, 

saying that the Conservative government when they become 

government will do away with red tape, that we will minimize red 

tape for business, that we will minimize red tape for individuals 

and citizens of this province. 

 

What this fuel tax has done, Mr. Speaker, has not reduced red tape 

for anybody. What it has done, it has increased the amount of red 

tape in this province by a percentage 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3503 

 

factor that I can’t even calculate. What they have done is, not 

eliminate red tape, they have brought in 641,000 licensed vehicle 

operators in this province into a red tape nightmare that is second 

to none, that I’m aware of, in North America. Six hundred and 

forty-one thousand licensed vehicle operators in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, who now must on a weekly basis collect their gas tax 

receipts, put them into a file folder or an envelope and save them 

up. And next year perhaps, if they still have any left, they’ll file for 

a refund. 

 

If each one of those operators file for a refund as a result of 

purchasing gas once a week over the next year, they will generate 

around 34 million tax receipts or 35 million gas tax receipts or 

more, and that is involving 641,000 operators of vehicles. Plus, 

Mr. Speaker, I contend, a number of civil servants that they can’t 

even calculate, who will have to go through these receipts and try 

and determine whether they are legitimate, to try and determine 

whether they can in fact provide a refund to them. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a clear breaking of their promise once 

again. They promised less red tape, and they have in fact 

undertaken through this fuel tax increase to provide more red tape 

in this province to more individuals than in the history of this 

province, than in the history of this country, I maintain. 

 

What we also see, Mr. Speaker, which is a very, very sad 

operation on the part of this government, is that many of these 

people can see that there is an opportunity for an abuse of the 

program. You have heard stories, members opposite have heard 

stories, about individuals who are buying cigarettes by the litre so 

that they can get a tax receipt. We have heard stories, Mr. Speaker, 

of gas station operators asked to provide them with blank receipts. 

We’ve heard stories of customers saying to gas station operators, 

oh, just give me another 10 or $20 on the receipt. And I’m not 

saying that this is something that I am encouraging. I think it’s not 

a good thing to encourage. But what the system has done, Mr. 

Speaker, is provided a lot of people with an opportunity to abuse 

the system. 

 

So I wonder what the government’s going to do come next fall or 

next spring when they finally decide to pay some of this money 

back when, in fact, the number of dollars that’s been requested for 

refund actually surpasses the amount they’ve collected. I wonder 

what the government would do if that was the case? 

 

I heard a story the other day about somebody who robbed a gas 

station or tried to rob a gas station. And they weren’t looking for 

cigarettes or fuel, they were looking for the gas receipt books. 

Those are now more valuable commodities out there than some of 

the products that are in the stations. 

 

But I think that’s a sad commentary, Mr. Speaker, on the type of 

government that we have today. A government which has, in 

every campaign promise, promised to reduce red tape, promised to 

improve our governments, promised to provide the people of this 

province with some fiscal responsibility, and in every case they 

have failed on those promises. It’s a question in my view, Mr. 

Speaker, of credibility. They have no credibility with 

people that they speak with or people that read their literature. 

They always make commitments that they can’t keep. 

 

What this gas tax does as well, Mr. Speaker, is not just burden 

more of the people of this province with red tape, but what it also 

does is it adds extra expense. We’ve seen the dental therapists, 411 

in number, be terminated for providing a very good service to the 

children of this province. And now we’re going to have to see the 

government hire hundreds of more people to process these gas tax 

receipts. 

 

I think it’s a ludicrous situation, it’s a ludicrous tax. People in this 

province are laughing at that government, they’re laughing at the 

Premier for many issues, but in particular this one. They think it’s 

the craziest thing that’s ever happened in this province. They’re 

asking me whether Monty Python is writing their policies. It’s just 

unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in times of tough economy a government has to 

become more involved in the economy in terms of money 

generation, job generation and program and economic 

development generation. 

 

When this economy is in need of a shot in the arm, what they’ve 

done with this Bill is shoot the economy in the head. They’ve 

taken $100 million out of the pockets of taxpayers and licensed 

vehicle operators in this province, and instead of using that money 

for a purpose which is of some benefit to this province, that is, 

letting the consumers and taxpayers and vehicle operators spend 

that money on business items in the economy to generate other 

work activity, other economic activity, they have in essence, Mr. 

Speaker, withdrawn that $100 million a year from the economy of 

this province when it’s in desperate need of an injection of 

economic activity. 

 

The fuel tax, Mr. Speaker, is a hidden tax which, in my view, and 

in the view of almost all municipal councillors and politicians that 

I’ve spoken to, increased property taxes. And the way that will do 

it is because the fuel tax now has to be paid by the transportation 

systems in the cities and the urban areas. They have not budgeted 

. . . their operating grants have not increased. They’ve not 

budgeted for that increase because this provincial budget, this tax 

increase, was introduced after the municipalities approved their 

budgets. 

 

So what’s going to have to happen, Mr. Speaker, is that these 

municipalities will have to transfer this tax increase on to the 

ratepayers of the urban municipalities. The rural municipalities 

will be forced with increased operating costs as well, and therefore 

the ratepayers in rural municipalities will be faced with the same 

tax increase. 

 

School boards will be increasing their taxes as well because they 

have a fairly large bus fleet, or number of bus fleets, around this 

province, and they are committed by this Bill, by this government, 

to pay these taxes. And, Mr. Speaker, in these times when the 

economy is down, when rural people and urban people alike are in 

the same proposition of having to look at increased food and 

clothing costs and an increased cost of living, they’re being asked 

to contribute towards the mismanagement of 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3504 

 

this government. 

 

The fuel tax increase does not address the problem of the 

mismanagement of this government — that’s very clear, Mr. 

Speaker. Rather than looking at their own operation, looking at the 

expenditure of $2 million a month on advertising, rather than 

looking at some of their patronage appointments, rather than 

looking at the way that they’re providing all kinds of tax breaks 

for oil companies and banks, they have instead, Mr. Speaker, 

ignored the options and the choices that they have, and instead, 

Mr. Speaker, they have increased the fuel tax to people in this 

province. The other interesting item about the fuel tax, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the fuel tax is not just 7 cents a litre in an isolated 

way. It has been increased, Mr. Speaker, from what it used to be. 

When the gas tax was removed, it was 28 cents a gallon, 6 cents a 

litre. Now it has gone up to 7 cents a litre, 32 cents a gallon. 

 

Not only has the government opposite broken their promise with 

respect to never reimposing the gas tax, they have even increased 

it. They’ve had the incredible audacity to increase the tax more 

than what it was before. I think that’s hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, 

and I believe that the citizens of this province would support me in 

that contention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other comments I’d like to make with regard to 

the gas tax is that it also affects our economy in other ways besides 

increased taxes to citizens and ratepayers in this province. It’s a 

betrayal of what they have promised that they would not do. But 

what this gas tax does as well is impose on small business another 

tax. It represents a contradictory decision, in my view, harmful to 

small business in both rural and urban centres. I’ve indicated that 

there’s $100 million that has been taken out of the economy by 

this government. What this government does not realize is that that 

money would have been spent in the business community. To 

quote one business leader . . . even their business contacts are 

saying to the public of this province that they are not happy. And 

Mr. Garth Whyte from the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business quotes: 

 

It takes away a competitive advantage Saskatchewan 

business enjoyed. 

 

Even the business community recognize the dramatic effect that 

this fuel tax will have. With regard to tourism, Mr. Speaker, it also 

represents a contradictory policy which prevents growth in the 

tourism industry. The PC gas tax has helped to increase the price 

differential between the United States and the Canadian gasoline. 

This has a negative impact on our economy very generally, and 

also specifically. And it impacts on industries such as tourism 

because if you have a number of people who are touring the 

country, they do it, according to the tourist statistics, 85 per cent of 

them use private automobiles. They are not going to go to a 

province or consume their fuel in a province where the gas prices 

are unusually high. And in this case it’s going to have an effect on 

our tourist business. 

 

I have, Mr. Speaker, as well, some comments to support that. Mr. 

Whyte said in an interview of the Leader-Post, June 18, that he 

had reservations about the 7 per cent gas 

tax. “The one tax . . .” He quotes: 

 

The one tax that concerns me is the gas tax. It takes away a 

competitive advantage Saskatchewan businesses enjoy. 

 

And I’ve spoken to many business people, Mr. Speaker, about 

that, in particular some of the gas station operators in the southern 

part of the province. They tell me that their gas volume has 

declined since the increase of the gas tax. They tell me, as well, 

that this gas tax is something which is being abused more and 

more on a regular basis, and on top of that it’s adding to their costs 

of doing business. 

 

There’s a very fine margin in the fuel business at the retail level. 

And what this government has done, it’s passed on some of their 

red tape costs to these fuel operators. And that again, Mr. Speaker, 

means less money spent at the station level on labour costs and 

other improvements to the station. 

 

“Canadian motorists . . .” I have an article here as well from July 

27, and it says that: 

 

Canadian motorists, once sheltered from high world oil 

prices, have been paying higher pump prices than their U.S. 

counterparts for the past two years.” 

 

And much of the consternation, Mr. Speaker, is on the shoulders 

of the border service station operators and tourism officials and 

exporters alike. 

 

And I go on, Mr. Speaker, to quote: 

 

The price difference obviously has a negative impact on the 

economy and transportation-dependent industries and a 

severe impact on tourism. 

 

And this is from the national . . . international article in the 

Star-Phoenix of Monday, July 27. 

 

Michael McNeil is a spokesman for the Canadian Automobile 

Association, and he notes that 85 per cent of tourism travel in 

North America is done by automobile. And I’d venture to say that 

even more of that is done in Saskatchewan, and proper. 

 

I have, as well, some supporting evidence, Mr. Speaker, from the 

school boards. School boards are now paying as much as $40,000 

a year more on school bus transportation as a result of the 

province’s new fuel tax of 7 cents a litre. And I have a quote here 

from Jake Volk, who is the SSTA director, the Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association executive director, and he says: 

 

Some schools boards, especially those in rural areas, have 

been severely hit by this tax. The Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association estimates the gas tax will cost 

Saskatchewan school boards $1,500,000 in additional 

transportation costs annually. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

  



 

October 23, 1987 

 

 

3505 

 

One of the most frustrating aspects of the tax is that it was 

announced after the school boards had set their school tax 

rates. If it had been announced before, school boards would 

at least have had the option of raising taxes to cover the cost 

of the gas tax. 

 

Roger Zelinski, the secretary-treasurer of the Buffalo Plains 

School Division, said he expects his board’s transportation costs 

will increase $14,000 this year as a direct result of the gas tax. 

 

It’s nearing 1 o’clock. I beg leave to adjourn the debate, Mr. 

Speaker. I have more to say on this. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


