













































August 12, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 12, 1987 

 

1725 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you, and through you to the other members of the 

Legislative Assembly, some visitors from outside our country 

who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery, and their names are 

Rob and Suzie Leitner. They’re visiting us here from Cairns, 

Australia — more often improperly pronounced Cairns, 

Australia, Mr. Speaker. But this was the site for the original 

meetings for the free trader countries of which Canada is a 

member of. 

 

They’re here visiting friends in Regina, and as I understand 

they’ve had an opportunity to take in some of the Western 

Canada Summer Games. And I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to welcome these visitors here to our country, from 

Australia, and I’d ask them to stand and be acknowledged. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 

Assembly, a relative of mine, and also I would say happily, a 

special friend of mine who is visiting today. It’s my brother, 

Terry Hagel, who is visiting from Calgary where he is a special 

education teacher in the Calgary Separate School Division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members in the Assembly to help 

welcome him here to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I'd like to 

introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, a special 

guest from France who is with two of my constituents, Bob and 

Karen Richardson, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And Mr. 

Bertrand Issard is a student form Louviers, France, which is 

near Versailles. He is staying with Mr. and Mrs. Richardson in 

Melville on a student exchange, and they’ve brought him in to 

observe the workings of our legislature today. I would like all 

members to welcome my constituents and their special guest, 

Mr Bertrand Issard. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 

today to introduce, through you and to this House, a group of 45 

seniors from the town of Humboldt in my constituency. They 

are here with their president, Agnes Kochin, the chaperons, 

Robert Dagenais and Marlene Heibert, and bus driver, Bruce 

Lucas. 

 

This is a very active group of people in Humboldt, with 

approximately 500 members, and they provide many activities 

for the seniors in the area. And I look forward to meeting them 

afterwards for coffee, and I would like to have the House 

welcome them today. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

also join the member from Humboldt in extending a very warm 

welcome to some pretty wonderful people and old friends of 

mine from Humboldt who are here. It’s good to see them all in 

the Legislative Assembly, and I join with members in extending 

to them our best wishes to a very enjoyable trip to Regina and 

an enjoyable visit in the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly 

my pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and through you 

to the members of the Legislative Assembly, a group from my 

home town . . . or home city of Melfort. They have just arrived 

in the gallery; they have just taken their seats. 

 

This group, Mr. Speaker, is the part of the committee for the 

1988 Saskatchewan Summer Games that the city of Melfort has 

the distinct pleasure of hosting. the committee is . . . And we’re 

certainly very proud of the work the committee has done. We’re 

certainly very honoured to have been selected as the city and as 

the site for the 1988 Summer Games. 

 

This committee is headed by Mayor Arnold Orr from the city of 

Melfort; Dr. Lionel Lavoie, the executive director; Bob 

Degelman, vice executive director; Dub Henderson, the game 

services director; Doug Lyon, sports director; and I believe 

Heather Audette, their executive secretary, is along as well. 

 

I do want to welcome you personally, ladies and gentlemen, and 

I would ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to join 

with me in wishing them the best of luck. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Canadian Transport Commission Decision on Regina 

Rail Line Relocation 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Minister of Highways and Transportation. It 

deals with the decision this week from the Canadian Transport 

Commission on rail relocation in Regina. The minister knows 

that I and most Regina residents fully support the idea that the 

rail yards and lines now running through Regina should be 

moved. There are serious safety and pollution problems for 

many Regina neighbourhoods. 

 

My concern is that the problem isn’t simply shifted from one 

neighbourhood to another. Those rail lines should be relocated 

far enough away from existing homes that they won’t have to 

go through this long and expensive process within a very few 

years again. 

 

With that in mind, with the Minister of Transportation tell us 

whether the Government of Saskatchewan will appeal this latest 

CTC decision to the Mulroney cabinet and urge 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1726 

 

that Regina’s rail lines be relocated farther away from existing 

neighbourhoods in north Regina? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be happy to 

respond to the hon. member’s question. And certainly this item 

is a very, very topical item. The decision has only come down 

in the last few days. I do understand the Minister of Urban 

Affairs is reviewing the decision. It certainly is a topic that is 

not without controversy. 

 

I would not want to commit at this time what the position of the 

government may or may not be. I can give you my fullest 

assurance that the Minister of Urban Affairs, as well as the 

cabinet and the caucus of this government, will look at all 

angles of the situation. We will assess it, and in due course I’m 

sure that we will present to you the official position of our 

government. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. A new question to 

the Minister of the Environment, if I may. During your 

estimates a few weeks ago in this legislature, you told me that 

you and your department would see to it that the relocated rail 

lines would meet all environmental standards, especially with 

respect to the transportation of hazardous goods. But the CTC 

decision will see those rail lines located with 300 metres of 

existing homes in north Regina. That’s much closer than the 

regulations respecting the transportation of hazardous goods 

allow. 

 

My question to the minister is: what do you propose to do to 

make sure that those regulations are met? And will you 

encourage your colleague, the Minister of Transportation, to 

bring this problem to the federal government’s attention? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Swan: — I’d like to advise the hon. member that the 

report is new. It’s just been placed before the public. My 

department is review that report, but it’s pretty hard for us to 

say yes, you can go ahead, or you cant’ go ahead, until we have 

some firm decision that there is going to be a rail line relocation 

and where that relocation is going to take place. At this point 

it’s not firm enough, and our department will not be making a 

final decision on it. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the CTC has brought down a 

decision, and the decision is that that is where it’s going to be 

located. 

 

I have a new question I’d like to address to the Premier in the 

absence of the Minister of Urban Affairs, who appears to be 

using the dispute over the location of the new lines as an excuse 

to cut funding to the project completely. 

 

I say again that the rail line relocation is not in dispute. 

Everyone agrees that it should be moved, including myself. All 

the people of Regina North want is that we locate the new lines 

a little farther north from existing neighbourhoods so we don’t 

have this problem all over again in a few years. 

I ask the Premier whether or not the provincial government has 

committed funds to rail line relocation this year, and is so, 

where does this appear in the budget? And will you tell the 

people of Regina that you remain financially committed to the 

concept of rail line relocation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I take the hon. member at 

his word that he does endorse rail line relocation in the city of 

Regina and that, in fact, he and his colleagues will now publicly 

support rail relocation. I’m not so sure that has been the case in 

the past, but I’ll take him at his word. 

 

Given that, the key is, is to find the best way to do it if, in fact, 

it is environmentally sound and it meets all the rules and 

regulations. The best place to put it . . . Or if you can’t move it 

far enough away, what are the kinds of things you could do with 

respect to the corridor that the member and I have talked about 

that would make it reasonable for people that live in the area? 

 

So we’re prepared to look at all options, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll 

give the member that assurance. So we’ll examine any ideas 

that come forward, either where it should be, or how it should 

be put forward, and who is all going to pay for it. And 

obviously the people of Regina are involved, the city is 

involved, and governments at various levels. We are open to 

suggestions and ideas of how to best do it. 

 

Relocation of Residents of North Park Centre 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, you will have 

received many letters from friends and relatives of residents of 

North Park Centre in Prince Albert, a facility for mentally 

handicapped adults that you are planning to close soon. 

 

One of those letters, Mr. Minister, came from a woman from 

Regina, a Mrs. Eva Zaron, whose uncle used to be a resident at 

North Park Centre. And she wrote to you urging you to keep the 

centre open. When you answered her letter on July 13, Mr. 

Minister, you added in your own handwriting a snide postscript, 

and I quote: 

 

I don’t believe you have visited your uncle in the last six 

months. 

 

Mr. Minister, on January 11, this woman’s uncle had died. And 

I ask you what the point of this insensitive and callous 

statement was. 

 

Hon. Mr Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the statement was not 

insensitive and callous. I wrote her a letter explaining concerns 

about North Park, and she sent me a letter. Among other 

complaints, she asked for my resignation, accused me of being 

a farmer, and having no idea what these people need. And then 

she wrote me as follows: 

 

I have an uncle in here for many years and I visit here often. 

 

So I inquired as to the circumstances about her uncle and found 

out that he had died six months earlier, and I didn’t 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1727 

 

know if this woman didn’t know that her uncle had died or if 

she was trying to mislead me. And I didn’t want to write a letter 

to here saying that your uncle died six months ago. I didn’t 

want to scare her in that way. So I simply indicated that I don’t 

believe you visited your uncle for six months, and I would think 

she would then inquire as to how her uncle would be. 

 

But I quote — her letter says: 

 

I have an uncle in here for many years and I visit here 

often. 

 

I was let to believe by her letter that her uncle was still there, 

and I found out he had died six months earlier. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I support that woman’s statement 

wholeheartedly when she asks for your resignation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — It is clearly a measure of your insensitivity that 

you stand and offer this tasteless explanation of your 

unexplainable conduct. And I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you 

stand in this Assembly and apologize to that woman and to the 

people of Saskatchewan for your insensitivity and your callous 

comments? Will you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr Schmidt: — No, I will not, Mr. Speaker. When 

somebody tells me she is visiting her dead uncle, what am I 

presumed to think? — that this lady hasn’t visited her uncle in 

the last six months. What more could I expect? There is no 

reason to apologize. I didn’t want to write the lady and say, 

lady, your uncle died six months ago. So I thought I would have 

a reference that she might inquire as to where her uncle is, 

because her letter says, I quote: 

 

I have an uncle in here for many years and I visit here 

often. 

 

She didn’t say that her uncle died six months ago or who was 

she visiting. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Social Services. We’ve just heard another example 

of the callous way in which you deal with people, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, when the North Park Centre closes next February, 

you claim that most of the 180 residents, many of them seniors, 

will be placed in super-group homes, or that they’ll be shipped 

to Valley View Centre in Moose jaw. Yet at a public meeting 

that I had with friends and relatives of the residents, it was clear 

that they still don’t have answers that they want. They want to 

know when these homes will be built; they want to know where 

they will be built; they want to know who will operate them; 

they want to know how they will be financed; and they want to 

know who will staff them. Mr. Minister, can you answer these 

questions today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I can answer those 

questions, but it would take quite some time, a little more 

time than is allowed in question period. I can tell you this, that 

it was not my idea to close North Park Centre; that the 

Canadian Association of Community Living, which is the 

Canadian organization of the mentally retarded, and the 

provincial association, have for many years asked for 

community living for all retarded people, and if you’re going to 

have retarded people living in the community, at some stage 

you’re going to have to close an institution. 

 

And the real debate here it whether or not these people should 

be living in the community as normal as possible, or whether 

they should be living in an institution in Prince Albert. And I 

am advised by the experts around the world, by the association 

that represents these people, that this is the right thing to do. It 

has not been easy, and it has not been popular, and I don’t do it 

because it was my idea. But I’m doing it because I’m advised 

and believe it is the right thing to do, Mr Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Minister, I 

never asked you to stand up here and debate with me as to 

whether you should or whether you shouldn’t close it. We’ve 

taken for granted that you are a man that won’t change his mind 

what the decision . . . once your decision has been made and 

once your mind’s been made up. 

 

I asked you some very specific questions, and I’m going to pose 

them to you again, and I ask you for some very specific 

answers. When are those homes going to be built? Where are 

they going to be built? Who will operate them? How will they 

be financed, and what kind of staff people will you have in to 

look after these people? Can you answer those questions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a very long 

question, and the answer is at least 10 times as long. I can try 

briefly to give you an indication, Mr. Speaker, as to what the 

situation is. We have a target date for the closure of the 

institution, in February of 1988. Workers in my department, in 

co-operation with the Saskatchewan Association for the 

Mentally Retarded, are assessing all of the individuals to see 

what would be most appropriate for the individuals involved, as 

to where they would best fit into the community. 

 

We acknowledge that in some cases it may not be possible for 

these people to live in the community, and they may have to 

transfer to our only remaining institution in Valley View, 

which, by the way, Mr. Speaker, we will try to also close, but 

we can’t do that in a short period of time because there is still 

some need for institutions. We can’t do this all at once. 

 

But in any event, our people will try to assess the situation, and 

once the assessments have been made they will be placed in 

either community living arrangements, in private homes, either 

in existing group homes where there are some spaces, in some 

super-group homes which will be built where needed in the 

province — and I’ve indicated publicly that there will be one 

constructed in Prince Albert. 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1728 

 

However, if the member opposite thinks it should be 

somewhere else, we could look at that as well. And we will deal 

with each family and try to ascertain what is best for each of the 

individuals — and that is a brief answer to what should be a 

very, very long answer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — On final supplementary. Mr. Minister, 

you haven’t answered one single question. More rhetoric, more 

diatribe. You’ve got seven months to house those people. 

You’ve given them an ultimatum that either they find a place 

. . . this is what you’re telling them, they find a place on their 

own because you haven’t got any plans for them. There are 

going to be 180 people that are looking for homes. You haven’t 

got an answer. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, are you willing to go back to your 

officials, find out what kind of plans there may be for these 

people, and table those plans in this legislature? Will you do 

that, Mr Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, many times I’ve stated 

publicly what the plans are. I’ve given you a brief overview 

today of the plans. And the Saskatchewan Association for the 

Mentally Retarded is supervising, on behalf of the residents, 

and is making sure that my officials are doing what’s best for 

the individuals involved. 

 

And as I indicated, this is not popular. It’s not popular with the 

union in Prince Albert, who is resisting vigorously because they 

value their jobs more than they value the lives of the people that 

they serve, and it’s not popular with the president of CUPE 

(Canadian Union of Public Employees). And it’s not popular 

with a lot of people that have vested interests. 

 

But I have to do what’s right for the people. And I am 

convinced, by all of the authorities throughout the western 

world, and by the association that represents these people, that 

this is the right thing to do. I tell you, for the fun of it I wouldn’t 

do this. I could play golf. I could do many things. But I’m doing 

what is right. 

 

Comments by the Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Mr Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a 

question to the Premier. And the Premier will have heard of the 

comment — I call it the incredible comment of his Minister of 

Social Services, the comment that that minister has made in 

writing to a Regina woman whose uncle had died. 

 

And as the minister has conceded, he had known that the uncle 

had died. We have made the comment known. I’ve sent the 

Premier a copy of the letter, and I ask the Premier: does the 

Premier condone this kind of conduct by his minister, and does 

he propose to take any action with respect to it? 

 

Hon. Mr Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 

sending me a copy of the letter. It’s the first I’ve been made 

aware of the letter or any of the information around it. I will 

take the opportunity to . . .  

well first to take the minister’s comments today as information 

and review it any further. If in fact the letter received by the 

minister was misleading, then the minister obviously has to 

respond to the facts as he finds them. 

 

I understand from what I just heard in question period that the 

lady said that she was, in fact, the relative of an uncle that lived 

here and visited here often, which would leave the impression 

that, in fact, that was the case. Now if it is or if it isn’t, I’ll 

review it and respond. 

 

Hon. Mr Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier knows that this is not the first comment which I would 

label tasteless and insensitive made by this particular minister. 

We’ve had comments about foreigners working in hotels. He 

seems to know foreigners by sight. He speaks of . . . gives . . . 

makes comments that suggest that prostitutes and drug dealers 

are the major users of legal aid; that he has talked about braless 

speeches. We know that. What I am asking you, Mr. Minister, 

and this is one of several: when are you going to indicate 

whether or not this man is speaking for your government. And 

if he is not, when are you going to remove him as a minister and 

not burden the people of Saskatchewan with a minister who 

speaks in that way on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you can examine your 

members, and I’ll examine mine. And we can look at the 

history, we can look at the history over the years of people that 

have been in the NDP party and people who have been in the 

Conservative Party, and those that have been cabinet ministers 

and their statements. 

 

You’ve drawn a fairly long . . . you draw a fairly long bow 

when you start to say that people who perform illegal acts, like 

drug pushers, should not be paying some of their legal costs, 

and that it’s something that the minister shouldn’t be saying. 

Well, I endorse that very much. People who break the law and 

make money and have to go to court, and obviously have 

money because they’re operating illegally, I believe should be 

paying some of the costs. And it’s completely unfair to draw 

that conclusion or to put it in here. 

 

I say, today, I will examine the contents of the letter and the 

letter received, and I will make my own judgements. It’s fair 

enough to raise the point, but I don’t think it’s too fair to range 

a long ways from it. 

 

Hon. Mr Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. And I just 

want to ask a short supplementary on the digression of the 

Premier. And I’ll take one example of your so-called drug 

pushers. Is it your submission, Mr. Premier, that anybody who 

is charged with dealing in drugs thereby loses any right he has 

to support . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask this question. Is it the 

Premier’s position that any one who is charged with dealing in 

drugs does not have a right to legal counsel because of the fact 

that he is charged with that — legal counsel with payment if he 

has no funds — because 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1729 

 

he has been charged with that, even though he’s been convicted 

of nothing. Is that your position? 

 

Hon. Mr Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 

people are entitled to a fair hearing before the courts, and the 

courts will decide whether they’re guilty or not. Being charged 

is not guilty. Being charged is just charged. 

 

I mean, when you want to use the long bow to shift from a 

question that you’ve just asked into something else, I mean, 

obviously the NDP youth has endorsed prostitution co-ops. 

Now do we expect the public and the NDP to stand up and say 

they want prostitution co-ops. Is that the policy of the NDP? 

And if it is, if a minister stood up and said, well I would 

endorse that, that’s something that the general public would 

think would be a good idea? I don’t think so. 

 

I mean, if you want to get in to drawing long bows, we can all 

get into playing those games. I said I would review this, and I 

will be prepared to review it, as we are . . . the whole case with 

respect to legal aid. And people on welfare don’t have to pay. 

Other people perhaps should pay something and particularly 

those, and I use the whole question of those that are living 

illegally and selling illicit drugs on the street, and the taxpayer 

is not prepared to say that I’m going to pick up all the legal 

costs for somebody who is ripping off the youth, hurting 

society. I mean, people . . . you can find people, I suppose, who 

will defend them, but it’s difficult. 

 

Hon. Mr Blakeney: — Supplementary. Supplementary, Mr. 

Speaker. I want to be very clear on what I’m asking here. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Could we please 

have a little order. 

 

Hon. Mr Blakeney: — The Minister of Social Services has 

indicated that in his view legal aid should not be available to 

people who are charged with certain offences, regardless . . . 

without   

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think that the hon. members 

should just relax and allow the Leader of the Opposition to ask 

the legitimate supplementary question. 

 

Hon. Mr Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask a 

question to the Premier. He knows that his Minister of Social 

Services has said in this House that regardless of the financial 

condition of the accused, if this accused is charged with certain 

offences, convicted of nothing, but charged with certain 

offences, legal aid should not be available. And I ask you, Mr. 

Premier, is that your position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll just say I don’t believe 

that that’s what the Minister said. And I believe that the Leader 

of the Opposition is stretching it a little bit, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

drifted so far a long ways from the original question and the 

topic. 

 

I would just say that when you’re dealing with social  

crimes and crimes that involve young people, particularly 

associated with drugs, and the pressure put on young people to 

become prostitutes and the difficulty that raises across society, 

society is a little hesitant. 

 

And I think he would have to agree in saying that we are going 

to provide a large measure of legal support for some of the most 

difficult problems facing a society today, and that in fact that 

we should take a good hard look at it, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to something that   

 

And as we know, we’ve made the decision to . . . (inaudible) 

. . . drug and alcohol abuse; we’ve made a decision to make 

sure that we help young people, make them aware, and we’re 

going to continue that, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s the NDP 

federally that supports legalized prostitution. I don’t, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier wishes me to get back to the original point. May I then 

ask the Premier this: if the Minister of Social Services wrote 

what you and I know he wrote, and if in fact the patient to 

which he referred was dead, and he knew that the patient was 

dead, as he said in this House, will you condone that sort of a 

postscript? And if not, will you take action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have heard the 

minister’s explanation today that he was written, and the letter 

advised him that the lad visited here and that she had relatives 

here and an uncle. Well I will review the record, Mr. Speaker, 

and will get the information. And as I said to the hon. member, 

I will take it from there. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I stand to 

table a copy of the letter written July 13, signed by Grant 

Schmidt, Minister of Social Services, and addressed to  Mrs. 

Eva Zaron, in which the handwritten postscript, Mr. Speaker, 

says: 

 

P.S. I don’t believe you have visited your uncle in the last 

six months. Grant Schmidt. 

 

And I invite, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister of Social Services to 

table in this Assembly the letter that was written to him, that 

prompted him to believe that this was an appropriate addendum 

to add at the end of that letter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to table a letter dated 

June 28, 1987 from a Mrs. Zaron — Z-a-r-o-n. And I table this 

letter, not because it was requested, but because I have nothing 

to hide. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 

 

Anniversary of Christianity in the Ukraine 

 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1730 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 

pursuant to rule 39 to seek leave of the Assembly to move a 

special motion commemorating the 1,000 anniversary of the 

advent of Christianity to the Ukraine. 

 

I will take just a moment, Mr. Speaker, to indicate very briefly 

the background and significance of the anniversary. This week 

Canadians of Ukrainian origin are beginning to celebrate the 

millennium of Ukrainian Christianity. 

 

Almost 10 centuries ago, in 988 A.D., Prince Volodymyr of 

Kiev accepted the Christian faith from Orthodox Constantinople 

as the national religion of the Ukraine, which was then known 

as the principality of Kievan Rus. 

 

To commemorate this event, Ukrainian people are planning 

various projects the world over, Mr. Speaker. This week, the 

Ukrainian Orthodox faithful are gathering in the beautiful city 

of Saskatoon for a four-day millennium celebration. 

 

This 1,000 anniversary celebration is of significance to over 

500,000 Canadians of Ukrainian origin, and of particular 

interest to Saskatchewan, because it was in Saskatoon, 70 years 

ago, that the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada was 

organized into an autonomous body. 

 

Today marks the first day of the official celebration. There will 

be other celebrations throughout the year by both the Orthodox 

and Catholic church faithful. Accordingly, Mr .Speaker, I ask  I 

seek leave from all members of the Legislative Assembly today 

to move the following motion. The motion reads: 

 

That this Assembly hereby joins with all of those in 

Saskatchewan and Canada who are this week 

commemorating the one thousandth anniversary of the advent 

of Christianity to the Ukraine. 

 

I therefore ask for leave to move the motion, and invite all 

members to join with me in supporting it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just 

speak very briefly in support of the motion for which I know 

that members on this side thank the government members for 

granting leave. I can’t add very much to the . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me, I’m sorry, I don’t like to interrupt 

the speaker, but apparently, according to the Rules and 

Procedures of the House, the motion must be moved, which we 

haven’t actually done. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank the 

hon. members for leave to move this motion. I would like to 

make a few remarks prior to the moving of the motion at which 

time I will move the motion, seconded by the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

By recognizing and allowing leave, members, you are 

recognizing more than the 500,000 Canadians of Ukrainian 

origin who are proud to call Canada their native country, and 

the Ukraine the country of their forefathers. Over half of these 

Canadians of Ukrainian origin live in the prairie provinces. 

Their history parallels the formation, the growth, and 

achievement of the three prairie provinces. The first official 

Ukrainian immigrant came to Canada in 1891, nearly 100 years 

ago. 

 

Canada experienced three waves of Ukrainian immigration: 

170,000 before the First World War — and my grandparents 

were among these — 68,000 during the inter-war period, and 

33,000 after the second war. Over the past 100 years, the 

Ukrainian people have overcome the problems of integration 

and Canadian citizenship. The descendants of immigrants two, 

three, and four generations removed continue to retain the 

values, the traditions, and a language which have become a part 

of a way of life in Canada. I am one of these descendants, as are 

the members for Saskatoon Riversdale, Regina North West, and 

Canora. It is likely that there are other members whose spouses 

and relatives have a Ukrainian heritage. 

 

Today the situation of Ukrainian Canadians as an ethnocultural 

minority is a special one. The original community is undergoing 

tremendous change while faced with assimilation at home and 

statelessness overseas. They understand the problems of the 

past and wish to devise strategies to safeguard their culture, 

language, and identity within Canada’s mosaic. 

 

Canadians of Ukrainian origin have contributed much to the 

social, the cultural, economic, and linguistic diversity of 

Canada. They have struggled to maintain self-determination, 

self-respect, and to be self-reliant without seeking any special 

favour among equals. It was this desire for freedom that brought 

the Ukrainian immigrants to Canada, the desire to be free of 

both economic domination and totalitarian domination. We 

believe in Canada as a multicultural nation with aboriginal 

people, two founding peoples, two official languages. We strive 

for trilingualism as a way of preserving and enhancing the 

cultural heritage of our community and to strengthen Canada. 

 

Both the Orthodox and the Catholic churches have played a 

central role in preserving the Ukrainian language, the culture, 

and identity here in Canada. Their influences on matters 

spiritual and educational remains strong to this day — 10 

centuries after the acceptance of Christianity by Prince 

Volodymyr of Kiev. As I said, earlier, in 988 A.D. the people of 

the Ukraine accepted Christianity officially through a mass 

baptism in the Dnieper River. 

 

To commemorate this event and its influence on all aspects of 

history of Ukrainians and their descendants, various events and 

projects are being sponsored. This week, the Ukrainian 

Orthodox faithful of Canada are gathering in Saskatoon for a 

four-day, all-Canada millennium celebration. In addition to 

liturgical services, displays, concerts, the focal event of the 

celebration will be a special council, called a Sobor of the 

Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada, under his headship of 

His Beatitude, Metropolitan Wasyly of Winnipeg. At this 

celebration in Saskatoon, a statue of St. Volodymyr will  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1731 

 

be unveiled on Saturday. Our Premier has been invited to attend 

this event. 

 

Other celebrations are planned for 1988, including that by the 

Ukrainian Catholic faithful in Saskatoon in May, and an 

all-world Orthodox celebration in Toronto next summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a golden opportunity for this Assembly to 

join with Canadians of Ukrainian origin as they celebrate their 

heritage, their faith, and prepare for the next 1,000 years. 

 

I therefore move the following motion, seconded by the 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale, and invite unanimous 

support. And the motion reads: 

 

That this Assembly hereby joins with all of those in 

Saskatchewan and Canada who are this week 

commemorating the 1,000th anniversary of the advent of 

Christianity to the Ukraine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I finally made it. I 

finally made it on this motion, I mean. And who knows, maybe 

some day I really will make it. I keep trying. When you’re in 

my position, you have to keep trying. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just speak very briefly to this issue, and 

to welcome and to thank the government members for granting 

leave to this very important motion on what is obviously a very 

important day for . . . an important celebration for Ukrainian 

Canadians. 

 

I note that the member from Prince Albert overlooked, by 

accident I’m sure, in mentioning at least one person of 

Ukrainian descent, in addition to the member from Canora, and 

that is the Minister of Consumer Affairs, the member from 

Maple Creek, who also comes from Ukrainian background. 

 

And all of us who practise and preach politics in Saskatchewan 

and western Canada know the significance of this motion, 

because there isn’t hardly a community anywhere in 

Saskatchewan that isn’t marked on the landscape by a beautiful 

church, either of the Greek Orthodox faith or my religion, the 

Greek Catholic faith — their celebrations are going to start a 

little bit later. But this landscape, the church, is really one of the 

significant, in my view, aspects of Saskatchewan, almost like 

the country grain elevator — you see it in so many places. 

 

And that’s because right from the very early days when our 

fathers and our mothers and grandfathers came from the old 

country, coming here to Saskatchewan, or to the West of 

Canada, not knowing the language, not knowing the laws or the 

culture, the one thing that they absolutely demanded as the first 

thing of civilization and community building was that church. 

And they devoted their last dollar, and they devoted their extra 

sweat and hard work to the establishment of the churches. 

 

(1445) 

In fact, parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, there’s an excellent book 

which has been prepared by Mrs. Maria Baran from Saskatoon, 

with photographs of everybody . . . of every church in 

Saskatchewan that has been constructed over this period. 

 

And my point being that the history of the thousand year 

millennium, the celebration, has been transferred . . . 

transported here to the Canadian north-American way of life. 

It’s become part of the cultural mosaic that everybody talks 

about. 

 

And so you see this string of Ukrainian contact centred around 

the church from Ukraina in Manitoba to Tarnopol in 

Saskatchewan to Shandro in Alberta. You can mane hundreds 

of communities. Because they came here in pursuit of land, they 

came here in pursuit of freedom, and they came here in pursuit 

of religious freedom. And it’s Christianity, but it’s something in 

addition to that. 

 

It contains all those values — all those beautiful values of 

freedom and growth and land and opportunity. And I think it’s 

therefore very important for all of us to endorse this motion 

unanimously, and to wish the Orthodox Ukrainians, and later on 

the Catholic Ukrainians, congratulations, if that’s the correct 

word. We’re with you, and we very much honour the place that 

you have played and fulfilled in Canadian life and the thousand 

year millennium. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I, too, 

would like to rise and speak in support of the motion, and I 

commend the member from Prince Albert for bringing it to the 

attention of the legislature. 

 

I have a great heritage in the Ukrainian history of this country. 

My grandparents came first of all to the great state of 

Pennsylvania in the United States in the late 1800s, and moved 

to Canada in the early 1900s, and settled in what is called the 

Donwell district of Saskatchewan. We have areas there that are 

so notable as being parts of the old country, and I refer to 

communities such as Mazeppa and Dnieper which form part of 

our area of Saskatchewan, and are just so deeply entrenched in 

the Ukrainian culture and history. 

 

I’m extremely proud, first of all, to be a Ukrainian, and 

secondly, to be a Ukrainian from Canora. I believe if there is a 

community within Saskatchewan that is known for its 

Ukrainian tradition, it is Canora. Canora has, first of all, the 

majority is of Slavic origin. We have provided the executives 

for so many, many provincial and federal executives and 

associations that deal with the Ukrainian people and culture that 

I couldn’t start to name all of them. 

 

What is unique also in Canora, and is known now throughout 

all of Canada, is a welcome statue that we have in Canora, built 

by all of the community — not by the Ukrainian people, Mr. 

Speaker. It is a beautiful young lady dressed in Ukrainian 

traditional costume and dress, and she greets visitors at the 

entrance of the south end of Canora. She has the traditional 

welcome of the towel with  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1732 

 

the bread and salt. And we feel that that is so much a tradition 

that is received by all visitors to our town. 

 

We also have within our community two churches, both the 

Ukrainian Orthodox and the Ukrainian Catholic, which are 

beautiful structures and represent Ukrainian architecture at its 

best. And I would invite any member of the legislature or any 

citizen of Saskatchewan to visit these churches. They are what 

Ukrainian people are all about. 

 

I would also like, before I sit down, to acknowledge some 

people of Ukrainian and Slavic origin that are parts of my 

constituency and have represented Ukrainian people so well, in 

not only Saskatchewan but in all of western Canada. And I’m 

referring to people like the Ukrainian Orthodox Bishop Stinka 

who is now, I believe, serving the people in the Alberta region 

with his headquarters in Edmonton who is originally a citizen of 

the village of Buchanan. 

 

I would also like to acknowledge other Ukrainian notables such 

as the Hon. Alex Kuziak, who represented Canora in this 

legislature for many years. We’ll claim also, because he is of 

Slavic origin . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the Hon. Adolph 

Matsalla. Yes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll tell him you 

said so, hon. member. 

 

I would also like to pay recognition to Walter Mysak who, 

while he was mayor of the town of Canora, happened to rice up 

in the ranks and become president of SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), an organization we all 

respect. And one other gentleman who is . . . or two other 

gentlemen who have now — one who has passed away — and 

that’s the Dr. Danylchuk who was president of many, many 

provincial and federal Ukrainian associations and organizations 

— and Dr. Danylchuk has now passed away; and also the very 

famous Nicholas Lewchuk who, at 87 years of age, not only 

designed but helped build that welcome statue that I talked 

about earlier in my few remarks. 

 

So with that, I would like to join with the motion in support of 

this motion, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I, too, 

would like to speak to the motion presented by the member 

opposite and to congratulate the Ukrainian community on the 

1,000th birthday of their chrisitianity advent into the Ukraine. 

You might wonder why someone with a last name starting with 

“Mc” would get up and talk about the Ukrainian people, but I 

grew up in the Yorkton area and spent all my public school and 

high school with class-mates from the Ukrainian background, 

and I consider them some of my best friends today. 

 

As well as that, my constituency is 60 per cent Ukrainian origin, 

and I have had a number of years with working with the 

Ukrainian people there. A lot of my fellow employees at the 

Morris Rod-Weeder plant were Ukrainian people, and the 

numbers of them in that area are very large indeed. 

I think the one thing that I will remember in my first term of 

office as an MLA was working with the Ukrainian Business 

Men’s Association of Yorkton, and across Canada, in helping 

them endorse and get the funding for the second edition of the 

Ukrainian Encyclopedia, where they are working very hard in 

Canada to list the origin of the Ukraine and the movement of 

them across to Canada. 

 

And it was a real pleasure to be in Edmonton at their national 

convention to announce that we would endorse the second 

edition of their encyclopedia, and then to attend the banquet in 

Yorkton, Saskatchewan, where we presented the cheque for 

$250,000 to help them fund their encyclopedia. 

 

They are a very hard-working and dedicated group of people — 

the St. Mary’s cultural centre in Yorkton that has been built 

strictly by their own efforts — they never came to government 

for funding, they just did it on their own, which is indicative of 

their dedication to get the job done. 

 

We also enjoy attending their malanka — their New Year’s 

celebrations, and have done so for a number of years. And they 

certainly respect their culture, and we congratulate them for 

that. And I certainly will be supporting the motion presented by 

the member opposite. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

want to join with the member for Prince Albert, the member for 

Riversdale, the member for Canora, and the member for 

Yorkton, in expressing support for the motion that is before us 

at the moment. 

 

In my 20 years of political involvement in Saskatchewan, it has 

been my great privilege during that period of time to become 

associated and to work with a large number of 

Ukrainian-Canadians in some of their religious and cultural 

occasions, and in other ways. 

 

And I have been, Mr. Speaker, very grateful and very honoured 

to be so included and so involved. Ukrainian-Canadians, as we 

have sensed, I think, this afternoon in the House, are intensely 

proud of their heritage their culture, their faith, their freedom, 

and the contributions which they have made to Saskatchewan, 

to Canada, and indeed to the world. 

 

Equally, Mr. Speaker, all other Canadians share that pride. And 

as a respectful non-Ukrainian, but as an MLA, and on behalf of 

the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, I would indeed want to endorse 

the sentiment in the motion before us this afternoon and 

indicate my fully support for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

a great deal of pleasure to rise to speak in support of this motion 

this afternoon. I will have the privilege of attending the 

celebrations in Saskatoon on Saturday evening and representing 

the Premier of this province and the government. I’m very 

pleased that this particular  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1733 

 

event is being held in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

This millennium is a kind of nostalgic journey, I am sure, for 

the members of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. It will not only 

give them an opportunity to remember the times that they’ve 

had in settling in this country and also renewing acquaintances, 

but it also gives them an opportunity to explore their heritage 

and renew their faith. 

 

What gave meaning to their lives was certainly their deep 

religious nature, their pride, and their devotion to family. I am 

sure that many people don’t realize the large number of 

Ukrainian people that live in the province of Saskatchewan and, 

in particular, the area around Saskatoon. 

 

I know that the Ukrainian people have played a very important 

role in the settling of this province, and indeed of this country. 

They are very proud people, hard workers, and very strong 

supporters of their communities and of each other. We see 

examples of the Vesna Festival and the Folkfest in Saskatoon 

that offer opportunities for people to find out more about the 

Ukrainian culture and customs, and also to appreciate and enjoy 

some of that fine Ukrainian hospitality. 

 

I am certainly very pleased that the member opposite has raised 

this motion this afternoon, and I would like to extend my 

congratulations to the Ukrainian people and indicate that I 

certainly will be supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 

rise this afternoon and participate in this debate . . . and 

certainly I support the motion put forward by my desk-mate, the 

member for Prince Albert. 

 

I am very proud to also be of Ukrainian extraction. I am also 

proud to inform people, whoever ask, that both sets of my 

grandparents came from the Ukraine. My grandfather on my 

father’s side and his wife, my grandmother, came over in the 

late 1890s in the first wave and homesteaded in a community 

called . . . actually three miles south of a community called Fork 

River, Manitoba. And my mother’s parents came from the 

Ukraine in the . . . just the pre-First World War era; their names 

were Burtniak, and they as well settled in the Fork River district 

and were in business in that community. 

 

But I think what is really important with respect to the 

celebration of the millennium that we were talking about today, 

is that the Ukrainian population in this country are celebrating 

not just the millennium of Christianity; in my view they’re also 

celebrating, in this country in particular, the major contributions 

that Ukrainians have made to this country and this province. 

 

They’re celebrating the building of the western part of the 

country, in my view. They’re celebrating living through the 

suffering of the climatic conditions that they endured when they 

came in the late 1890s to communities around Canora and 

Yorkton, where they spent harsh winters in handmade, very 

primitive shelter. They’re celebrating, in my view, the 

endurance and longevity of the Ukrainian  

stock of people. And it really is important for all Canadians to 

understand the contribution of Ukrainian people to the building 

of this country. So I join with my colleagues in this Assembly 

in supporting the motion and I extend my best wishes for a very 

successful celebration in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join the members of this Assembly as we congratulate our 

friends and acquaintances of Ukrainian heritage. 

 

We all are familiar with this hard-working, dedicated, proud 

people, and their is no question that they helped establish this 

great province of Saskatchewan. And through all their hard 

work and the severe tough times that they had as our province 

settled, there is no question that they were still able throughout 

all this, Mr. Speaker, to maintain their customs. And I think a 

lot of us are familiar with it. 

 

(1500) 

 

I know that as I grew up, contrary to my German name of 

Klein, I think most people are aware of the fact that my wife 

and I are Polish, and we carry a strong Polish heritage. But I 

can’t help recalling my childhood on the east side of this city, 

and as we went to church and tossed about with all of our 

Ukrainian friends, me speaking Polish and they Ukrainian, but 

in the mean time, pretty close. And so we understood a little bit 

of what we were trying to tell each other and I can’t help but 

reflect on some of the good times. 

 

As I grew up in Regina, not much in height, but as I matured in 

my livelihood, I was fortunate enough with my wife to become 

very familiar with the leaders of the Ukrainian community. And 

I enjoy very much that special relationship that I feel that I have 

with them. And I know that as we travel Mosaic and visit both 

the Kiev and Poltava pavilions, we have . . . the hospitality and 

friendship and customs that they display are simply outstanding. 

 

And I know that in Regina South, although it isn’t as ethnic as 

my childhood background was in the east side of this city, we 

too have a lot of Ukrainian acquaintances in the constituency of 

Regina South that are very active in the Ukrainian community. 

As I travel the province it’s strange, really, I suppose, that . . . 

But when you talk to the Ukrainians and they’re so exuberant 

with their backgrounds — they maintain that probably about 50 

per cent of everybody in this province has Ukrainian blood. 

 

And as you travel this province as I am fortunate enough to do, 

it seems that they’re very accurate because every community 

you visit, it seems that there’s a Ukrainian person very, very 

active in that community. So I too join in supporting the motion 

and congratulating all of the people of Ukrainian descent as 

they celebrate this very special occasion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1734 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

CONDOLENCE 

 

Hon. Mr Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

wonder if I might beg the indulgence of the House to make just 

a brief reference to a distinguished citizen of this province who 

has recently died, and I speak of Louis L. Lloyd, Louis Lloyd, 

who died last week and was buried in . . . or a service was held 

in Abbotsford, British Columbia, and whose burial was 

yesterday at Antelope. 

 

I think members of this House will be aware of Louis Lloyd and 

his career. He was a pioneer co-operator in this province and in 

Canada. He was the brother of the late premier Woodrow 

Lloyd. He was for a period of years the president of Federated 

Co-operatives Ltd., a ceaseless apostle of the gospel of 

co-operation not only as a way of operating our economy but a 

way of ordering our lives. 

 

I could say much more of Mr. Lloyd, but I will close by saying 

that he was one of those authentic rural statesmen and idealists 

which this province has produced in some small number. And 

he was a distinguished member of that group and we all regret 

his passing. 

 

STATEMENT BY Mr SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day I’d like to read a 

brief statement regarding a point of order which was raised on 

August 10. It was raised by the member for Regina Centre 

stating that the answer of the minister responsible for 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation in question 

period did not relate to the question asked, but really was an 

answer to another question asked by another member on an 

earlier date. 

 

I have now had the opportunity to review the verbatim record of 

the question period. I wish to remind all members and the 

minister, of a previous ruling of the Chair dated May 13, 1983 

as follows: 

 

I would like to advise all (members) that if they wish to 

present answers to questions for which they have taken 

notice, they should seek to be recognized by the chair for 

that (specific) purpose. This will prevent the member’s 

line of questioning from being interrupted and will 

facilitate the more orderly question period. 

 

While I wish to make the point that it was out of order for the 

minister to attempt to answer at this time a previous question of 

which he had taken notice, I am also aware that the member for 

Regina Centre did refer to the credit union lease issue in his 

preamble. This incident serves to demonstrate what happens 

when members introduce material in their preamble that goes 

beyond the scope of their question. 

 

I therefore urge members to keep preambles brief and factual, 

and urge ministers to ensure that their replies deal with the 

matter raised. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Hon. Mr Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

move second reading of Bill No. 31, an Act to amend The Local 

Government Election Act. 

 

Members of this Assembly may be aware that votes on whether 

or not to incorporate resort areas into resort villages are 

proposed for later this summer. These votes are to be held in the 

resort areas of Cochin and Aquadeo Beach which are located on 

Jackfish Lake. 

 

Informational meetings were held in these resorts last summer 

regarding the proposals to form resort villages, and at these 

meetings the majority of cottagers protested that they were 

ineligible to vote because they lease the land their cottages were 

situated on. In Aquadeo Beach, for instance, 90 per cent of 

cottage owners lease their land. 

 

The current criteria in The Local Government Election Act 

allows residents and owners of land to vote in resorts, but not 

lessees of land. The proposed amendment will simply allow 

lessees and their spouses to vote on incorporation of resort 

villages and subsequent resort village elections. They must be 

Canadian citizens, at least 18 years of age, and Saskatchewan 

residents for at least six months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill requires the urgent attention of this House 

to allow preparation to take place for the incorporation votes, 

which have been planned in consultation with community 

representatives and are to occur September 5, 1987. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would agree 

with the minister that this is a matter that requires the urgent 

attention of the House. I can only wonder why it’s taken so long 

to bring this Bill before us. 

 

But basically this side of the House supports the principle that 

lessees who have lived in a resort village for a period of . . . or 

have leased property for a period of six months, and are 

residents of Saskatchewan, should have the right to participate 

fully in resort village elections. 

 

There are some aspects of the Bill before us that give us cause 

for concern, particularly as these pertain to qualifications to be a 

candidate. Although the Bill allows . . . or puts lessees on the 

same footing as those who own properties in resort villages, it 

draws a very clear distinction between those who own property 

and those who are lessees, in that those who are lessees are 

specifically excluded from qualifying as candidates for resort 

village councils. 

 

That is a matter that this side of the House will want to take a 

few hours to examine further. And having said that, 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1735 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to make a 

very brief intervention. I would like to ask the minister through 

you, Mr. Chairman, whether or not he has received a request 

from a group in the city of North Battleford for the minister to 

exercise his powers under, I believe it’s section 12 of The 

Education Act in which this group is calling for a ministerial 

inquiry into the North Battleford (Public) School Division. 

 

I would ask the minister whether or not, first off, he has 

received such a formal request, and secondly, what the status of 

that request is in fact at this point in time — whether or not he’s 

taking it under consideration or whether he’s ruled it out. And I 

suppose whether or not he’s going to answer the 

communication that came to him requesting the ministerial 

inquiry under his powers, as I believe I’ve said, under section 

10 of The Education Act. 

 

As I was home on the weekend in The Battlefords, it had been 

mentioned to me that the organization that had requested the 

ministerial inquiry has not, in fact, yet received a response from 

the minister. 

 

So just to reiterate my very brief questions. First off, does the 

minister acknowledge that he has received a request for a 

ministerial inquiry into the North Battleford (Public) School 

Division, and secondly, as to what the status of that request is? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — I’m of the view . . . the understanding 

that yes, the department has received some correspondence 

relevant to section 10 which empowers an inquiry, I suspect, 

among other things. The official who may have dealt with that 

isn’t here in this legislature. I personally can’t recall a letter to 

myself, but that doesn’t mean to say I haven’t had one. But I 

can’t give you much more information than that at this very 

moment, given the resources we have here, and as you can 

appreciate, we get a number of pieces of correspondence but we 

. . . I think the department, whether it’s myself or somebody 

else in the department that’s had the letter, we are advised that 

there has been one and I can’t tell you what’s transpired since 

that time. I could endeavour to get more details for you even 

perhaps yet this afternoon, if that would suit. I’m not trying to 

be evasive, it’s just that there were not . . . with those who we 

have here we’re not aware of all the circumstances. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, through you to the 

minister, I would appreciate it if you would give me  

your undertaking that you will either get the information I’ve 

requested today, or failing that, if you could either communicate 

with me or have an official of your department communicate 

with me as to the exact nature of the correspondence and what 

the exact status of it is. If you give me that undertaking it would 

please me a great deal, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Yes I would, and we’ll in fact try and 

even accommodate you by 5 o’clock today. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, on August 6 of this year of 1987, 

the member from Saskatoon University asked you a question or 

made some statements with respect to his concern that many of 

the cuts at the technical institutes directly affected women, and 

that women were very severely hurt by the cuts in programs to 

the technical institutes. And your response to that, Mr. Minister, 

was as follows, and I’m going to read from Hansard right now 

at page 1585: 

 

And their idea (their — referring to the New Democrats) of 

somehow being the sugar-daddy to women, somehow being 

the sugar-daddy to all the women in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, is their . . . Their idea of that is to have them engage 

in courses and training, have them spend a couple of years of 

their life, and maybe 10 or $20,000, and then when they 

come out and look for those jobs, they aren’t there. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, there is a very real concern in 

Saskatchewan society, and it’s been expressed to me on a 

number of occasions, that the cuts in programs to the technical 

institutes are by and large affecting women — seriously. In 

other words, these programs are not available. 

 

And the term sugar-daddy, Mr. Minister, is a pejorative term. 

And it’s derogatory towards women because it conjures up the 

notion of kept women. But it’s your term, Mr. Minister, and 

your description of policies to further the advancement of 

women in education. 

 

Now your government, Mr. Minister, has paid lip-service to 

affirmative action for women, and we know it’s acceptable 

knowledge in Saskatchewan that we need to implement 

programs, make training programs available for women, and 

natives, and the physically disabled in order to give them 

opportunities to get into the labour market. And one would 

hardly say that that is being sugar-daddy. 

 

But you have made cuts to education programs at the Wascana 

Institute, for example, that are devastating to women. And some 

of the statistics that I have been provided with are as follows. 

Dental therapy — cut. The percentage of students in that 

program are 98 per cent women. Barbering and hair-styling — 

cut. The percentage of students in that program that are women 

is 88 per cent. Aesthetician — cut. The percentage of students 

in that program are 90 per cent women. And then, occupational 

choices — I’m not sure exactly what falls in there, but that’s 

what it’s been labelled — 45 per cent of the students in that 

program are women. 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1736 

 

Now these figures are pretty telling, Mr. Minister, and I think 

this creates a very serious situation for women in 

Saskatchewan. And I’m wondering whether these programs that 

have been cut is your idea of being sugar-daddy to women. And 

I’m wondering, is affirmative action ensuring women’s 

participation in education and the labour force your idea of the 

government being sugar-daddy to women? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — The first point I would make, and I 

would want to be particularly clear on this, is first of all the 

term, sugar-daddy, that you referred to. In the context I used it 

was absolutely and in no way meant to be a slur, or derogatory 

towards women in this province. 

 

What I was talking about was the NDP’s rather condescending 

approach of constantly categorizing women in traditional roles 

when it comes to training. And I think we went through things 

like nursing assistants, and diploma nursing. And I was making 

the point that I don’t think anyone is well served by clinging to 

the notion that women should be focused on those job training 

areas when, for example in the nursing assistant area, 63 per 

cent of the women last year couldn’t get full-time jobs in their 

training specialty. Or in the case of diploma nursing, I think the 

numbers for last year were 58 per cent. 

 

What I was talking about is making sure — unlike the NDP, 

who want to categorize and slot women into certain 

occupational roles — that we do give the women of 

Saskatchewan, whether they be single parents, or whether it 

comes to our student aid programs, or the women in rural 

Saskatchewan who now through the extension programs access 

institute courses and university courses through our regional 

college network — which is an innovation that’s come to be 

since . . . to the degree it is today since our government, under 

our Premier, came to be in 1982. 

 

I talked about the accommodation of women in the dental 

auxiliaries with the flexible curriculum at Wascana here in 

Regina, and how, by having and making available evening 

classes, and more flexibility in terms of the class times, that it 

gives access not only to all of society, but certainly . . . all who 

work in society, but certainly working women as well. And it’s 

worth noting that there are more women students in our 

institutes today than there are male. 

 

However, having said all of that, if some have interpreted it 

differently and, I might add, wrongly, and are somehow 

offended, I would absolutely and unequivocally apologize to 

them. But certainly the reference was to the NDP and their 

condescending approach. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, the NDP have always 

supported the concept of affirmative action, and this particular 

government’s record in that area isn’t particularly admirable. 

 

And another point that I wish to make on the area of affirmative 

action and the idea that you don’t want to create jobs or 

continue programs that are traditionally female oriented — 

women should not have to move into non-traditional jobs in 

order to obtain a job. If they want  

to, they should; if they don’t want to, they shouldn’t have to. So 

your elimination of traditional female courses is a direct attack 

against women in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And with respect to the technical institutes, 

that’s what’s been occurring. So I want a commitment from this 

minister, Mr. Chairman, that he will move on an affirmative 

action program in education in this province to ensure that more 

women have access to all types of jobs, just non-traditional . . . 

not only non-traditional female jobs, but traditional and 

non-traditional female jobs in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Well I would only say again that, first 

of all, I wouldn’t want to see opportunities for the women in 

this province . . . I wouldn’t want to see them focused merely in 

these traditional areas. I would like to see them have an 

opportunity in areas such as the CAD-CAM (Computer Aided 

Design — Computer Aided Manufacturing) computer assisted 

design and manufacturing courses in Saskatoon and the 

bio-sciences technology and mechanical engineering. 

 

And I still . . . I don’t understand all the member’s logic. Why 

would you, whether it’s a male or female, why would you cling 

to the concept that . . . of forcing people or having people go 

into courses where two out of three, after they’ve invested 10 or 

$20,000 and two years of their lifetime, two out of three can’t 

get jobs? Now can the hon. member explain that logic to me, 

and who are they doing the favour to, whether it be male or 

female? 

 

And I want to read into the record, Mr. Chairman, relative to 

affirmative action . . . Under the NDP in March of ’81 in this 

province, in the civil service of this province, there were 7.7 per 

cent women in management — under the NDP, Mr. Chairman 

— 7.7 per cent. Do you know what the same number today is, 

Mr. Chairman? And it’s going to get higher — 17.2 per cent, 

well over twice. 

 

Mr. Chairman, you know, that’s where the rhetoric flies in face 

of the record. Under the NDP, 7.7 per cent of the women were 

in management roles in the civil service of Saskatchewan. In 

March of ’86, Mr. Chairman, the same number was 17.2 per 

cent. And, Mr. Chairman, better than that, in July of ’87 that 

number is 21.3 per cent — three times — three times what it 

was under the NDP. 

 

Now you ask me, Mr. Chairman, you ask me: who has had 

more opportunities for assuming management roles in this 

province’s civil service, whether it’s been women under an 

NDP government or women under a Progressive Conservative 

government? And I’ll tell you, these numbers are even going to 

get better, Mr. Chairman. We’re very proud of them, and the 

civil service is very proud of the management role and the 

management leadership provided by these women. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 

Chairman. Mr. Minister, women in Saskatchewan are very 

proud of the traditional work that they’ve done in the health 

field. You’ve mentioned the  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1737 

 

nursing assistants; you’ve cut out that program, eliminated that 

program at Kelsey. You’ve eliminated five . . . Five of the six 

programs that you eliminated were programs that were mainly 

women students, if not entirely women students. The women 

instructors have also lost their jobs at Kelsey because those 

programs were eliminated. So you have eliminated programs 

for women to learn, and programs for women to teach. 

 

The nursing assistant program cannot . . . the nursing assistants 

can’t get jobs because your government is not funding the staff 

to work in the nursing positions. You have quoted the survey 

that was done, “The Utilizations of Certified Nursing Assistants 

in Saskatchewan,” and I will quote it, as well — because 

recommendation six says: 

 

That the nursing assistants should develop, in conjunction 

with the Saskatchewan Advanced Education and 

Manpower, certified post-basic courses in gerontology and 

compassionate care, to enable CNA’s to develop sound 

and marketable skills for the long-term care nursing 

market. 

 

If you were funding it, that market would be there. I don’t see 

any plans in your education program for the future to have those 

post-basic courses. And a post-basic course in place, a course 

which has been eliminated at Kelsey. And you, yourself, said, 

in the budget speech, in June 26, in Hansard . . . No, excuse me, 

in July 23, you said: 

 

It seems to me as we move into the information age — the 

knowledge-based economy — the more appropriate 

questions that you should be asking are, where are the 

programs that will match the jobs of the future? 

 

It seems to me that you should be asking: where are those 

people who can work in gerontology as our population ages? 

The people that can work in gerontology are the nursing 

assistants and the diploma nurses — those are the people that 

can work. Those are the jobs that women have done, 

socially-useful work, very valuable work, work that you’re 

cutting down because you cut those programs, and eliminated 

those programs, and denied women the opportunity to have that 

kind of traditional training. Not only that, you have cut the 

pre-trades program from 22 spaces to 13 spaces — those were 

programs for women in pre-trades. Those are cut. 

 

One-third of the program of the budget for the bridging 

program at the Regina Plains Community College was cut. And 

let me tell you what that program was. That program began two 

years ago and was the first of its kind in Canada . . . and you 

want to promote new and innovative programs. Here was one 

that started up just two years ago, designed to help women enter 

or re-enter the work-force by providing counselling, pre-trades, 

and pre-technology courses, and skills upgrading classes. Since 

then 500 women have participated in Regina, and similar 

programs have been established across Canada. But without 

provincial assistance about one-third of the 250 women served 

by the program will be unable to attend college in the 

up-coming year — another example of the cuts that you’ve 

made to women. 

And I join my colleague in expressing my very great 

disappointment that this is what you’re doing. My commitment 

is to seeing that we will work to reinstate programs for women, 

and that we will provide women both with traditional 

opportunities and non-traditional opportunities, opportunities in 

management, and opportunities in rank and file work, 

opportunity in the health fields, where women have been very 

strong care-givers for time immemorial, plus all the other job 

opportunities that should be open to women. There’s no point in 

saying that the jobs aren’t there if the government isn’t going to 

fund them in the public service. We need that planning. Weed 

that work for women. We need that commitment, and I for one 

will certainly work for it, as we will on this side of the House. If 

you’re not going to do anything, just wait till the next election. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — The first point that the hon. member 

made was relative to instructors that were laid off, whether male 

or female. I would tell the hon. member again, I would apprise 

her of this fact, that every instructor that was laid off who 

wanted a job, with one exception, has been offered a job. So 

how does the hon. member square that fact which was read into 

the record here before, with her remarks about all these 

instructors being laid off? 

 

Now we have no desire to lay off people unnecessarily. We’ve 

always tried to approach this restructuring whether it be the 

Public Service Commission as a whole, or advanced education, 

in a humane, sensitive, and reasonable way. And I would 

suggest the fact that all instructors who want employment have 

had the opportunity to have an offer, except one, flies in the 

face of what you have said. And I think the hon. member will 

acknowledge that she was inaccurate in her statements. 

 

As it relates to the health sciences and the needs and the 

opportunities in the future, certainly geriatric care is important, 

and I have no doubt that we will meet in the future, as we have 

in the past, the needs. 

 

But I would as well advise the hon. member that certainly the 

preventative aspect of gerontology are as important or maybe 

even more important. And I think of things like what can be 

done with nutrition. I think of what research in the area of 

kinesiology can do as relates to the implications of the 

demographics of an ageing population. I’m advised that in fact 

there is an advisory committee report coming forward on that 

very issue o gerontology, and I will be giving it serious 

consideration when I have an opportunity to look at it. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Chairperson, thank you. I have 

some questions for the Minister as it pertains to the elimination 

of the dental therapy program here in Wascana, as a result of 

the lay-offs of 411 dental workers that were laid off because of 

the government’s cut to the dental plan. 

 

My question to the Minister is this: I would be interested in 

knowing, and dental therapists in this province would be 

interested in knowing, how many additional spaces 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1738 

 

have been created at the Wascana Institute in the dental hygiene 

program. 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Twenty-four, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, can the minister advise me 

how long the courses are for the dental therapists that are going 

to be retrained in dental hygiene? How long is the duration of 

the course? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Mr. Chairman, seven months. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, with a course seven months 

in duration with 24 additional spaces, can the minister advise 

me how long it will take to retrain the dental therapists in the 

dental hygiene course? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I wasn’t aware that all 

411 people that the hon. member — if in fact that’s the right 

number — that were laid off, in fact wanted to be retrained in 

that area. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, it’s very difficult for dental 

therapists at this stage to be retrained when there are only 24 

additional spaces that have been created, when the course is 

seven months in duration. I understand that there are over 200 

dental therapists, and let’s take a hypothetical possibility that all 

200 dental therapists wanted to be retrained in the field of 

dental hygiene, how long would it take the provincial 

government to retrain those laid-off workers? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — We don’t have to deal with 

hypothetical cases and what ifs, so we can deal with facts. 

 

I’m advised that something in the order of 50 dental therapists 

have applied. We’re hopeful that we could accommodate all in 

14 months. We’re anxious to accommodate as best we can; 

that’s why there was some additional moneys allocated. We 

want to try and do right by these people as best we can. 

 

At the same time I don’t think we are doing anybody a favour, 

once again, if we jam 400 people, and as you suggested to take 

a course whereafter they take and spend 10 or $20,000, and to 

find no job at the end of the day. 

 

I mean, I know that’s a typical sort of NDP approach, and it’s 

been a characteristic trademark of the mentality of your 

government . . . or of your government . . . or your party when it 

was in government. But it’s not our approach, and it’s 

inconsistent with the reality of what is happening today, and it’s 

inconsistent with the research data that we have, and it’s 

inconsistent with the desires of every reasoned citizen out there 

when they look at the thing and examine facts as opposed to 

hypothetical situations. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Deputy Chairperson, as I understand the 

situation, people are being taken into the program on the basis 

of seniority, and many people are not applying to those 24 

positions because they have not had extensive years of services 

to the plan. And it would be fruitless at this stage to apply for 

entrance into the program because they wouldn’t get in this 

year, next year, or the year after. 

 

And I’d like to just go back a few minutes to what the minister 

said. He talked about, it may not make any sense to retrain all of 

these dental therapists. That being the case, I’m wondering what 

kind of alternate training programs, besides the dental hygienist 

program, the government is offering to all of the laid-off 

workers who had very specific skills in the field of children’s 

dental care. What sort of alternate training positions will be 

available, and will the government be funding those alternate 

training positions? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — I would advise the hon. member as 

well, that at Wascana campus we are working on a new 

bridging program to assist certified dental assistants to upgrade 

to dental hygienists as well. I think the point is, whether it be 

this or the additional training spaces and the fact that we would 

try and gear up the program to accommodate people as often 

and as quickly as possible over and above the new training 

spaces, is that we’re trying to help these people if they want to 

continue in the health sciences area, to have the appropriate 

training for where the jobs are, point number one. 

 

And point number two, as I read into this record some days ago 

for one of the other critics from the NDP opposition, just 

virtually dozens of new initiatives and new programs either 

under way, or soon to be under way, that they may well wish to 

take a look at as well. 

 

And if you’re trying to suggest that somehow we are insensitive 

or aren’t understanding of their plight, nothing could be further 

from the truth. I mean that’s never an easy situation. And if 

you’re trying to suggest that we take some delight in doing this 

kind of thing where people, whether it’s dental therapists or 

anybody else that has to be laid off, I can assure you that the 

opposite is absolutely true. It’s never a pleasant task, but it’s a 

matter of, you know, it comes with the responsibility of 

governing. And we can’t shirk those responsibilities. At the 

same time, we’ve tried to be very understanding and sensitive to 

the needs of those who were laid off, whether they be therapists 

or others. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to remind you 

that it was your government that fired more than 411 dental 

workers in this province — it was your government. It’s your 

government that isn’t providing training spaces to retrain those 

workers, most of whom are women. It’s your government, your 

Premier, that has said dentists are better than dental therapists or 

dental workers. Dentists tend to be men; dental workers tend to 

be women. So where’s the sexism in this whole operation? 

 

We’ve had example after example in this budget, and in 

estimates, and in the newspaper, of women who’ve been fired 

by your government, and as a consequence of that, we no longer 

have training positions in our technical institutes because 

there’s no jobs for those women to go to, because you people 

are underfunding things like health care and special care 

nursing homes, hospitals, and now you’ve done in the 

children’s dental plan. 

 

And my question to you is simply this. Let’s talk about the 21st 

century. You now say that we don’t want to have all 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1739 

 

of these dental hygienists on the market, so you’re only going to 

have 24 training spaces per year. Fair enough. If those dental 

therapists and dental workers have to wait, they will be waiting 

10 years to be retrained on the basis of 200-odd people being 

dental therapists alone. 

 

So my question to you is simply this — it’s a very simple 

question, Mr. Minister: are you prepared to train them in other 

positions that will take them into the 21st century which you 

regularly talk about in this legislature? Are you prepared to do 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — A couple of points I would like to 

make in response to the hon. member. First of all, I think she 

underestimates anybody’s intelligence when she suggests that 

somehow people will wait for 10 years. I think that’s a 

nonsensical statement for the most part. 

 

The second point was the hon. member tried to suggest, Mr. 

Chairman, that somehow we don’t have a record that we can be 

proud of as a government when it comes to training spaces. 

What I would say to you is this. You’re so proud of the NDP 

legacy. Are you then equally proud of what our government has 

done in terms of, we now, today, this very day in this province, 

despite all the rhetoric that you talked about in terms of 

cut-backs, despite all your rhetoric due to changes and slashing 

and decimation and all those overstated, over-inflated bits of 

rhetoric that you engage in, the reality is this. 

 

Point number one and fact number one — and I’ve read it in 

this record many times before, and I’ll read it again. There are 

1,200 more training spaces in the institutes today than there 

were when the NDP were in office. Point number two, when the 

NDP were in office there were virtually no extension programs 

at the institute level for all of Saskatchewan, and this year we 

have budgeted for 2,600 students to take programs, institute 

programs, in the country, across this province. 

 

That program, Mr. Chairman, didn’t even exist when the 

wonderful NDP were in government — 1,200 more spaces at 

the institutes, 2,600 students will take programs across this 

province and, Mr. Chairman, 34 per cent more spaces and 

enrolments at our universities. Now that’s what I call 

performance, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. My 

question to the minister is to do with the Humboldt school 

district, and the public school. First of all, has the funding 

formula for concession grants been changed? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Yes, the formula now . . . Whereas in 

the past, school boards would ante up something in the order of 

10 per cent, now, on average, that same number will be closer 

to 20 per cent, but it does vary somewhat. And certainly we 

recognize that there’ll be a greater expectation there on behalf 

of the local school board. That’s the down side, I suspect, from 

their side. 

 

(1545) 

 

However, because when my department held some meetings 

across the province with school boards last winter, a number of 

points were raised with them relative 

to the unfairness of the system as it was presently. And one of 

those unfairnesses or hardships of the present system was that 

school boards had to come up with their down payment all in 

one year. 

 

So although we have asked for a greater share from the local 

school board, we have said now that you can amortize it out 

over 10 years, and hence in any one year, avoid an overly large 

drain on the local burgesses. And I think, for the most part, 

people aren’t terribly unhappy with the new funding formula. 

 

There were some other changes, too, relative to roof 

construction or repairing of roofs. There was an unfairness 

raised by some school boards wherein the situation like this 

could develop, or did develop in some instances, that some 

school boards religiously repaired their roofs and made sure 

they were kept in good shape, and hence never got into a major 

repair. And I think the cut-off was $50,000 before you’d get 

assistance from the provincial government. 

 

Others, they argued, unfairly took advantage of the provincial 

taxpayer, let their roofs go until they were a large project and 

then eligible for provincial funding. So those who looked after 

their roofs regularly felt they were being penalized unfairly for 

being good custodians, and so we made some changes there as 

well. 

 

All of these have been in the interest of fairness and being as 

reasonable as possible, and recognizing sometimes the hardship 

of a large increase and the impact of a large increase in mill 

rates in any one given year. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — According to a newspaper clipping from 

Wednesday, August 5 in the Humboldt Journal, the board 

chairman says that when the negotiations for this project that 

they have in mind, of enlarging the space at the Humboldt 

public school, when it started it was a 2 per cent a couple of 

years ago, and now, under the new formula, it’s up to nearly 17 

per cent. 

 

That amounts to $275,000, or a 47 mill increase. I don’t think, 

Mr. Minister, in these times when the taxpayers of the rural 

areas are overburdened already, that they should be asked to 

pick up this extra tab, especially when you drag your feet on the 

negotiations from the time when it was 2 per cent until now 

when it’s about 17 per cent. 

 

I would like to ask specifically about the project going . . . At 

the request of the Humboldt public school board, with regard to 

the public school, I would like to ask what stage this is at and 

why it has not yet been finalized. 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Inceptual approval has been given for 

that project. That would be point number one. So our approval 

has been given to go ahead with it. And there is active and 

ongoing negotiations in so far as details of final cost of project 

and that sort of thing. 

 

I recognize the point the hon. member is making, and I am 

sympathetic to the board’s point in that, you know, if we go 

back to the old rule, so to speak, there was less cost involved to 

them than in the new rules. But I would argue, I suppose, that if 

we had gone the other way, they wouldn’t . . . if we’d have 

gone from a situation where 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1740 

 

their cost under the new rules was half as much, they wouldn’t 

have wanted to hold to the old rules. 

 

And I remind you again, of course, that if, one, they now have 

the ability to amortize this out over 10 years, which 

substantially dampens the effect . . . and I think you would 

recognize that yourself. It’s like . . . you don’t try to pay for 

farm land that you or I might buy, all in one year. I think what 

we’ve applied is the same kind of logic here for school boards. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the problem 

that I find with that is that, sure, you can put it over 10 years, 

but it still comes out of the pockets of the taxpayers of that area 

who can ill afford to be taxed any more, in the fact that, you 

know, when it started it was 2 per cent. Is there any way that 

you will rearrange or adjust the formula in this specific case to a 

level at which it should have been at if this project have gone 

ahead, let’s say a year ago? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Well as I said earlier, there has been 

consultations and discussions with school board members and 

my officials. What you’re asking me for is to make a special 

deal for Humboldt. And I guess I would say this: I would love 

to make a special deal for them. However, I think you will also 

recognize that what I do for Humboldt, I must be able to do for 

all school boards across this province in support of the 

argument of fairness. I think people expect nothing less than 

that from government — to be fair. 

 

And so what you do for one school board, you should do for 

others. And that’s why we have these formulas in the first place, 

to make sure that we reflect fairness in society in so far as what 

the assessments are and what enrolments are and those kinds of 

things. I’m very hesitant to tamper with the formula. Because 

then one other member there might stand up and say, well . . . 

The member from Saskatoon who was questioning me about a 

school project there, he might stand up and say, well, you did 

this special deal for Humboldt, now will you do that for 

Saskatoon. And the hon. member for North Battleford will say, 

well you did that for Humboldt. 

 

I think the point that you ought to recognize here . . . because 

sometimes governments are criticized wrongly, unfortunately, 

for not building schools in opposition ridings. I think you will 

recognize a number of projects that have been raised here, and 

not one of them with a view to “haven’t you approved the 

project: with that one exception, I think. But the point is, if the 

projects are approved and I think you should be . . . that speaks 

well for the evaluation process and the non-political nature of 

the valuation and priorization process that we have in this 

province. But I’m reluctant to interfere with the formula 

because then the issue becomes one of setting a precedent, a 

dangerous precedent, and the issue then becomes one of 

fairness. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I’m very glad, Mr. Minister, 

that you brought up the issue of fairness. Because I could go on 

here for hours about the unfairness of this government. You 

deny the people of, in this case, of Humboldt, a facility unless 

they put out up front $275,000, approximately, out of their 

pockets, in a community, in a 

rural community where we know that there are many hardships 

because of the agricultural sector. You talk about fairness in 

that respect and you turn around and you’ve given $300 million 

a year to the oil companies for a royalty holiday. Is that the kind 

of fairness that the people of this province should come to 

expect in your books? 

 

You’ve given George Hill $200,000 a year to be chairman of 

PCS. Is that fair when you ask the people of the Humboldt area 

to dig deep into their pockets to shell out for a school for their 

kids? That’s the type of fairness that we should be talking about 

here. 

 

Mr. Minister, the department — your Department of Education 

— you should be well advised to think about fairness and talk a 

little less about it. Because the situation we have today, you 

have no fairness in your department or in any other department 

in this government. 

 

So I would just like to say that I’m disappointed that the process 

hasn’t come quicker to enable the school board to get this 

facility going at a time when the rates were less. I’m 

disappointed you’ve dragged your feet on it and now asking 

them to have to dig into their pockets and pull out a whole 

bunch more money, money that should have come from other 

sectors instead of giving them tax holidays and patronization. 

 

So I would say to you, Mr. Minister, I wish you’d think about 

fairness a little more and do a little less talking about it. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister a 

number of specific questions about the University of 

Saskatchewan, and the first one relates to tuition rates at the 

university. In the last five years, Mr. Minister, tuition rates at 

the University of Saskatchewan were up 43 per cent, from $870 

to $1,254. A 43 per cent increase, Mr. Minister, in the last five 

years. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Minister, the operating grant from your 

government to the University of Saskatchewan is up only 20 per 

cent during the same time. What is in effect happening, sir, is 

that students are being asked to pay tuition rates double that of 

the rate of inflation and double that of the increase of your 

operating grant. 

 

And I ask you: do you not acknowledge that your underfunding 

to the University of Saskatchewan is in effect resulting in this 

very, very unfair and substantial increase in tuition rates, and 

that this increase in tuition rates of 43 per cent in five years 

represents a very real obstacle for many students to be able to 

obtain a post-secondary education? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Well as it relates to tuition fees, and 

really what we’re talking about, we talked tuition fees or the 

cost of books or the cost of housing, or anything else that 

impacts on a student’s pocket book, it impacts on his 

accessibility to . . . or his opportunity to go to an institution. 

And that’s what we’re really talking about here, and we want to 

make sure that that accessibility is maintained and enhanced at 

every opportunity we get — every opportunity we have. 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1741 

 

Now whether the board of governors, in their wisdom, are too 

high or too low or whatever, relative to their number that 

they’ve chosen this year for a tuition fee increase, I’m not about 

to second guess it. Certainly I’m aware of what they are. In the 

case of the U of R, it’s 9.41 per cent, I think it is; at the U of S, 

it’s something in the order of 9.9 or 10 per cent. 

 

Now I think any student would just as soon not be faced with 

any increase, but I think for the most part students didn’t see 

those as unreasonable particularly. I think if one looks across 

western Canada, we’re lower than British Columbia, for 

example, probably about the same as Manitoba. But I think 

interprovincially we stack up very well. 

 

I’ve read into this record many, many times as the hon. member 

would know, our track record on funding. And I don’t think 

when he talks about our government underfunding universities 

that he’s being particularly accurate there, or maybe not 

necessarily wanting to be particularly accurate. 

 

I think the other index that’s useful to look at here that backs up 

the fact that whatever is happening at our universities, 

accessibility is not being denied. And the reason I say that is if 

you look at the last four or five years, the number of full-time 

equivalent students attending universities is up — is up to 14 

per cent and more. So by every measure, I think the laws and 

the rationale and the reasoning that’s been applied here, ahs 

been the laws of reasoning and compassion and sympathy and 

understanding for the students’ plight. 

 

But as I said to you in this House before in a particular question 

period, it’s not much use for us to sit there and argue about the 

problem of accessibility unless you’re prepared to do 

something. And that’s exactly why our government and our 

party under our Premier is interested in delivering, whether it be 

institute programming or university programming, more and 

more programming across rural Saskatchewan so that people 

can stay in their communities for at least some of the job 

training; in the case of those who have jobs, maybe all of their 

training if they want to be upgraded. 

 

Because as much as we can focus — and the headlines tend 

most often to be focused on tuition fees — the big costs for 

every student that I run into, that has to go to an institution and 

leave his home and go into the cities to take a course or courses, 

the big cost is not his tuition feel, it’s a significant cost, but it’s 

not his biggest cost. His biggest cost is the room and board bill. 

And that’s why we are putting a lot of effort into the distance 

education, the community outreach, and our new regional 

college network. We want to do something about accessibility, 

not merely talk about it. And I’m sure that you applaud that 

initiative. 

 

We saw a story in the Leader-Post the other day — 14 

communities across this province going to get University of 

Saskatchewan, I think it was English and history, fed across this 

province. Now those people that will be able to take that course 

in Weyburn or Meadow Lake, or wherever it’s being offered, 

will save that $6,000 or $10,000 a year in room and board cost. 

(1600) 

 

And sure, a tuition fee of $1,185, which is what it is for a U of S 

agriculture student this upcoming year, is significant. It’s 

significant. But the 6 or $7,000 that it costs him for room and 

board is also very significant. And if he can take some of that, 

or a first year of that, at home, he’s very, very much . . . his 

pocket-book is very, very much ahead. 

 

So what I’m trying to say to the hon. member is the board of 

governors gives very serious consideration to these. I, myself, 

have consulted with students where it made . . . where we have 

some jurisdiction, for example at the institutes. They’ve been 

minimized to the degree that they can be minimized, and 

they’re very fair when you compare them with the rest of 

western Canada, certainly. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, let me just say briefly that I 

don’t think students at the University of Regina or the 

University of Saskatchewan consider a 10 per cent tuition rate 

increase this year to be reasonable. That increase is not the fault 

of the board of governors at those two institutions. That 

increase is the fault of your government and your government’s 

underfunding. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I say to you that when there has been tuition 

rate increases over the last five years under your government 

that are double the rate of inflation, that is an unfair burden on 

students and a burden that is uncalled for. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a number . . . a related 

question. You will be aware that full-time student enrolment at 

the University of Saskatchewan has been increasing very 

steadily and significantly, from 10,818 students in 1981-82 to 

13,766 students in fiscal year 1986-87. And you’ll also be 

aware that most of this increase has taken place in the College 

of Arts and Science. In fact, that college now has 3,000 

additional students to what it had a decade ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I would point out to you that the College of 

Arts and Science operating budget, despite that very substantial 

increase in student numbers, has only increased in real terms 

three-quarters of 1 per cent in the last five years. During that 

time, Mr. Minister, that very real lack of funding has resulted, 

first of all, in major increases in class size, and you could see it, 

for instance, in introductory classes. First year history classes 

up from 40 students to 100 students over the last six years. 

Economics, 40 students five or six years ago; average 

introductory class size now, 100 students. In French, up from 25 

students to 40 students in the average size of an introductory 

class. Mr. Minister, in some cases, such as in psychology, we’re 

looking at class sizes now of 350. 

 

And those increases in class sizes, Mr. Minister, have resulted 

in a very real decline in the quality of education in the College 

of Arts and Science. In a lot of cases, Mr. Minister, term 

assignments had to be seriously decreased because the faculty 

members are simply not able to handle the marking load any 

further. And students are being examined with multiple choice 

questions, graded by a computer, instead of comprehensive 

final examination questioning. Well, Mr. Minister, in my view 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1742 

 

this is not what students have in mind by a quality university 

education. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: in light of the very 

substantial enrolment increases that have taken place at the 

University of Saskatchewan over the past number of year, why 

has your funding, since you’ve been in government in this past 

5 years, not taken account of these very, very substantial 

enrolment increases? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — The hon. member raises a question 

relative to the whole issue of enrolments. And much as the 

increasing enrolments, on one hand, can be seen to be a 

problem, my view is what increasing enrolments tell us is that 

we’re a — That’s something we should be proud of. A number 

of our adult population, and our young people coming out of 

high schools, are having the opportunity to go to university. 

And I think, what a tremendous stride forward over the last 10, 

20, 30, 40 years! 

 

And you accused our government of somehow not keeping up 

our expenditures; our allocations to universities haven’t kept up 

with the enrolments. And I will read a widely distributed 

document — the one I handed around in this House a couple, 

three nights ago — the Preparing for the Year 2000. 

 

And what does it say on page 8? I mean what are the facts? 

What are the facts, hon. member? It says in there on page 8, and 

I’ll read briefly from it. 

 

. . . enrollment has risen 35 per cent since 1980. And 

government funding has been increased by more than 60 

per cent. 

 

So you know you can’t . . . your logic, it defies the facts. But as 

I read into the . . . I talked about it the other night. It’s not good 

enough to dismiss it just by my data supports that we are. 

Because that gets around the real thing that we’re both 

interested in, and that is making sure that people have the 

opportunity. 

 

And in the university’s own paper, Issues and Options, some of 

the numbers there that I thought were particularly interesting 

. . . And it’s a mark of a civilized society; we’ve gone from a 

situation before 1920 where 3 per cent or less of our young 

people attended university to where, in 1985, that number now 

is up to 15 per cent. And even from one Saskatoon — where 

you come from — school board division, 25 to 35 per cent of 

the high school graduates there go on to university. 

 

And I say, what a tremendous stride forward — 25 to 35 per 

cent in the late ‘80s as opposed to 3 per cent 50 years ago. I say, 

what a tremendous stride forward. And although some people 

look at increasing enrolments as a problem, I look upon them 

positively as saying to us that a number of young people are 

having the opportunity in gaining accessibility to our 

post-secondary institutions. 

 

Now the same number, of course, for rural Saskatchewan it 

isn’t as high. And that’s one of the reasons why we’re 

bolstering the role of regional colleges to try and give 

opportunity and accessibility in the North and in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

And one other point that the Issues and Options paper made, 

Mr. Chairman, that’s worthy of note here, especially given what 

the Regina Lakeview member talked about earlier, and as well 

the Health critic — a relative number of women have an 

accessibility to universities. In 1970, 37 per cent of the 

enrolment were females. In 1985, it was just 1 per cent short of 

50 per cent. That is to say, one out of two enrolled were 

women. And I say, what another mark of accomplishment and 

one we should look upon with pride that that statistic is, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

So, much as the issue you raise has got a positive side and a 

negative side, certainly, in terms of the challenges that our 

system face, I think we should be proud of what these numbers 

tell us in that more and more of our young people and our adults 

— young adults and old adults alike — are getting upgrading 

and retraining, what these numbers tell us in terms of the 

enrolments. And I would say to you once again that you can 

factor in inflation, you can factor in enrolments, but the money 

has kept pace. 

 

Now if you’re asking me, could we use more at universities? 

Certainly, we could always use more. But don’t try and give me 

the line that we’re not keeping pace, because it’s simply not 

true. I’ve made that point in this House before. It’s for all the 

public to see in that document, and I stand by it. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I beg to differ. I would 

argue that your funding has not kept pace with inflation and has 

certainly not taken account of increased student enrolment. 

 

And I simply give you — I give you the figures, sir. In 1983, 

your funding to the University of Saskatchewan was 

$85,645,000; in 1988, it’s $104,256,000. By my calculation, sir, 

that’s only a funding increase over the five-year period of 20.3 

per cent. That is not only below the rate of inflation, but it 

certainly does not take account of the very substantive increase 

in enrolment at the University of Saskatchewan during that 

time. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to move to a related topic, and that is 

the question of your failure, the failure of your government to 

pass along the funds that you have received from the 

Government of Canada for university and technical school 

education to the universities and technical schools of this 

province. 

 

As you will be aware, Mr. Minister, on March 14, 1985, Mr. 

Alan Johnson tabled a report to the House of Commons 

representing a detailed study of federal financing for 

post-secondary education in Canada. And one of the major 

points that Mr. Johnson makes in his report is that provincial 

governments across the country have been steadily reducing 

their spending on post-secondary education, while the federal 

government’s contribution to post-secondary education 

represents a bigger and bigger portion of university and 

technical institute budgets. 

 

Simply put, Mr. Minister, fund that Ottawa is allocating to 

universities and technical institutes are not getting to those 

post-secondary education institutes. According to  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1743 

 

Mr. Johnson, federal funds and tax points from Ottawa 

constituted 90.3 per cent of Saskatchewan operating grants to 

universities and technical institutes. Could you confirm that 

fact, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Three points I would make here as 

quickly as I can. I sympathize with the hon. member who’s a 

little bit under the weather today, I take it. 

 

As it relates to established programs’ financing, in terms of the 

history of that . . . As you well know . . . Block funding 

approach. That didn’t distinguish between money that should go 

to health versus money that should go to education. What the 

federal government’s view might have been would have been 

entirely arbitrary and not accepted by the provinces in so far as 

what should go where, etc., etc. 

 

But having said all of that, Saskatchewan’s expenditures on 

post-secondary education, whether it’s that report you refer to 

or one other from the federal secretary of the state, pointed out 

that Saskatchewan’s expenditure on post-secondary education 

increased by 17.1 per cent from ‘83-84 to ‘85-86. And what 

makes that particularly notable, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is that’s 

the highest, the highest rate of increases among the provinces. 

 

The hon. member doesn’t have to accept my numbers for what 

we’ve been doing in terms of support for universities; there is 

the federal Secretary of State. And I would further go on to add 

that the numbers that they have there . . . that they use, Mr. 

Chairman, underestimated our expenditures in ‘85-86 by an 

additional 35 millions of dollars. 

 

So look how good the story would have been if they’d have had 

the proper numbers . . . if the federal government had the proper 

numbers. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would point out to you 

that Mr. Alan Johnson’s study was done prior to your two-year 

budget freeze on university funding in this province. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, that we are rapidly moving towards a 

situation where the provincial government is putting in a 

minuscule amount of the funding that is going to our 

universities and technical institutes. The large bulk of that is 

being put in by the Government of Canada. 

 

In effect, sir, what’s happening is that you are failing to pass 

along, to the universities of this province, the funding that is 

being provided to your government from Ottawa for 

post-secondary education. 

 

And my question to you, sir, is this. Would you be prepared to 

advocate a policy long put forward by the Association of 

Universities and Colleges of Canada, namely that federal 

transfers intended for post-secondary education should be spent 

in that sector and should be matched by the provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — I would reiterate, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, and hon. member, that we do not accept the  

arbitrary, very arbitrary division that the federal government 

makes on those expenditures. The second point is that once 

again they have underestimated the expenditure. 

 

But having said all of that, Saskatchewan’s expenditures on 

post-secondary education have risen by 50 per cent in the last 

five years, while total EPF (established program of financing) 

entitlements rose by only 35 per cent during the same period. 

 

So dissect it every which way you like, and the bottom line is 

that we more than made up for what was coming from . . . We 

exceeded our contributions to post-secondary education by far, 

in so far as what we were getting from the federal government, 

if one did accept some kind of arbitrary allocation. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s our view on this side 

of the House, that education, and spending on education should 

be seen as an investment in the future of the young people of 

this province, and you’ve talked a lot in this Assembly about 

preparing for the information age, preparing for the year 2000, 

preparing for the high-technology society. 

 

It’s obvious that we have very different interpretations of your 

funding policies for the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina, and we seriously question many of the 

figures that you’ve put forward. But it should be obvious to you 

that we will never have an adequate base for science and 

technology in Saskatchewan if we curtail university funding. If 

there’s to be a future for high tech and for science in this 

province, it requires a strong university base. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, it’s obvious to me that your funding 

provisions since you assumed office, for universities, have not 

kept pace with increased university enrolment. It’s also obvious 

that you are not passing along the funds that you are receiving 

from Ottawa for post-secondary education to our university 

institutions. 

 

And the question that I want to ask you is this: would you be 

prepared to change your funding policies and to undertake an 

initiative in which you adopt a five-year funding plan for the 

University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina that 

fully takes into account their inflationary costs? Will you sit 

down with the University of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan and work out a formula for funding over the next 

five years that accurately measures their real rate of inflation, 

that builds in provisions for offsetting the decline in the quality 

of education that’s taken place over the past few years; that 

builds in provisions for rebuilding the quality of education at 

our university campuses. Would you be prepared to support that 

kind of a five-year funding plan? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — For the very reasons the hon. member 

has talked about, I think we are already out of the chute on this 

one. That’s exactly why we set up the university renewal and 

development fund, to allow for that five-year planning. It’s 

gone very well, and things like the new agriculture college, the 

library acquisitions, just to name a couple of projects in recent 

days that have been given the green lights, I think that 

approach, the five-year  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1744 

 

planning approach, has been working well. 

 

As it relates to my meetings with the board of governors, that 

was exactly what was behind that brief, was to give the 

university board of governors some thinking, as best as one can 

ever guess the future, in so far as what they could expect and 

plan around over the next four years. 

 

So I think . . . You say five. I guess we gave some indication for 

the next four years. I don’t think we’re very far apart on that. 

And I think that process is well under way, and at the same time 

it respects their autonomy and their right to make decisions 

relative to their universities. But the windows and the process 

. . . or not the window, but the process is there — five years on 

the RDF (renewal and development fund) side and four year on 

the other side. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’re pleased with your 

renewal and development fund initiative, but that’s not what 

we’re talking about here. We’re talking about operating grant 

funds. It’s that that I’m suggesting ought to be on a five-year 

plan, and not simply your renewal and development funding. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, as you’re aware, the University of 

Saskatchewan has had to take two unprecedented actions as a 

result of your underfunding to that university. First, it’s been 

forced to impose an enrolment quota in the College of Arts and 

Science. If one simply assumes that enrolments in that college 

were going to be the same as last year, at least 300 students will 

be turned away. All indications are, however, that the number 

of students who will need to be turned away will be far higher 

than that. It’ll likely end up being in the range of 500 students, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

And second, in large part again because of the financial 

pressures that you’ve placed on the University of 

Saskatchewan, the university will be closing it’s College of 

Home Economics. This is the first time in the history of the 

university that the university has had to close down an entire 

college. That college had an enviable record of service to the 

people of Saskatchewan. It was the first college in Canada to 

grant a degree in home economics, and it’s got an enrolment of 

265 students and 11 faculty members. 

 

Mr. Minister, the crisis in funding to the University of 

Saskatchewan has gone beyond overcrowded class-rooms, a 

reduction in the quality of education, outmoded facilities and 

equipment, library services that are deteriorating. It’s reached 

the point where the right of qualified students to a university 

education is being denied, and where major program cuts and in 

fact the shutting down of an entire college have had to be 

implemented. 

 

My question to you is this: in light of the crisis in funding at the 

University of Saskatchewan, will you drop your two-year 

budget freeze on the University of Saskatchewan? And will you 

grant the University of Saskatchewan an increase in the range of 

at least five and a half to 6 per cent that reflects its inflationary 

costs in the year 1987-88? 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, I 

think we’re covering and re-covering some ground that we’ve 

gone over today and in the days previous, relative to the 

universities and funding and financing. But just for the hon. 

member’s information again — and what he said we’re talking 

about here is operating money and a five-year planning process, 

and perhaps he didn’t hear me — in the brief that I presented to 

both boards, what we talked about there was some indication of 

what they might expect over the next four years. And we can 

quibble about whether it should be four or five. I think our 

objective is the same, and that’s under control, if you like, or 

it’s already been accomplished. We’re out of the chute on that 

one already. 

 

In so far as inflationary factors, I think arguments can be made, 

and quite rightly so, that the students aren’t an inflationary 

factor. They’re a source of revenue. So one has to be careful 

how one anticipates students; either they’re a drag on the 

university or on the university’s budget, or an asset to them. 

And I think the case can be made, and rightly so, that they are, 

you know, they generate revenue for the university. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, your answer is entirely 

unsatisfactory. I want to ask you two other specific questions 

about the University of Saskatchewan. One is a memo that you 

circulated there on March 17. And I find this memo, as I 

mentioned to you the other day, similar to the one at the 

University of Regina, very distressing. I find it a clear attempt 

by your government to interfere with the autonomy of the 

university. 

 

I want to make one specific reference to the University of 

Saskatchewan memo. You talk in there about the University 

needing to address conditions of work on the campus. You say, 

and I quote: 

 

There is also concern within society as a whole that 

academic staff enjoy some conditions of work that may be 

out of step with experience elsewhere in society. 

 

You go on to say: 

 

The government believes that it’s important to address 

these issues at this time. 

 

And finally, you suggest that: 

 

The universities could use a joint report on terms and 

conditions of work to address the concern that some 

conditions of work may be outdated and in need of 

overhaul. 

 

Mr. Minister, in my view this is clearly a veiled attack by your 

government on the basic principles of tenure and sabbatical. As 

in the case of the University of Regina memo, the whole tone of 

your memo interferes with university autonomy. And I ask you, 

sir: will you withdraw that memo? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Well, the hon. member, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman raises again in this House today, that somehow the 

briefs . . . and at the University of Regina’s  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1745 

 

request, I might add that they . . . The very first time I met with 

that board, they asked me to come and give them some vision as 

to where the province saw itself going over the next few years, 

and what it might mean to them. So it was almost at an 

invitation, although not explicit. 

 

If he somehow is of the view that I’ve stepped on and 

encroached upon the autonomy of the universities, clearly he is 

the only person who is of that view, because neither president, 

nor chancellors, nor boards of governors, nor chairmans of 

boards of governors have raised the issue with me. And in fact, 

I would read into the record what president Chris Johnson had 

to say about this whole issue in the summer 1987 of the Green 

and White. And I quote: 

 

The university recognizes the need for current budget 

restraints and must accept them at this time. However, it is 

equally important that government accept the autonomy of 

the university in arriving at its judgement about the 

trade-offs between program cuts and quality, as well as the 

priorities among the potential cuts identified. This 

autonomy, traditional in democratic societies, has been 

reconfirmed by the government in communications to the 

board of governors. 

 

End of quotation, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I think I can say it no 

more clearly than what the president did. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s still my contention 

that that memo . . . the minister says, “only my contention.” I 

suggest that that contention that your memo interferes with 

university autonomy is widely held by faculty members at the 

University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to ask the minister a specific question with respect to 

capital planning at the University of Saskatchewan. Now that 

you’ve approved the College of Agriculture being constructed, 

Mr. Minister, the next facility on top of the University of 

Saskatchewan’s priority list for capital construction is a new 

facility for the drama department at the University of 

Saskatchewan. This facility, Mr. Minister, is very urgently 

needed. 

 

The drama department is currently housed in an old hangar 

building at the University of Saskatchewan campus, which was 

acquired as a temporary structure in 1945. It’s deteriorated very 

badly since then, and has been subject to serious flooding in the 

last year. There is no good space for teaching and performing in 

the building, Mr. Minister. Enrolment over the last few years 

has risen dramatically from 138 in 1975-76 to 407 students in 

1986-87. 

 

(1630) 

 

There is no space at all in the building to lecture to a class of 

more than 20 students. The electrical and the heating systems 

are not working properly. Storage space is totally inadequate. 

 

Mr. Minister, the drama department is one of the places on the 

campus that’s most frequented by the general public. And as 

you will well know, the work of the drama  

department visibly extends into the city of Saskatoon and the 

province of Saskatchewan. We on this side of the House believe 

that fine arts is central to the life of the community and should 

be properly housed. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the University of Saskatchewan founded the 

first drama department in the British commonwealth in 1945. 

That department has done a lot to foster the arts in 

Saskatchewan. And my question to you is this: will you now 

indicate your support for the work of that department by 

committing your government to funding a new facility for the 

drama department, and can you indicate when such funding will 

be made available? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Well, under the auspices of the 

university renewal and development fund established by our 

Premier and by the Progressive Conservative government of our 

Premier, many projects have gone forward, not the least of 

which was the green light and the approval given for the 

agricultural sciences building, the new Agriculture College at 

the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the member may raise a legitimate concern about another 

facility that, in his mind, should go forward. And I’m sure it’ll 

receive fair consideration by all concerned. 

 

I find it somewhat hypocritical for him to raise that and to talk 

about projects that are long overdue when it was his 

government, knowing full well that agriculture is the main 

economic engine in this province, that that project sat and sat 

and sat and sat and waited for approval, not for one or tow or 

three or even ten years, Mr. Deputy Chairman, but for 25 long 

years before our Premier, a man who understands agriculture, 

came along and got a hold of the situation and gave that project 

a green light in conjunction with some very creative initiatives 

at the . . . by our president at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I could go on and list the projects, such as the 

administration building, a new administration build, heating 

plant projects, animal resource centre, computer system — a 

number of projects over $100,000 — library acquisitions, waste 

management, pharmacy additions, high technology equipment, 

our general rehabilitation and equipment purchases, by 

themselves very important, and as well, other projects under 

way. 

 

So our record is clear when it comes to: (a) first, recognizing 

that there needed to be a plan in establishing a university 

renewal and development plan, and then acting on it, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I have one final area of 

questioning for you, and that is with respect to the Canadian 

Jobs Strategy and apprenticeship programming in this province. 

 

I’ve got, as I’ve mentioned to you in this Assembly before, I 

have a lot of very serious reservations about the Canadian Jobs 

Strategy program. This program, Mr. Minister, at the federal 

level has effectively brought together all previous job creation 

and training programs that existed at the federal level into six 

programs that operate under the heading of Canadian Jobs 

Strategy. And  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1746 

 

what’s become obvious to me is that the Canadian Jobs Strategy 

program is really not a job strategy at all. There are no job 

creation initiatives by government in that program, Mr. 

Minister, on a long-term basis, that I can see. 

 

It seems to me that Canadian Jobs Strategy assumes that labour 

market planning is simply a matter of matching workers in 

available jobs. And there is, therefore, an implied acceptance of 

high regional unemployment rates, such as the high rates that 

we experience in many parts of Saskatchewan, particularly, 

northern Saskatchewan. By not having a job strategy integrated 

into your training strategy, all that’s happening, Mr. Minister, is 

that the newly trained are often being sent out to non-existent 

jobs and are being replaced with another group of unemployed 

persons. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, it seems to me that the Canadian Jobs 

Strategy program has paved the way for you closing programs 

at the technical institutes like barbering, office education, the 

dental assistants program, truck driver training program, 

cosmetology, at the technical institutes. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you acknowledge the fact that your cuts to 

these programs that I’ve just mentioned at Saskatchewan 

technical institutes are, in effect, directly tied into the Canadian 

Jobs Strategy program, and the fact that many of those training 

opportunities are going to be contracted out to employers in the 

private sector? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — The first point I would want to make is 

that CJS (Canadian Jobs Strategy program) — and that’s a 

document or an agreement that we are just getting very close to 

signing with the federal government. The first one we should 

make very clear . . . because to make the assumption that the 

Canadian Jobs Strategy is somehow determined, and aimed us 

in the direction of where program changes would be made, is 

untrue. It’s fair to say that their philosophy there, as is ours, is a 

shift away from make-work kind of projects, to making sure we 

have training for real, if you like, in quotation marks, 

“employment”. 

 

And I noticed the hon. member used the words “cuts” again. 

And I think you have to be very careful with your language, 

because when you use the word “cuts”, that flies directly in the 

face of the fact, I once again would put into the record, that this 

very day there are 1,200 more training spaces than there were 

four or five years ago in this province, and 2,600 students, this 

next year, across rural Saskatchewan will have an opportunity 

to take extension programs — institute extension programs — 

across this entire province. 

 

So you must be very careful there with your language. I think 

that . . . because to suggest that there are cuts when there are in 

fact 1,200 more spaces would be somewhat in error. Changes 

have been made, yes, for reasons we’ve debated earlier, but 

certainly there are more spaces. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you two very 

specific questions. As you know there has been a dramatic 

decrease in the number of people taking apprenticeship training 

in the province of Saskatchewan. I wonder if you could give 

this Assembly the figures for  

the number of people who were taking apprenticeship training 

in 1982 as compared to the number of people who are taking 

apprenticeship training today? Could you give us those figures, 

sir? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — I have provincial comparisons: number 

of indentured apprentices, ‘81-82 in Saskatchewan . . . now I 

won’t get exact here, I’ll give you some rough ideas. In ‘81-82 

run in roughly 5,000-5,100; ‘83-84 it ran 46 to 4,400; ’85 it was 

4,000 roughly; ’86, 3,500; ’87, 3,500. 

 

To give you some example of how Saskatchewan stacks up 

relatively to Alberta, they went from 28, 27,000, ‘81-82; down 

to 18,600, 18,100 in ’86 and ’87; British Columbia — the story 

even more dramatic there in some ways — 18,852 in ’81; 

16,990 in ’82; down to ’86 number 4,350. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, there’s obviously been a 

very substantial drop in the number of people taking 

apprenticeship training, and that’s of great concern to me 

because what that means is a significant drop in the number of 

journeymen available for work in this province, and that 

obviously means a significant reduction in the quality of work 

being done on construction sites in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 

 

It used to be, five or six years ago when the NDP government 

was in, that construction companies would hire a carpenter or a 

millwright, in other words someone specifically trained and 

either apprenticing or having their journeyman’s papers in a 

specific trade, to do a particular job. Now what you see around 

this province, instead, is general utility workers being hired to 

do the work that a specialized tradesman used to do. 

 

And what’s happening, Mr. Minister, is that the employers of 

this province in the construction industry imply aren’t hiring 

indentured apprentices any more to do that work. And that’s 

one of the reasons why there’s been such a very substantial drop 

in the number of apprentices training at our technical institutes 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I would like to have your assurance, given 

the fact that you’re entering into a Canadian Jobs Strategy 

agreement with the Government of Canada, I want your 

commitment that Canadian Jobs Strategy funding will not 

replace the existing apprenticeship programs that are being 

conducted at our technical institutes. 

 

In other words, sir, I want your assurance that we will not get 

into a situation in this province where employers are contracted 

with, through Canadian Jobs Strategy, to deliver apprenticeship 

training that rightly ought to be done at the technical institutes 

of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — A couple of points relative to 

apprenticeship. There is a study, either under way or soon to be 

undertaken, relative to apprenticeships as they result with 

federal/provincial co-operation on that study. 

 

The second point I would make is that relative to  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1747 

 

apprenticeship funding under Canadian Jobs Strategy, up until 

two years ago it has always been funded under the terms and 

conditions of the federal/provincial training agreement, and 

that’s not dissimilar to the fact now that it falls under the 

Canadian Jobs Strategy. 

 

A further point I would make — and I think the fact that we’re 

into a study indicates that we have some concerns and want to 

make sure we’re on the money here relative to apprenticeship 

and apprenticeship training. The other point I would like to read 

into the record for the hon. member — because I think it’s 

worthy of note in terms of our commitment to journeymen and 

tradesmen across this province — is that one of the very big 

issues there, as you have rightly pointed out, is the training. 

 

The other side, I also find that what they’re saying is that I need 

the opportunity, I’m a tradesman or a journeyman, but I need 

the opportunity to be re-skilled or upgraded. And here we have 

some pretty startling numbers for you. Last year there was 70 

updating and upgrading courses across the province for nearly 

1,000 adults in the tradesman and journeyman area; and this 

year we’re forecasting 287 programs for over 4,000 adults. 

That’s a fair commitment. I mean I think if you stacked it up 

against the numbers I read into the record earlier, that’s a real 

commitment to making sure those people have the tools and the 

knowledge and the skills for the new economy. 

 

And I mean if there’s an issue, I think, that what we’re talking 

about here . . . is what we’re really talking about is the 

implications of the new economy, and what has its effect been 

on the numbers of indentured apprentices, and what does the 

implication of the new economy mean in terms of them being 

upgraded and retrained and reskilled. And I think you can see 

that we’re trying to respond — in a respondent stage, I might 

add — to their concerns, and I think that that’s a point well 

worth noting, and one that we take some fair degree of pride in. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, the figures about high 

enrolments that you’re talking about, I suspect, are in the 

pre-employment training areas where generalists are trained, 

rather than specialized people in the trades. 

 

I suggest to you, sir, that six years ago when the NDP was in 

government, that the courses for apprenticeship training in this 

province were overflowing, and today, on the basis of your own 

statistics, it’s clear that a lot of those class-rooms are half 

empty. You talk about preparing for the year 2000. I say to you, 

that essentially, by cutting back on apprenticeship training in 

this province, what you are doing is leading us into a situation 

where you’re de-skilling the work-force, where you’re 

encouraging training that makes for a utility 1 or utility 2 

employee on a construction site, but not for someone who’s 

under apprenticeship training and ends up getting their 

journeyman certificate. And I think, Mr. Minister, that that’s a 

very real mistake. 

 

We’re quickly heading into a situation in this province, sir, 

where we are going to have to begin importing skilled workers 

in the trades from outside of Saskatchewan because of your 

failure to maintain a sound apprenticeship training program in 

the province of  

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1645) 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, for some time the trades have been pressing 

you to implement compulsory apprenticeship training in a 

number of areas beyond the three areas where it currently exists 

— in the plumbing field, the electrical field and sheet metal. 

Would you be prepared to support compulsory apprenticeship 

training for other trades as a means of upgrading the quality of 

workmanship in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Just one point in terms of our 

commitment to apprenticeship. The budget, ‘86-87, was 4.2 

million, and it’s gone up by over 10 per cent this year — it’s 

4.75 million. So I think that should be a clear signal as to what 

our commitment and our intent is there, and it flies in the face 

of, I think, the member’s observations. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you one final 

question in this are. I might say, Mr. Minister, that it’s our view, 

by the way, that one of the things that you could do to 

substantially enhance the quality of workmanship on 

government-funded projects in this province is if you would 

use, primarily, certified journeymen and indentured apprentices 

on those projects. 

 

But I have one more specific question for you, sir, and that is 

whether you’ll give this House your assurance that the 

provincial apprenticeship board will not be disbanded? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a few specific 

questions on the Canadian Jobs Strategy agreement that you are 

signing with the Government of Canada. And I’ve passed some 

of these questions over to your officials earlier. I hope they’ll 

now have the answers for me. 

 

The point that I specifically want to make about Canadian Jobs 

Strategy is that the Canadian Jobs Strategy program was 

essentially an attempt by the federal government to roll together 

the job creation and training programs offered by the federal 

government at the national level. 

 

And what has in effect happened, Mr. Minister, is that the 

Canadian government was spending $2.25 billion on job 

creation and training in 1984-85; then when the Canadian Jobs 

Strategy program came into effect, the amount that was 

budgeted for that and that was spent on training and job creation 

in Canada, dropped to $1.4 billion. In 1986-87 it was only $1.5 

billion. 

 

So obviously there was a cut of three-quarters of a billion 

dollars in job creation training and . . . in job creation and 

training funds across Canada. And my specific question to you, 

sir, is how much did Saskatchewan lose as a result of that 

national cut-back with respect to the funding for job creation 

and training in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Two points here. First of all, the 

agreement that I hopefully . . . we will sign shortly with the 

federal government — essentially we have a guarantee  

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1748 

 

that the dollars for skill training will not be less, but more. 

 

And secondly, as the hon. member pointed out in the opening of 

his statement there, that he forwarded a number of questions to 

me a couple of hours ago, we’ll endeavour to have those 

answers for you as quickly as we can. But given the short time, 

it may not be even yet today, but we’ll handle them as best we 

can for you, and as quickly as we can. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I’ll let those other questions go 

then. Ill ask you a specific question with respect to Canadian 

Jobs Strategy, under the agreement that you’re signing with the 

Government of Canada. 

 

As you know, Mr. Minister, the Canadian Jobs Strategy 

agreements that are being signed between various provinces and 

the Government of Canada make no provision for the private 

sector who receive contracts for training from the federal 

government. There’s no provision under those contracts for any 

kind of monitoring to ensure that there are minimum quality 

educational standards maintained in that training. 

 

My question to the minister is: in the agreement that you sign 

with the Government of Canada, is there going to be a provision 

for minimum training standards that the private sector will have 

to meet when it gets training contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Well, we’re satisfied that in the 

agreement that we hope will soon be signed, that quality will 

not be jeopardized, albeit that for, in our case and some 

instances it will be a monitoring role. I mean, I don’t think 

there’s anybody that has any interest in seeing standards 

decreased, or our graduates coming from institutions, private or 

public, where the credentials are somehow in question. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s clear then that there is 

going to be no provision for minimum quality standards for 

education in this agreement. In other words, we’re going to be 

into a situation where employers in the private sector, whether it 

to be a truck driving company or a hairdressing salon, that 

choose to put on an educational program and get contracts from 

the Canadian Jobs Strategy, it appears are not going to have to 

meet any minimal quality standards for training as a result of 

the agreement that you’ve signed. And I think, sir, that that is 

very, very unfortunate. 

 

One of the other concerns I have, Mr. Minister, about this 

agreement, is that the increased emphasis on private sector 

training usually means that the training is tailored to a specific 

employer at a specific task and isn’t necessarily transferable to 

other jobs. This is a major shortcoming, it seems to me. 

 

The advantage of education through publicly funded institutions 

is that it’s comprehensive training. The graduate, when they 

complete the course can readily move from one employer to 

another. It’s not job specific training, Mr. Minister. That’s the 

kind of training we ought to be emphasizing in this province. 

 

Will you acknowledge, sir, that the marketability of a  

diploma or a certificate from a newly established private 

training school or private employer cannot hope to match the 

value of diplomas granted by reputable and long established 

public education institutions in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — A couple of three things here. I mean, 

you just talked about no controls and you’re clearly in error 

there. They’ll be stronger controls than we’ve had in the past. I 

have a draft here and it talks and has language in it like this: 

that Saskatchewan agrees to attest to the soundness of all 

training plans developed under the skill shortages and skill 

investment proposed to the Canadian Job Strategy. All training 

plans developed to those which have a total value of $50,000 or 

more   

 

That’s some of the language that’s in it. And over and above 

that, I’m advised by my officials, and this is a testimony to the 

good job that they’ve done in negotiating this agreement, or 

soon to be agreement, that we’ve got the best quality control 

provisions of any agreement across Canada. Because, as I said 

earlier, nobody is interested in having our young people or our 

adults trained at institutions, public or private, where the 

training will be suspect or the skills will be suspect when they 

come out. Nobody is well served, neither they nor the institute, 

whether it’s public or private. So there’s a double-check in the 

system, if you like. And we’re satisfied that the quality control 

monitoring, or whatever terms you want to use, are there in the 

agreement and we expect that we’ll be well served by it. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — One final question, Mr. Minister. As you will 

be well aware, through the technical institute programming 

that’s been available in this province there was a course being 

put on in Esterhazy, Saskatchewan, in which the instructor, a 

Mr. Flanders, had in fact only . . . it’s a shoe repair course, and I 

believe he had only one student in his course, name his 

daughter. My question to you is: is that shoe repair course at 

Esterhazy still being offered? Is Mr. Flanders the instructor? 

And how many students are currently in the course if it’s still 

operating? 

 

Hon. Mr Hepworth: — Relative to the shoe repair course at 

Esterhazy, it’s now finished and I’m advised that that program 

is undergoing an evaluation and a review. It’s not the case, 

although it was perceptibly the view of some, that there was 

only one student left and it was the daughter of the instructor, 

etc., etc. And, quite frankly, in fairness to that instructor and to 

that daughter, there was some almost persecution there. 

 

There was 12 students, something in the order of 12 students 

enrolled. It’s a competency-based program. That is to say that 

each student moves along at their own speed, and as they learn 

and acquire the knowledge and the skills, they graduate. And so 

some might take this long to finish — if I was to signify time by 

some special relationship, Mr. Chairman — others might take 

this long, others might take that long. And as this course moved 

along, some finished earlier than others, and at one point, as 

there always would be, I suppose, only one or two graduates to 

complete the course. And that was the case, albeit in this 

instance it was the daughter. And I think optics are much worse 

than the true story here, Mr. Chairman. 

 

  



 

August 12, 1987 

 

1749 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


