


















































June 18, 1987 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 18, 1987 
 

543 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to introduce to you and the Assembly 78 students from 
Dr. L.M. Hanna School in the constituency of Regina North. 
The teachers are: Mr. Langen, Mr. Fross, and Mr. Reiss. And 
there are seven chaperons, not because this is an unruly school, 
but I believe this is the first time this session that a group nearly 
as large as this has come here by bicycle. All of the students 
rode their bicycles here. And anyway it gives me great pleasure. 
 
I will be joining the students for pictures shortly, and 
refreshments, I understand, outside as it’s such a lovely day. 
Please join me in welcoming Dr. Hanna. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 
deal of pleasure that I introduce to the Assembly some 24 grade 
4 students from the Lumsden Elementary School, of course in 
Lumsden. They are sitting in the west gallery. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Carol Youck; chaperons, Heather 
Girgan, Peggie Monson; and the bus driver, Ralph Fraser. 
 
As I say, it’s with a great deal of pleasure I welcome them to 
the Assembly. I hope all hon. members will join with me in 
welcoming them. And also, because they’re getting near the end 
of their school year, we wish them a very, very safe summer 
and hope to see them again next year. I’ll be meeting with them 
after question period for drinks and questions. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have the 
pleasure of hosting a group of students today from Swift 
Current from the elementary school of Dickson. They have 
brought with them their teacher, Delmer Wagner, and the 
principal of the school, Mrs. Mrytle Pruden and, of course, Mr. 
Ike Klassen, the bus driver came along also. I will be meeting 
with the grade 4 students after question period. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, that the Swift Current school system 
has a reputation of being one of the best in the province, and 
this particular school, one of the most active in the community. 
Would you please welcome with me these students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly 
my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the legislature, a group of 23 grade 4 students from 
the Broadway School in the great city of Melfort. 
 

This group is accompanied by their teacher, Jim Zwarych, as 
well as a number of chaperons: George Moscal, Marg Placsko, 
Mrs. Townsend, Pat Dolo, Lorne Kish, Mr. And Mrs. From, 
Mrs. Hodgson, Mrs. Howell, and a very capable and able bus 
driver, Alex Glanville. 
 
I do understand that the group is making a two-day trip out of it, 
and I do hope you have a very enjoyable time here in the 
legislature. I do hope it is informative to you, and I will be very, 
very pleased to meet with you for pictures and drinks at 
approximately 3 o’clock. 
 
I would invite all members of the legislature to join with me in 
extending a warm welcome to this fine group of people from 
the great city of Melfort. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to this Assembly and to every one in 
the galleries today, two very special people with us on the floor 
of the Chamber here. To my right we have Jamie Baab, who 
was injured in a tobogganing accident at the age of 13; and we 
have, Katrina McKay, who is an occupational therapist. 
 
Jamie Baab is working for a new federal project called the Neil 
Squire Foundation which is launching a three-year federal 
funded project to show that severely disabled individuals can 
become part of the labour force when properly assisted and with 
proper technological devices. 
 
The members of the foundations are in Regina today to open 
offices, hire staff, and launch the community college program 
which will operate out of the Cypress Hills regional college in 
Swift Current. And the object of the project will be to educate 
and train handicapped people, such as Jamie Baab, in 
computers, and eventually some of them should be able to go to 
university and study complicated classes on computers. 
 
And I understand that Jamie is here to interview people for this 
program. He is an example of someone that is working under 
the Neil Squire Foundation, and I ask everyone to welcome 
Jamie here, and Katrina McKay, and wish them success in their 
project. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the legislature, four guests in our country who are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. The first two are Mrs. Elizabeth McKendrick 
and Mrs. Margaret Brown, a couple of sisters, who’ve come 
over from Scotland. They are visiting with their son-in-law and 
their daughter, Sheila McKendrick, who works here in the 
Legislative Assembly with Hansard. I believe this is their first 
trip to Canada, and we had a short visit where we reminisced a 
little bit, and I caught up on what a Scottish accent is all about 
once more and chatted about a few common memories from 
back home. 
 
The other couple I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, 
and to the members, are Alex and Kathleen Daly 
  



 
June 18. 1987 

544 
 

who are here from Dublin, Ireland. They are on vacation with 
their daughter and son-in-law in Spiritwood in the Turtleford 
constituency, and very old and very dear friends of mine. 
 
We wish all four of you a very, very pleasant stay in the 
province. We hope you are enjoying the warm Saskatchewan 
hospitality; it matches the weather we’ve had in the last week. 
We wish you a very safe trip home. Thank you for being here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Election Promises and Health Care Commitments 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a 
question to the Premier, and it deals with what I deem to be a 
betrayal of his commitment to the people of Saskatchewan with 
respect to health care. 
 
Yesterday’s budget confirmed that prescription drugs will . . . 
the plan will require that the sick pay hundreds of dollars up 
front, out of their own pockets, for medication, and even after 
that, even after they surpass the deductible, they’ll get only 80 
per cent recovery. It confirms that the children’s dental plan has 
been privatized and that some 60,000 young people will no 
longer be covered at all. 
 
It suggests that the chiropractic care will be severely limited 
and makes clear that 100 positions have been cut from the area 
of mental health, and that a number of rural hospitals are at risk 
of being closed. 
 
Now I ask, Mr. Speaker: how can you make these destructive 
cuts in government programs and yet deny that you are 
undermining medicare? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will respond to the hon. 
member by saying what we’re doing in health care and in the 
drug program and in the dental program is the right thing to do. 
It is improving health care and dental care across this province, 
and it will provide a brand new form of health, educational, 
drug and dental programs in this province that are overdue. 
 
When the hon. member talks about having to spend hundreds 
and hundreds of dollars, I can remind the member that for 
senior citizens the deductible this year is $25 — $25. For senior 
citizens living in nursing homes it hasn’t changed at all, Mr. 
Speaker — hasn’t changed. It is the same as it was before. 
 
When you look at the youth with respect to the dental program, 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that we’ve done the right 
thing. He’s absolutely aware of the fact that all children from K 
to grade eight are covered — and he knows that — and it’s all 
paid for, done by dentists. It’s all covered. 
 
And when you’re looking at teenagers, families have said to us, 
and parents have said to us: the problem with teenagers these 
days, talking about priorities, is not that they can’t get their 
cavities fixed, or not that they’ve got a dental problem, but it’s 
dealing with drugs and alcohol 

and social problems, and so forth. And we make . . . And, Mr. 
Speaker, families will come to us and say we want, not only 
that you maintain the expenditures in health care, but we want 
the money in the right place in health care. And we’ve made 
those choices and the people are saying it’s the right choice. It’s 
the right choice. 
 
We are proud to make the changes in health care and in the 
dental program and in drug and alcohol abuse and with respect 
to AIDS (Acquired immune Deficiency Syndrome) and with 
respect to other problems that we have in society. They might 
not have been the same problems 50 years ago, but they’re the 
problems of today that need to be addressed. These are the right 
decisions to be made at the right time. And yes, Mr. Speaker, it 
takes some courage to make those right decisions on behalf of 
teenagers, and on behalf of families, and on behalf of the health 
care system. Somebody’s got to be able to stand up and do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, I direct a very narrow 
supplementary to you, listening to your first question. You said 
that all children from K to grade 8 are covered. Will you now 
confirm that all children who are in kindergarten, grades 1 to 8 
inclusive, are covered by your plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if there’s somebody 
that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. I think hon. 
member should realize that the person being questioned has the 
right to make that answer before being interrupted — or 
interrupted at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if there is somebody who is 
18 years old in grade 8, he’s not covered. The age category is 
five years old to 13 years old. That covers 90-some per cent or 
95 per cent of all the people that are in kindergarten to grade 8. 
Okay? Five-year-olds to 13-year-olds. 
 
Now if you have people who are outside that connection in 
terms of their being four-year-old or they’re going to be 
18-year-old in grade 8, I mean obviously it’s not going to be the 
case. The majority of the people who are five years old to 13 
years are in K to 12 . . . K to grade 8. Beyond that, you are into 
the teenagers. And teenagers, we find today, Mr. Speaker, when 
we look at the problems they face, it’s not in their teeth. And 
families are saying, if you’re going to spend some money, do it 
on something else. 
 
I could add, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asked about 
hospitals. If the hon. member would want me to respond to rural 
hospitals, let me just say this. He asked . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I’m sorry, that was the previous 
question. Okay. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was 
some straying from whether K to 8 were covered. 
 
Supplementary, Mr. Premier, I have a letter from a 
  



 
June 18, 1987 

545 
 

constituent of mine, a person who I know with a very limited 
income, whose husband has a chronic heart problem. She has 
found out that her costs up front will increase from $11.80 a 
month to $173 per month. That is her situation which she has to 
find up front. Can you justify this sort of an attack on 
low-income people who have major drug needs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I said yesterday and I will 
say now: if there are very unique circumstances where people 
have . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’d like to remind the 
members to please not interfere. AS we all know in this House, 
there’s a certain latitude of allowance for those sort of things. 
But when they become constant, we cannot allow it to continue. 
So I’m asking for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if I can respond, three parts 
to the hon. member’s question. 
 
If there are unique circumstances, if there are unique 
circumstances where there are very, very large drug expenses 
because of a particular disease, I ask the hon. member to bring 
that information to the Minister of Health, share with him the 
pharmacist that it goes through, and then we can look at specific 
situations. I know that the NPD administration runs a program 
in Manitoba, and they’ve dealt with very specific things, and 
they’re very satisfied with the entire program, as are the people 
of Manitoba. I’m advised, from all political sides of the 
question. 
 
Secondly, I would like to point out that senior citizens in this 
province, seniors, are getting $500 an individual, low-income 
seniors. And you mentioned this was a low-income problem. 
Senior citizens getting $500, $750 a couple. And, Mr. Speaker, 
if there are senior citizens, senior citizens any place in Canada 
that are getting that kind of money, plus a health-care program, 
I’d like to see that, Mr. Speaker. The combination of the things 
we put together here for senior citizens, $25 deductible this 
year, plus up to $500 from a heritage grant program, are 
significant, Mr. Speaker. 
 

New City Hospital For Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, there was not one word in this 
budget speech about your government’s campaign commitment 
to build a new City Hospital in Saskatoon. Does that 
commitment still stand, or is this just another broken election 
promise? 
 
Regardless, will you provide the three Saskatoon hospitals with 
emergency funds to prevent 308 hospital bed closures this 
summer to make sure that the waiting list of nearly 10,000 
people doesn’t grow even more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, I’ll ask the Minister of 
Health to respond in detail. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the hon. 
member’s question as it relates to the Saskatoon City Hospital, 
discussions continue to be ongoing with the City Hospital 
Board. 

There has been no suggestion to the Saskatoon City Hospital 
Board about deferral or cancellation or anything like that, 
although I’ve heard comments from members opposite that that 
is the case. That, in fact, is not the case, and members of the 
City Hospital Board will know that discussions are ongoing. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister of Health, is 
there any money in the budget for the initial construction costs 
of the new City Hospital in Saskatoon. Can you confirm 
whether there’s money in the budget? 
 
We’ve had that sign out front of City Hospital for the last two 
years, the sign that talks about a new City Hospital. Put your 
money where your mouth is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen another 
example of very inflamed rhetoric. The sign that the member 
refers to says, construction to begin in 1988. This is now June 
of 1987. The money will be in the budget for us to continue 
with the City Hospital construction and we are, as I have said, 
continuing our ongoing discussions with the board of City 
Hospital as it relates to that project. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I ask the minister very clearly: is there 
money in the budget for the new City Hospital? And he did not 
answer the question as to whether there is any emergency 
money this summer to deal with the closure of 308 hospital 
beds in Saskatoon and numerous operating rooms, to deal with 
the 10,000 person hospital waiting list in Saskatoon. I’d ask the 
minister to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the question was as it 
relates to the construction project that was announced for City 
Hospital I answered that question very clearly. As it relates to 
money in the budget, this budget will address the projects which 
are ongoing, and that project is ongoing. How much more clear 
should I be about that? That’s number one. 
 
As it relates to the waiting lists and the money available in 
Saskatoon — at that very City Hospital in next month, in the 
month of July, there will be a day surgery unit opening to 
address the very waiting list problem that the member talks 
about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the responsible measures that we are 
taking to try to address hat is in fact . . . what I admit is a very 
serious problem as it relates to the Saskatoon waiting list issue. 
But that Saskatoon waiting list issue, I might add, Mr. Speaker, 
is related to a province-wide circumstance, Saskatoon being the 
focal point, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question that that’s true. 
But we have regional hospitals in this province that are 
underutilized. We have put a good deal of money over a good 
long period of time into health care. Everybody knows that. The 
Minister of Finance pointed it out yesterday, Mr. Speaker, a 63 
per cent increase in five years. 
 

Closure of Neo-natal Beds in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, specifically with respect to the 
bed closures that are schedules in the city of 
  



 
June 18. 1987 

546 
 

Saskatoon this summer, as I understand it from some 
professionals working in that system, among the beds to be 
closed will be at least five beds in neo-natal intensive care units. 
Obviously that sort of bed in a hospital is not of discretionary 
use. It’s a rather essential and emergency type of bed and 
facility. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could give us his specific 
commitment. If he cannot deal with the broad problem today, 
could he give us his specific commitment with respect to, I 
believe it is, five closures of neo-natal ICU beds, that the 
government will not proceed with that kind of closure this 
summer in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I hear what the member has said. What I 
will say, as it relates to the specific five beds that the member 
refers to, I’ll take notice of the question to make very sure that 
what he says isn’t . . . you know, and what’s been related to him 
is in fact the case. So I’ll take notice of the question as it relates 
to that specific. 
 

Firings of SPC and Government Employees 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Hon. 
Premier, and it has to do with the spate of firings in general, or 
specifically the spate of firings of 24 Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation workers that occurred yesterday. 
 
But first the question with respect to firings and the way they 
are being handled by this government. They are being handled, 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, with the workers being asked to 
clean out their desks immediately, on the spot, without any 
opportunity to do anything else but to clear out of the buildings. 
They are treated almost like criminals. 
 
I’m asking this of the Premier, because obviously his ministers 
are insensitive to this. Will the Premier please make sure that 
this kind of an approach is discontinued. 
 
And secondly, how does he explain to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan this callous and cold-hearted manner 
in which he has dealt with the firings to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask ministers to 
respond in detail. In a general sense I will say that up to 80 per 
cent of the public employees who are not with the government 
now have moved on a voluntary fashion, and they’ve accepted 
either early retirement or some combinations of voluntary . . . 
And it’s voluntary, Mr. Speaker. It speaks for itself. 
 
Now with respect to others, there’s been severance packages 
that have been put together, and they have obviously accepted 
them. With respect to Sask Power, I would ask my colleague, 
my seat mate, the Deputy Premier, to respond to this 
specifically. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. I notice that 
the Hon. Premier talks about voluntary resignations from 
government. It reminds me almost, Mr. Speaker, of the movie 
called The Godfather. I guess they were made offers that they 
couldn’t refuse and so they voluntarily left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Mr. Romanow: — So my question, as it were, to the godfather 
of the entire government opposite, is this: when it comes 
specifically to the 24 SPC people, will you tell this House, those 
24 people, and the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
why it was that they were dismissed in this summary fashion, 
without notice, without explanation, without the decency of 
being dealt with in a fair manner, especially when those 
workers have had 15 to 25 years of service. What’s your answer 
to that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as the minister 
responsible for Sask Power, I would point out to all members 
that, in fact, in total I think there will be about 141 people at 
Sask Power that will be affected during the down-sizing and the 
reorganization. Of that 141, 117 of them will be accepting 
voluntary early retirement. In fact, Mr. Speaker, on a couple of 
instances at least that I’m aware of, there were individuals who 
asked, because of health reasons to be included in the early 
retirement program, and they were accommodated. 
 
As it relates to the 24 that were laid off, my understanding is, 
Mr. Speaker, that there are provisions, Mr. Speaker, for 
out-placement counselling; there are provisions for a severance 
package, and all of the normal things that normally happen in 
these sorts of circumstances. The positions, Mr. Speaker, in the 
circumstances, no longer exist. We have problems of our own at 
Sask Power as it relates to bottom line. So reorganization is 
necessary in order to bring more efficiency and effectiveness to 
the corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say that the kinds of tactics that have been 
alluded to by the member opposite as it relates to, as he says, 
firings, are intolerable. We won’t’ put up with them. And I 
would be more than pleased to deal with any specific individual 
that he happens to bring to my attention. 
 

Salary of President of Sask Power 
 
Mr. Romanow: — A question to the Premier. I ask the Premier 
to give us a straight answer in this regard, and I direct it to him 
specifically because the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation just told us in the answer to the last 
question, that part of the reason for the firings — let’s make no 
mistake what’s been going on here. It’s firings. Part of the 
reason is down-sizing. I direct this question to the Premier. If 
you’re so committed to down-sizing, why don’t you start 
showing some fairness by down-sizing the $200,000 a year 
plus, salary of your friend, the former president of the PC party 
in Saskatchewan, and current president of the SPC, George 
Hill? Will you tell the House that you’ll down-size his salary? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, a good deal of the credit for 
the more efficient operations at Sask Power is 
  



 
June 18, 1987 

547 
 

due to the new president, Mr. Hill. We canvassed . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We canvassed the entire province and the 
entire country for qualified people to head up Sask Power. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we canvassed 
the entire country for the best that we could find with an outside 
consulting firm. We went all across this country . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order! 
 
I am afraid I must continue to keep rising and interrupting 
question period. The time is ticking by and it’s your question 
period, so I ask you, for your own benefit, to please stop 
interrupting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we hired a professional 
consulting firm to seek applications across Canada for the head 
of Sask Power. They brought in a large number of names — a 
large number of names. They recommended the appropriate 
names to the board of directors of Sask Power — Saskatchewan 
people. The board of directors picked a Saskatchewan person 
who ranked above all the rest in Canada, both in terms of his 
legal expertise, his business expertise, and his experience with 
Sask Power, because he was chairman of the board of Sask 
Power. And after that you’re saying you’re criticizing Sask 
Power and the board of directors of Sask Power for picking a 
Saskatchewan person over somebody from outside. I know 
previously we’ve had people under your administration pick 
them from all kinds of places outside of Saskatchewan. We 
wanted a Saskatchewan person who ranked the best in Canada. 
And that’s what we got in Mr. Hill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, accepting for the moment — 
which I might add that no one in Saskatchewan does — that Mr. 
Hill is the best candidate, accepting for the moment that 
proposition, my question is this: the Premier is asking all of 
Saskatchewan to start pulling in their belts, tightening their 
belts in the interests of restraint. Why is it that we have a 
president of SPC at $200,000 a year, plus perquisites? Why is it 
that the Premier hasn’t asked his good friend, who’s from 
Estevan, his constituency, the past Tory president, to down-size 
his salary in the interest of the province of Saskatchewan’s . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I am not at all convinced 
that the hon. member has the accurate information with respect 
to the salary. Mr. Speaker, as he knows, the Crown 
Corporations Committee can provide you with the salaries of all 
the top executives. They have done it in the past, and they will 
do it when the Crown Corporation Committee come up. 
 
When you want, with respect to down-sizing, we started the 
down-sizing inside government, right across the 

piece, with less management in our office. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have led the way in 
down-sizing and reducing and providing the efficiency in 
administration and in government. Across the piece we have 
less cabinet ministers; we have less executive assistants; we 
have less MAs (ministerial assistants) than we had before. And 
we have down-sized that in terms of travel, and we’ve made 
that quite clear, probably before you were elected. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Supplementary to the Premier. The Premier 
refuses to confirm, but he certainly refuses to deny, the 
$200,000 salary for Mr. Hill. On June 3, my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview, June 3, wrote to you, sir, and 
to your government, asking that you table the names and the 
salaries of all of the Crown corporation executives so that all 
of -Saskatchewan might know what they get paid; and in order 
to make sure that there is fairness in your restraint program, we 
can judge what you are doing with the dental technicians and 
the rank and file workers by those salaries. I ask you: if I’m 
wrong on the $200,000, you can disprove me by tabling the 
answer to that letter right now. Come on, table that answer to 
that letter. Give us the facts as to what that pay is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 
raised letters yesterday and today, then they haven’t tabled one 
of them. They’re afraid to table anything that they’ve raised 
there. We’ve asked them to table it and they haven’t. You will 
get . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please! Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We will deal with Crown corporations in 
the normal course of events. When you have a Crown 
Corporations Committee, you will get the information, as you 
do on travel, as you do on everything else. So we will provide it 
through the normal course of events. And you will find, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have trimmed the size of the government from 
the top down, right across the piece to show the way, and it’s 
the right thing to do. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Clerk 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 
introduce to members of the Assembly a new officer at the 
Table, Gregory Putz, Esq. Gregory was born and raised in 
Saskatchewan but has most recently been residing in Ottawa. I 
would like all members to welcome Gregory to the 
Saskatchewan Table and our Assembly, and also to welcome 
him back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would also like at this time to introduce his 
mother and his wife who are with us here in the galleries today, 
and I would like to ask them to rise and 
  



 
June 18. 1987 

548 
 

that we acknowledge them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Also, colleagues, I would like to advise the 
Assembly that Brenda Blondeau will be a page for the 
remainder of this session. Brenda. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — And one further point of interest. All 
members will recall that Gilles Pelletier is one of our pages. 
Gilles has now been joined by his sister, Nathalie, who is a 
guide with the Legislative Assembly. Both Gilles and Nathalie 
are from Quebec but have come to Saskatchewan to work and 
to improve their skills in the English language. We welcome 
this initiative by these young people. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order before 
orders of the day. Mr. Speaker, yesterday during question 
period my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, 
asked a primary question, I believe it was of the Premier, which 
was answered. Then she stood on her feet and was on her feet to 
ask for a supplementary question. Instead, sir, you recognized 
the independent member to my left, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. My point of order is this, sir: it is my 
understanding of the conventions in the practice of this House 
that a member is entitled to a question and two supplementaries 
on the assumption the questions and the supplementaries are in 
order, which most certainly was the case with respect to the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, sir, to look at the record and at 
this matter and to determine whether or not that statement of 
practice that I have offered to you, sir, is accurate, and if so, to 
insure that members who ask questions to be followed by two 
supplementaries or more, depending upon the relevance in the 
question period, be permitted to do so. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I thank the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale for raising this matter before the House today. 
Obviously, as we know that yesterday the fact that the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana did not get a supplementary caused 
great concern to her and to her fellow members. I would just 
like to make this statement regarding that issue which you have 
raised. 
 
Yesterday being the first day of the Assembly I was taking care, 
as much as possible, to give as many people as possible, as 
many members as possible, an opportunity to ask a question. So 
I would like to also point out that there is no written rule, 
although there certainly is a practice. There is no written rule 
that indicates there is a supplementary after a main question. 
However, I certainly listen to your point of order with interest 
and I acknowledge the concern that you raised. And I thank you 
for raising it, and this is the reason I did what I did 

yesterday. I noted also that today the hon. member did have an 
opportunity to ask a question and to a supplement. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — On a question of privilege under rule 6 
of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly you 
will, Mr. Speaker, be familiar with the rule 6 which provides 
that: 
 

A Member who proposes to raise a question of 
privilege shall first advise Mr. Speaker of his intention 
so to do . . . 
 

And which advice I have given you shortly before noon today, 
within the prescribed period. My question of privilege deals 
with the remarks attributed to the Minister of Justice attacking 
the credibility of Legislative Counsel and what in my 
judgement was a misrepresenting of her role. I believe this to be 
a question of privilege. I have in my letter referred to 
appropriate provisions of May’s Parliamentary Practice which 
defines privilege as: 
 

. . . the sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each 
House collectively as a constituent part of the High 
Court of Parliament . . . 
 

A general statement on privilege and then it goes on to say: 
 

Each House also claims the right to punish actions, 
which, while not breaches of (any) specific privilege, 
are offences against its authority or dignity, such as 
disobedience to its legitimate commands or libels 
upon itself, its officers, or its members. 
 

It is my submission, Mr. Speaker, that the remarks made by the 
Minister of Justice, if accurately reported — as they were 
reported in the May 20 issue of the Leader-Post and the May 20 
issue of the Star-Phoenix — are a breach of the privilege of the 
House. I won’t deal at length with them but I will quote in 
summary fashion and will be glad to elucidate if it’s judged that 
more detail should be on the record. 
 
The report in the Star-Phoenix said, he said, that is the Minister 
of Justice said, the opinion of Rasmussen, the legislature’s 
lawyer, holds no weight with the government. He referred to 
her as the lawyer for the opposition, and said, she, at many 
times, has given questionable legal opinions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand your role to be, to decide whether or 
not this is a prima facie case of a breach of privilege. I will not 
give an argument now. I have attempted to outline what I think 
the case is. If you deem it to be an appropriate case of breach of 
privilege, I then will move a motion and the debate can proceed 
on the motion. I raise this question of privilege, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, just to talk briefly to the 
point raised by the hon. member. I understand, after exhaustive 
research, that Beauchesne’s does not specifically recognize that 
the officials of the House are in 
  



 
June 18, 1987 

549 
 

fact protected by privilege. And the matter of privilege and 
protection under privilege, Mr. Speaker, I think is extended 
only to members of the House. I think it has also been the 
tradition, of not only this House but other Houses, that matters 
involving officers of the House should not be resolved in the 
House, for the sake of the relationship that must exist between 
members of the House and officers of the House. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that you will review the matter put before 
you and make your decision, and whatever that decision is, 
naturally, we will be abiding by that. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve listened to the member for Regina 
Elphinstone and to the member for Souris-Cannington, and as 
all of you are well aware, a matter of this sort is a matter which 
cannot have an immediate answer. And, therefore, I will defer 
my ruling and bring back my opinion at a later date. 
 
(1445) 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Before orders of the day, and by leave of 
the Assembly I would move, seconded by the member from 
Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of three former members of this Assembly, 
and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contribution they made to their communities, their 
constituencies, the province, and to Canada. 
 
Arthur Percy Swallow, who died in Yorkton on 
January 28, 1985, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly, representing the constituency of Yorkton 
from 1944 to 1956. 
 
Mr. Swallow was born in 1893. He was predeceased 
by his wife Helen and one son in infancy. He is 
survived by a daughter, a son, a five grandchildren and 
one great-grandchild. 
 
Mr. Swallow was a long-time resident of Theodore 
where he was a farmer and implement dealer. He was 
active in community affairs, in the United Church, 
served the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the United 
Farmers, and the local co-operative. 
 
Wilbert A. McIvor, died on March 22, 1987, was a 
member of this Legislative Assembly, representing the 
constituency of Arm River from 1967 to 1971. 
 
Mr. McIvor was born on his family’s homestead near 
Craik on January 11, 1915. In 1940, he married Faere 
Old, who predeceased him in 1981. They had five 
children. 
 
Mr. McIvor farmed near Girvin and was a reeve of the 
Rural Municipality of Arm River from 1956 to 1968. 
He was a sportsman and harness race enthusiast, 
becoming vice-president of the Saskatchewan 
Standard Bred Association. 

 
Dr. Henry Philip Mang, who died in Regina on 
March 30, 1987, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly, representing the constituency of Lumsden 
from 1934 to 1938. 
 
Dr. Mang was born in Edenwold on December 11, 
1897. He was educated at Regain Collegiate Institute 
and Normal School before graduating, in 1923, from 
the University of Toronto Royal college of Dentistry. 
During the First World War, Dr. Mang enlisted in the 
Royal Flying Corps. 
 
He was a farmer, he was a teacher, a principal, a 
dentist and a politician. He was active in many 
organizations, especially the Wheat Pool Field Service 
Organization, the Regina Chamber of Commerce 
Agriculture Committee, the Qu’Appelle Regional 
Appeal Board of the provincial Department of Health 
and the Francis Inspectorate of Teachers. In 1953, he 
was elected to the Canadian House of Commons as the 
member for Qu’Appelle. 
 
Dr. Mang travelled extensively during his early years. 
He was a delegate to the YMCA International Student 
Voluntary Movement conferences at Des Moines, 
Iowa in 1920 and Indianapolis in 1924. In 1925, he 
was the Canadian delegate to the World Association in 
Edinburgh and attended the International Teachers’ 
Institute at Heidelberg and Berlin. 
 
He worked for the native of his constituency and was 
made honorary chief of the Cree Tribe in 1959. He 
contributed much to sports and was inducted into the 
Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame in 1967. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and 
bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved families. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate 
myself with the words of the Premier with respect to these three 
former members of this Assembly who have died recently. 
 
With respect to Mr. Swallow, I did not serve in the legislature 
with Art Swallow, but I knew Arthur. He was a solid member 
of the legislature, quiet, well-liked by his fellow members, had 
a reputation as a good constituency man. I know that he had 
some personal problems and sickness in his own family which 
he dealt with with forbearance. And he was a person who I 
think was admired generally by those who served in the 
legislature. I had an opportunity to know him when I was a 
young public servant and dealt with the legislature, particularly 
the Crown Corporations Committee, and I came to know some 
of the members, including Art Swallow. 
 
Some others will know Wilbert McIvor who served in the 
legislature in more recent times, up till 1971. Wilbert also was a 
quiet member, not given to many flights of oratory in the 
House, but solid, obviously well regarded in the 
  



 
June 18. 1987 

550 
 

House and in his constituency. 
 
Henry Mang is a person for whom one can’t have anything else 
but admiration. There can’t be many people in this world, and 
there can’t have been many former members of this Assembly 
who could say at one time or another that they were a farmer, 
and a teacher, and a principal, and a dentist, and an MLA, and 
an MP, and an Indian chief, for openers. I only knew Henry in 
his later years. He certainly was a good deal more extroverted 
than Art Swallow or Wilbert McIvor, as I recall them. 
 
I recall Henry in 1980 when we had associated with the 
Celebrate Saskatchewan festivities, a reunion of MLAs of all 
persuasions. I remember it well because a former member, now 
deceased, Franklin Foley, took to the piano and a general 
sing-song ensued. Henry Mang, who was then about 82, 
showed up and was very much a part of the festivities. He 
continued to take a very active interest in life and if one were to 
recount the many organizations with which he was associated, 
we would be here for some considerable time. President of the 
Regina Dales football club — that’s a mere example but it goes 
on and on — the chamber of commerce, and sports 
organizations, and business organizations, and many, many 
others. 
 
And, as was suggested that in his youth, at a time when people 
weren’t given to world travel, Henry, before he was 30 years 
old, had been not only down in the States in Iowa and 
Indianapolis, but had been in Edinburgh and Heidelberg and 
Berlin. These are the activities of someone who pretty clearly 
enjoyed life and lived it to the full. And I think one could say 
that of Henry Mang — he lived a full life; he lived a long life; 
he lived it with vigour. 
 
And in the case of all three, I would like to associate with the 
Premier, my words of condolence to members of the bereaved 
families. All of us make our contribution to the legislature and 
it is appropriate that we honour those who have made their 
contribution and who are no longer with us. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. While it 
was not my privilege to know the former member for Yorkton, 
Mr. Swallow, I have certainly learned a good deal about him 
and his public career in this Assembly, in part from the remarks 
that have just been made in this Assembly by the Premier and 
by the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Swallow was a man who 
made a worthy contribution to his community and to his 
province. He made his mark in the public life of Saskatchewan 
and I certainly would want to associate myself with the remarks 
of the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in paying 
tribute to his memory and extending sincere condolences to his 
family. 
 
Wilbert McIvor was a Liberal member of this Assembly when I 
was president, a number of years ago, of the Saskatchewan 
Young Liberals. I got to know him well. He was a genuine 
spokesman for the rural interests of a constituency like Arm 
River, which he had the honour to represent in this Assembly. 
He knew his area; he worked hard for it, based upon his solid 
practical experience as a farmer and a reeve in local government 
for something like 12 years. 
 

 
I can recall, Mr. Speaker, a warm summer afternoon in 1985 
when a large number of people were gathered at Turgeon House 
here in Regina to celebrate the 80th anniversary of the founding 
of the Saskatchewan Liberal Association. Wilbert was there. I 
spent some time that day visiting with him, and I recall in the 
conversation how quickly the subject matter turned to 
horse-racing. That was, of course, one of his passions — a sport 
to which he devoted himself and to which he made a proud 
contribution in addition to his service in public life. We respect 
his memory and we send our sympathies to his family with our 
gratitude for his career in this Assembly and in public affairs. 
 
Dr. Henry Mang was a truly unique Saskatchewan character. As 
others have mentioned today: a dentist, a teacher, a farmer, a 
pilot, a world traveller, an honorary Indian chief, a sportsman, a 
member of parliament, and an MLA — what a wonderful life. I 
am pleased to say he was also an honorary life member of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Association and active in the party 
throughout his life. 
 
His career, Mr. Speaker, touched so many people and always in 
a positive way. I fondly remember our many conversations, his 
advice and encouragement were always a great strength. Time 
spent with Henry Mang provided great insight in to the history 
of our province, into the proper nature of political life an 
community service, and also into the current issues of the day in 
which he always maintained a very keen and lively interest. 
 
We shall miss him, but he leaves a proud legacy that has 
enriched all of Saskatchewan, and our condolences go sincerely 
to his family in their bereavement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great sorrow that I 
rise to speak today, a few words in remembrance of the late 
Wilbert McIvor. 
 
Wilbert McIvor passed away suddenly at his home on the farm 
at Girvin, Saskatchewan, on March 22, 1987. He was born on 
the McIvor homestead east of Girvin on January 11, 1915. He 
completed his education at Girvin and farmed there until his 
passing. In 1940, he married Faere Old. They had five children. 
Wilbert was predeceased by his wife and one son. He is 
survived by two daughters, two sons, nine grandchildren, and 
one great-granddaughter. 
 
He was active in baseball, hockey, curling, and harness racing, 
both as a participant and as an official capacity. He was also 
active in local government and provincial politics. He served as 
reeve of the R.M. of Arm River from 1956 to 1968, during 
which he was very involved in the enlargement of the Davidson 
dam, construction of the Craik dam, Davidson swimming pool, 
Craik Regional Park and Prairie View Lodge, as well as many 
other projects. 
 
Wilbert was president of the Arm River Liberal Association for 
five years before being elected as MLA of the Arm River 
constituency for four years. Funeral 
  



 
June 18, 1987 

551 
 

services were on March 25 at the Girvin United Church. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the pleasure to have known Wilbert for 
about 50 years. The McIvor home is five miles from my home 
where I was raised and still live today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke a moment ago about Wilbert’s activities. 
Knowing Wilbert very well all my life, I witnessed his involved 
in his many sports. I watched him play hockey when I was a 
small boy; I participated in the Girvin bonspiel in 1947 which 
was exactly 40 years ago last winter, and my first game was 
against Wilbert McIvor. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I played many curling games against Wilbert. 
Girvin has the largest curling event in Arm River for the last 
few years. Mr. Speaker, Wilbert McIvor curled with his family 
in the Girvin classic just one month before he died. I watched 
him curl several games. He was still making his share of shots, 
especially for a man of over 70 years of age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the latter years of Wilbert’s life he was very much 
involved in harness racing. I watched him raise, train, and race 
his Standardbred horses. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the morning he 
passed away he was out working with his horses. 
 
It was through my political involvement, Mr. Speaker, with 
Wilbert McIvor that I became interested in politics. I was at the 
Liberal nominating meeting when Wilbert won the nomination 
to be the candidate for the 1967 provincial election. I had the 
pleasure to travel with him from home to home in the Craik 
rural poll. Mr. Speaker, on election day I was pleased to be a 
part of Wilbert McIvor’s victory, to win at the polls to become 
the Liberal MLA for the Arm River from 1967 to 1971. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I always respected Wilbert’s political views. He 
was a hard-working, independent, right-wing individual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wilbert’s brother, Allan McIvor ran for the Social 
Credit in the 1961 election. Arm River just wasn’t ready for a 
Social Credit representative. But as far as Allan, he was 
well-liked and would have made a good MLA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the McIvors were very successful farmers in 
the Girvin district. They are known to be good farmers, good 
managers, and well-respected citizens. Wilbert’s two sons, 
Perry McIvor and Dennis McIvor, and a grandson, Kim, operate 
together a large farming operation in the Girvin district. They, 
like their father, run a very good operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, it has been a pleasure to put on the 
record in this legislature words of appreciation and praise for 
the late Wilbert McIvor. It was a pleasure to have known him 
for 50 years of my life. Mr. Speaker, I wish to express my 
sympathy to the family and friends of Wilbert McIvor. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to join hon. 
member in expressing condolences to those that have died, 
former members that have died, that we are acknowledging 
today. I particularly want to recall some events with regard to 
two members that I knew personally. 
 
I had the pleasure of knowing both Wilbert McIvor and H.P. 
Mang, as he was affectionately called in Edenwold. 
 
Wilbert was very active, of course, in the Liberal party. Wilbert 
was quite an interesting individual. He was spare of language in 
most cases, but when he did speak, you knew exactly where you 
stood and where he stood. And he made no bones about it and 
was well respected, by those who knew him, for that ability. I 
had the pleasure of working with him politically for some time, 
and I got some education from Wilbert in harness racing, which 
is still somewhat . . . I don’t understand that well, but certainly 
he made an effort to try and educate me into that special hobby 
of his. I know that he served his constituency and his province 
to the best of his abilities. He had strong views and very much 
was committed to trying to get his positions as part of the 
policies of this province. 
 
Mr. Henry Phillip Mang was, as the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg indicated, one of the great characters of 
this province. He was somewhat of a Renaissance man in 
Edenwold and area in the interests that he had. 
 
If I recall — I could be subject to correction, but I do believe 
that Dr. Philip Mang was, until his death, was the oldest 
graduate of the University of Toronto — the oldest surviving 
graduate of the University of Toronto. He was born in 
Edenwold and went to the University of Toronto, and I think we 
can all think back at what that would have meant in the turn of 
the century. He graduated in dentistry, came back to his home 
community of Edenwold, became a teacher, taught for many 
years and was very, very active in the community. 
 
I can recall an incident when I was first seeking a nomination. 
The first farm house I went to, H.P. Mang was there with some 
of his friends and, of course, discussing the issue of the day. My 
seeking of the nomination, I went in to try and get their support. 
I was there for some five hours that afternoon into a political 
learning session for me, and developed not only a life-long 
respect for H.P. but a friendship as well. 
 
I recall when I, as we say, crossed the floor, H.P. had been the 
last Liberal member, if I recall, up until that time, and shortly 
after that we had the reception in the Assembly at the opening 
of the House, and I got a notice from one of the 
commissionaires that a Mr. Mang was looking for me. 
 
Well things were pretty tense for me at that time, as some 
members may recall, and I figured: oh boy, here it comes; I’m 
going to have a confrontation right in front of all these people. 
And coming through the crowd of people was this cigar and 
H.P. Mang, and he just came up and grabbed my hand and he 
said: I just wanted to say that I did this once before myself. He 
said: good luck to you. 
 
  



 
June 18. 1987 

552 
 

And it confirmed, as I told the story to people in Edenwold, it 
confirmed what many of them had believed had happened, but 
nobody knew for sure at that time, that he had made a change at 
some time during his political activity. 
 
But he was an institution in his area. He was very dedicated to 
his community, to the province, and it was one of the pleasures 
of my life of having an association with H.P. Mang, from 1971 
until his recent death. And I join with other members in 
extending condolences to the families of the members that we 
are acknowledging today. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to join 
with other members in making a few comments about the three 
members that have departed since we last performed this 
particular function. 
 
Of the three members, beginning with Mr. Swallow, I must say 
that as a youth I remember meeting Mr. Swallow, and recall my 
father talking about Mr. Swallow. And I gathered from meeting 
him and the discussions and comments my father had passed on 
to me that he was an all around, good, solid MLA and served 
his constituency well. And I certainly want to put those 
comments on the record for the family of Mr. Swallow. 
 
I had the opportunity to sit in the legislature with Mr. Wilbert 
McIvor, the member for Arm River, for the period of four years 
that he was here in the legislature. I respected Mr. McIvor. He 
did his work dutifully. He was involved in his community and 
was a person who was not given to outlandish statements or 
outbursts of any kind in the legislature during the time that I 
knew him. It was a pleasure to know him and to discuss things 
with him. 
 
With regard to Mr. Mang, I had known him slightly. But during 
the time that I came to know him, I grew to appreciate some of 
his qualities. As with Mr. Blakeney when he spoke previous in 
this particular motion, I was at the 75th anniversary of the 
province of Saskatchewan which was conducted in 1980, and 
the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association had a reunion 
for members, as was previously mentioned. And I recall talking 
to Mr. Mang and reminiscing. And of course prior to that, my 
father and his paths had crossed sometimes, provincially and 
federally. And as a consequence, he had some recollections to 
impart to me, and I listened with interest. He was a unique 
novelty at the gathering of retired MLAs and MLAs that were 
sitting at that time. And other MLAs, I noticed, listened with 
interest to some of the stories that Mr. Mang was telling at the 
reunion. 
 
So it was with some feeling of honour that I rise to say a few 
words about each of these members. It was a pleasure to have 
met them all and to have participated in the democratic process 
with Mr. McIvor. And for that reason it’s a please to be able to 
take part in this motion today, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
some of my colleague members who recognized the passing of 
Mr. Arthur Swallow of Yorkton. I had not 

moved to Yorkton during the time that Mr. Swallow as a 
member of the legislature, so I did not know him in that 
capacity. But I did get to know him from the business side when 
he was the manger of the Yorkton Credit Union. 
 
And what brings back memories was the fact that was the first 
time that I’d ever gone to a banker to borrow money to buy my 
first car. And Mr. Swallow had something about him that made 
you feel comfortable going into a bank and listening to your 
request, and I think that’s what really sticks in my mind. I did 
serve on the board of the Yorkton credit Union just after Mr. 
Swallow’s retirement, and he played a big part in the growth of 
the Yorkton Credit Union. 
 
So I would like to pass on condolences to his family, his son 
and daughter and grandchildren. And I’m sure I express it on 
behalf of the constituency of Yorkton and all the people around 
Yorkton that knew him during his activities with the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and the local co-op and of course 
the credit union. And I appreciate that opportunity to do that 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move, 
seconded by the hon. member from Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the 
transcript of the oral tributes to the memories of the 
deceased members, be communicated to the bereaved 
families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I know, in visiting with 
the opposition House Leader yesterday, that they had some 
desire to go to motions for return and deal with those today at 
the conclusion of condolences. 
 
Our preference, for a couple of reasons, would be to ask for 
leave to go to special order and deal with that, and I don’t think 
that they would agree to that. And as all members know, when 
you begin a new session or resume an old session, it takes some 
time to get the flow of the order paper in order by getting 
legislation, etc., on the order paper. 
 
But we do have another opportunity today and that is the Farm 
Progress Show in Regina, with all members in town for the 
session in any event. And since condolences have been 
completed for today . . . The Farm Progress Show, Mr. Speaker, 
I understand, is the largest dry-land farm show in the world. We 
have here in Regina the second largest show facility in Canada 
and, I think, the 11th largest in North America. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, what I would like to do is invite all members to visit 
the Farm Progress Show today, and if they’re in town the 
weekend, to do that. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move that 
  



 
June 18, 1987 

553 
 

this House do now adjourn. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The hon. member essentially states our 
discussions correctly. May I make just two or three very quick 
points, sir. That is this: to state the obvious, we’ve been only 
sitting one hour and about 12 minutes today. Yesterday I asked 
the Deputy Leader and the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is the member debating the motion? Because 
adjournment motions are not debatable. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, I’m asking leave of the House to go 
directly to Motions for Returns (Debatable) because there are 
528 of them that have been on the order for six months or more. 
Why not do an hour’s work to get those Motions for Returns 
(Debatable) out of the way? That’s what we want to do. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m sorry, there is a motion on the floor which 
must be dealt with, and therefore I must rule that you’re out of 
order. There is a motion on the floor which must be dealt with. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is not granted. 
 
Well, there is a motion on the floor which must be dealt with, 
and the motion is a motion of adjournment. 
 
(1625) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 

Muller Martin 
Duncan Sauder 
McLeod Johnson 
Andrew McLaren 
Berntson Hopfner 
Lane Petersen 
Taylor Swenson 
Smith Baker 
Muirhead Toth 
Maxwell Gleim 
Schmidt Neudorf 
Hodgins Gardner 
Gerich Kopelchuk 
Hepworth Saxinger 
Hardy Britton 
Meiklejohn  
 

Nays — 22 
 

Prebble Kowalsky 
Brockelbank Atkinson 
Shillington Anguish 
Romanow Goulet 
Tchorzewski Hagel 
Thompson Lyons 
Rolfes Calvert 
Mitchell Trew 
Upshall Smart 
Simard Van Mulligen 
 

Solomon Goodale 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:27 p.m. 


