


















































October 28, 1987 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 October 28, 1987 
 
 

3591 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — By special order of this House, oral questions 
will be at 2 p.m. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Supply and Services 

Ordinary Expenditure 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. On page 99 of the blue book is Supply 
and Services and the activities of the vote, supply and Services, 
have been transferred to Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation in '87-88. So I'll now ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, and if there's any questions on page 99 they can be 
directed to the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And 
it gives me pleasure to introduce the officials that will be assisting 
me as we discuss the estimates of the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. Seated beside me is the president of the 
corporation, Otto Cutts. Behind Otto is Ken Brehm, the corporate 
secretary. And seated behind myself is Shirley Raab, the treasurer. 
There are other officials that are at the back of the Chamber which 
will be assisting as required. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are there any questions on page 99 or 100? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The questions I'd be asking, Mr. Chairman, 
are ranging over the entire Supply and Services item that you're 
referring to and the property management corporation. I can ask 
them now or when you get on to property management. It doesn't 
matter to me. I don't know whether it matters to the minister. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 53 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We'll move on to property management now 
on page 82 of the blue book. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I'm going to attempt to 
ascertain some more information about the property management 
corporation, the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 
and I'm going to send over to the minister a page out of the budget 
address, March 1986, wherein the Minister of Finance makes 
some comments about the property management corporation. And 
his comments deal largely with expenditures under  

the Minister of Finance report, and it says, in part: — 
 

One of the ways that expenditures will be controlled is through 
the creation of the Property Management Corporation. The 
Corporation, which is modelled after similar Crown 
corporations in British Columbia, Manitoba and Quebec will 
acquire, finance and manage government land and buildings. 
No longer will these functions be spread out among several 
government departments and agencies. Instead they will be 
centralized in one commercial Crown corporation to achieve 
maximum efficiencies. 

 
Line department managers will then be able to concentrate their 
efforts on the programs they know best, leaving the property 
management function to the experts. For the first time in the 
history of Saskatchewan . . . managers will be held accountable 
for the efficient use of space. 

 
We anticipate that savings resulting from the new corporation 
will be substantial. 

 
It goes on to say that the: — 
 

. . . corporation is in keeping with our commitment to eliminate 
waste and duplication in government (and certain other 
comments). 

 
I want to ask the minister if he fully subscribes to the words set out 
by the Minister of Finance in the budget address of March 1986 in 
this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would think the statement as put out by the 
Minister of Finance is a . . . shall I say, a fair indication of what 
our goals are in SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). Certainly I think he will realize, as will anyone, that 
as you move towards perhaps a different way of dealing with line 
departments that it will be an evolutionary type of development. 
By that I mean it wouldn't happen just instantly overnight, and 
efficiencies and methods of operation, I'm sure, as is the case of 
most corporations, will certainly develop as time goes on. 
 
But getting back to your statement: — do we support the 
statement put out by the Minister of Finance in the budget? I 
would say that that is a fairly fair representation of where we think 
the corporation will go, but in what savings and what efficiencies 
will be there for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I do add a caveat on there, that it will evolve, and is evolving. 
And I believe, as years go on, there will be other efficiencies and 
perhaps new ways of dealing with the various departments and the 
operation of the corporation that will evolve with experience and 
maturation. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to particularly deal, Mr. Chairman, 
with the one statement which I have read, and it's this: — 
 

For the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, government 
managers will be held accountable  

  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3592 
 

for efficient use of space. 
 
Now this statement was made in March 1986, and the minister 
subscribes to that, which means that prior to this time there were 
inefficiencies in the use of space, and managers were not held 
accountable. And I wonder if the minister could enlarge upon 
what the problems were in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think what is meant by that, and I would 
explain it in this fashion, is that perhaps the method of where your 
space if . . . let's take an example, if you are a manager and 
previously that was charged to the supply and service, another 
department. Now under SPMC that comes out of your budget as 
an expenditure within your department, where you have to make 
that decision of the moneys that you've been allocated by this 
Assembly to run your department. And I think that would, and is 
going to bring about greater efficiencies because you're held more 
accountable there. In other words, you're spending your money to 
do what you want in the way of space, furniture, things of this 
nature. 
 
Previously it would have been that you were spending the money 
out of my budget, and I believe, when you are accountable and 
have to defend what you're doing yourself, you're going to have 
greater efficiencies. I use you in this illustration as . . . of you 
being a line department manager and myself being the manager of 
the property management corporation. So I hope that gives you 
some indication of how I feel, and the Minister of Finance felt 
there would be greater accountability under this type of structure. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, the statement seems to 
indicate that this is the first time in history that there'll be 
accountability. And I don't believe that for a moment. This is a 
fairly, fairly firm statement saying there was no accountability 
before, but there's going to be accountability now. 
 
And I want to draw your attention, Mr. Minister, while I'm on my 
feet, to the report of the Supply and Services Department. And this 
is the annual report '85-86, and before I get to what I want to say 
about this report, I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, to think about 
this because I want an answer. 
 
This report had a transmittal letter dated November 1, 1986, was 
finally laid on our desks here in the Assembly July 9, 1987 — 
more than seven months later. I want to know why it took so long 
to get that report on to the members' desks and to the public of 
Saskatchewan, because we're entering a period here where there 
are no further reports from this department and there are no reports 
from the Crown corporation. So we're entering a gap, an 
information gap, and I want to know why it took so long to get 
that report on the desks of the members here in the Chamber. 
 
(1015) 
 
Now I was talking about efficiency and the use of space. I read 
this report quite clearly, and it's loaded with complimentary 
statements about how well the Department of Supply and Services 
is doing, interfacing  

with private enterprise and efficiently managing the space and 
efficiently purchasing, and so forth and so on. It's loaded with all 
kinds of phrases that indicate it's a very efficient operation. And 
the deputy minister, in his letter, in his message, says — and he 
concludes, after a fairly laudatory, upbeat statement — he says: — 
 

I feel this annual report reflects Supply and Services progress 
towards an excellence in service, efficiency in all our 
undertakings, and economy in delivery. 

 
And it's signed by the deputy minister. 
 
Now this seems to me to be in stark contrast to the Minister of 
Finance, who says that this thing is not running properly. And I 
wonder if you can explain the contradiction, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think you're confusing the issue a wee bit. 
You asked two or three questions, and I will go back to the one 
regarding the statement of the Minister of Finance. And I think if 
you look at this, really what is meant there, that in regard to space, 
that under the new structure we believe that program managers 
and line departments will be held more accountable for space 
because of, as I indicated to you in my first answer, having to pay 
for that out of their budget. And I believe that makes common 
sense. 
 
Now you draw a wee bit of a long bow in saying that perhaps this 
insinuates that there never had been efficient management before. 
I'm not suggesting that that is inherently in that statement. 
However, in discussing about the report of the — I think that was 
your next question — going on to the report here of the 
Saskatchewan Supply and Services, in which the deputy minister 
indicates that the Department of Supply and Services was 
functioning quite efficiently. I think that's a different thing from 
what was suggested under the statement by the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
In regard to the tabling of the document, I believe we started, and I 
could go back, but it was some time in June when the House 
opened. We can check the records, and I think this was tabled 
about . . . in the middle of July. So there was . . . I think as far as 
tabling goes, that wasn't too long after the opening of the House. 
I'm just going from memory; we could get the exact dates, and you 
may well have those; I don't know. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well that's true, Mr. Minister. It was tabled 
on July 9, '87. That was seven . . . more than seven months after 
the letter of transmittal was dated in the report. And I say that's too 
long, especially in a n agency where there's no information. 
 
We have a secret agency here — a very secret agency of 
government. The minister refuses to provide information, there are 
no reports covering the operation of the Supply and Services, and 
there's no reports covering the operations of the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. I think that's a serious 
omission. 
 
I don't know whether it's intentional or not by the minister, but I 
think it's a serious omission as far as  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3593 
 

keeping the people of Saskatchewan up to speed on what this 
government's doing in space management and other functions that 
were performed by the Department of Supply and Services. 
 
The Minister of Finance, in his statement, is the one that drew the 
bow. He's the one that said: — 
 

For the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, government 
managers will be held accountable for the efficient use of space. 

 
My assumption is that government managers, regardless of where 
they existed, regardless of how you shuffle the paper, were 
responsible for the efficient use of space prior to this agency being 
created. And I don't accept the minister's word. 
 
I want to go on with the Minister of Finance's statement. He says 
that this corporation is modelled after similar Crown corporations 
in British Columbia, Manitoba, and Quebec. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
took the trouble to pick one of those provinces and find out how 
they run the show over there. 
 
And I thought I'll take the one closest to Saskatchewan — that's 
Manitoba. And the situation I find in Manitoba doesn't appear to 
be the situation I see in Saskatchewan. And I want to ask the 
minister how he modelled the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation on the province of Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I'll go back to my first statement that I 
gave you and indicated that as in most corporations, or new 
methods of doing business, there's an evolutionary track that one 
follows along. And I believe we will see SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) in Saskatchewan building and 
bringing in some of the ways of operation of perhaps other 
property management corporations and developing our own 
unique Saskatchewan ones, which I would like to see happen here. 
 
I don't believe that one should go holus-bolus and take something 
from another part of Canada or another part of the world and say, 
this is the perfect staff. I think you would agree with me that we in 
Saskatchewan have a record of developing things that are unique 
and that are Saskatchewan-made and Saskatchewan . . . function 
well for this province, and have been leaders and will continue to 
be leaders in this type of development. 
 
You asked specifically in the method of operation. I'm informed 
that they operate very similar to the Quebec and British Columbia. 
Your specific question was: — how does it relate to the Manitoba 
one? And certainly I'll give you a couple, I guess, of examples 
with Manitoba. 
 
First of all, under SPMC we have brought together all these real 
properties of the government and put a dollar value on those, and I 
believe it's somewhere in the neighbourhood of $500 million of 
assets this corporation is responsible for. I believe Manitoba did 
the same thing, so there would be one similarity. 
 
Secondly, in the dealing with debt and with third parties  

and so on, we are amortizing that over a period of years, and I 
believe Manitoba are doing exactly the same thing, so there would 
be two areas where you'd see some similarities. 
 
But I don't want to give you the misconception that we would 
believe that we should go and take the Manitoba model and bring 
it right in here and say, because it's done in Manitoba that way, 
we're going to do it in Saskatchewan. We have picked some bits 
and pieces. We're developing our own system. It is the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, and I'm sure 
that you would support that kind of evolutionary development and 
build what is best for handling the properties, the public properties 
of the people of the province of Saskatchewan on a Saskatchewan 
model. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, I certainly believe in a 
Saskatchewan-made policy with regard to the health care, trade, 
you name it, and that includes the Saskatchewan supply and 
service functions. Whether they're called supply and services or 
property management corporation, I believe in a 
Saskatchewan-made policy. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, your remarks display to me a total 
misunderstanding of how the situation's set up in Manitoba. And I 
detect what you're doing here is you're guarding the flank of the 
Minister of Finance. You're guarding the flank of the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance is noted for getting off on cloud nine 
occasionally, and he was that way in this budget speech, Mr. 
Minister. This is the budget speech where the Minister of Finance 
said that the deficit would be about $500 million. But when the 
economic report of the province of Saskatchewan came in, it was 
$1.2 billion. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance wanted some foundation under his 
decision to go for a Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, so he got some of his research people to pluck out 
some names of provinces where he could say, these provinces are 
all doing it; why doesn't Saskatchewan do it? 
 
Mr. Minister, quit defending the Minister of Finance and stand on 
your feet. The property management corporation function, as it's 
carried out in the province of Manitoba, is totally different than 
Saskatchewan — totally different. And I have the script here that 
tells how the Manitoba operation runs, Manitoba Properties 
Incorporated. It's a holding company. It's on paper, and it's in the 
Minister of Finance's office in Manitoba. That's all it is; it's a 
bunch of paper in the Minister of Finance's office, and to prove it, 
here's the annual report of Government Services for the province 
of Manitoba. And all of the functions that are in here . . . most of 
the functions that are in here are in Saskatchewan in the property 
management corporation where we can't get at them — where we 
can't get at them. It's a Crown corporation. They present no report 
— no report here before us. So we have this secret agency in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Manitoba, it's out in the open. It's all here in the report.  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3594 
 

You can read about all of the different functions that are normally 
supplied by the Department of Supply and Services in 
Saskatchewan prior to this time, and they're there for budgetary 
examination in the Legislative Assembly, and the report's there on 
time. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you should stop defending the flights of fancy of 
the Minister of Finance of this province. You should have done it 
when he was so far out on his budgetary deficit. You should have 
cut your connection with him then and gone on your own, because 
I would have trusted you farther than I would trust the Minister of 
Finance of this province to get a straight answer. 
 
For the Minister of Finance to put in a budget address that this is 
similar to the province of Manitoba, the first one I picked out of 
the three that he mentioned as examples, is totally fallacious. And 
you stand here in this Chamber and you support the words of the 
Minister of Finance. You'd have been much better, Mr. Minister, 
to avoid the words of the Minister of Finance, and so would any 
other minister here, because they get caught up in that web of 
deceit that this Minister of Finance and the previous minister of 
Finance have woven for the people of Saskatchewan, along with 
the Premier of Saskatchewan. And I would encourage you to 
defend your area of responsibility on what you believe is right, not 
what the Minister of Finance wants the public to think. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, when you're going to table a 
report for the conclusion of the Department of Supply and 
Services in the province of Saskatchewan for their last year, and 
when you're going to have a report for the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation? I want to know that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well first of all, just getting on to the 
Minister of Finance — and I don't think that is the full purpose of 
these estimates, is to discuss the credibility or the strength of the 
Minister of Finance — I think the members well know that the 
Minister of Finance in this government can well defend himself. I 
think they know that very well on that side of the House. 
However, I don't intend to get into an ideological argument with 
the member opposite as to the strength of the Minister of Finance. 
I can understand that he would be somewhat enamoured and lean 
towards the Manitoba model. 
 
(1030) 
 
I said in my opening remarks, and I believe this very strongly, that 
we will develop a Saskatchewan model, and we are developing a 
Saskatchewan model. And that Saskatchewan model will have 
some similarities as to Manitoba, as to B.C., as to Quebec, as to 
other areas as they develop these type of property management 
corporations. But certainly what I want to see here, and what we 
will be driving and putting together, is a Saskatchewan model, and 
I couldn't care if we didn't do it exactly the same as Manitoba. 
 
There's a number of things that they do in Manitoba that I don't 
quite support. And I guess that's the difference. There are some 
things probably that they do well, but for us to say because it's 
done in Manitoba we're going to do it this way in Saskatchewan, if 
that's what the opposition  

are waiting for, they're going to wait a long time to see that 
happen. 
 
However, be that as it may be, the member was asking about a 
report. The member knows that this is a Crown corporation, and 
there will be, after its first year of functioning as a Crown 
Corporation, a report which will go to the Crown Corporations 
Committee, at which time, as is the case of other Crown 
Corporations in this province, and has been for quite some time, 
full debate and questioning on the operation of the corporation will 
take place in that form. As to the '86-87 report, it is not completed 
with the Provincial Auditor at this time. When that is completed, 
there will be a report come forward. 
 
So, Mr. Member, you realize as I said, this is something new, this 
is something we're building, and it will be in the Crown 
Corporations. And you've sat in Crown Corporations for a number 
of years, you know how they operate, and you can "have right at 
'er" in that type of discussion. 
 
I remember when I was in opposition going to Crown 
Corporations. Very, very distinctly it was told that you questioned 
the year under review of that corporation. That will be the same 
type of questioning that will take place for SPMC. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister in charge 
of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation says that 
there's a similarity between the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation and the Manitoba Properties 
Incorporated. Well it's like the similarity between an apple and an 
orange. They're both generally round, there the similarities cease. 
And for the minister to get up and suggest . . . that doesn't make 
any sense because I've got the facts here, and the facts don't 
support the minister's claim. 
 
The minister says, when the first full year of operation is done the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation will present a 
report. Let me remind the minister that this secret organization that 
he has, which has no report, in the order in council has a year-end 
of the calendar year, and 1986 is done. Where is the report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials indicate to me that the first 
report will have a year and five days — it was five days in '86 and 
then the year in '87, ending on March 31, '87, and that report has 
not been through the Provincial Auditor at this time. When that is 
completed, then we would be putting forth the report. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have the order in 
council here fixing December 31 in each year as the date in which 
all books and accounts of the corporation shall be closed and 
balanced — December 31, not March 31. I want to hear your 
response to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The year-end date was changed by another 
OC, and if you want the second one — you have the original one 
— if you want the second one, we'd be more than pleased to 
provide you with the number of the OC and I'm sure it's here. So 
there was a change in the date. 
 
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3595 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — The minister is telling me now that the 
year-end for the property management corporation is March 31? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — It's very difficult to deal with this new 
secret agency, Mr. Minister. On December 4, 1986, I sent a note 
over to you, Mr. Minister, and I asked you if you could give me 
the structure of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation and the appropriate officers filled in the chart. You 
were unable to supply me that information at that time, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And now it's almost nine months later and I have not received any 
information from you about this secret agency that you've 
established, or that the Minister of Finance has established for you. 
I want to know why you're not giving out any information about 
this agency. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well let's get one thing very correct. And 
you know, you can use inflammatory words and get into debate 
and hassle if we want. But you know, for you to indicate some 
type of a secret organization is simply not correct. In fact, you will 
see there will be more information provided than there was 
previously because, as I say, the line departments have to deal 
with the Property Management Corporation. 
 
So you will see — and trust me on this — as you see this evolve, 
I'm sure you will see more information. So I want to be very, very 
straightforward with you — there is no attempt, and you well 
know that, to have any type of a secret organization. 
 
The OC (order in council) that amended the exchange and 
extended the year end is OC no. 1163 in '86, the 3rd of '87, 94, no 
. . . the 17th of December. Yes, there's a different number over 
here. I can provide this to you if you wish. So you know, I'd just 
like to indicate that there's no attempt to hide anything. 
 
As far as the structure of the management, the management at this 
time are in an acting position. I have not made the final decision as 
to the structure, as to the people who will be filling in the 
structure, so therefore I think it would be fallacy for me to provide 
this to you. I give you this commitment — when that decision is 
made, I would have no hesitation in providing you with the people 
who will be permanently directing this corporation. 
 
In the intervening time, in the evolutionary time, the people who 
were in Supply and Services have been fulfilling those functions. 
And I'm sure many of them will continue to do that. 
 
But you wondered why you did not get a response back saying 
there's this person and this person and this person, because those 
permanent decisions have not been made at this time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister in charge 
of the property management corporation says, trust me, trust me. 
He says, in the effluxion of time all this information will be made 
available to you in quantities  

that you've never had before. And he promises, he promises, he 
promises. 
 
My problem is, along with the people of Saskatchewan, I've been 
stung by Tory promises before. And anybody who stands in this 
House, after some of the promises that have been made by the 
Tory party, and is prepared to take at face value their promises in 
the future, deserves to be turfed out of this House because they'd 
be next to the village idiot. And I'm not prepared to take that 
position. I'm not going to accept your promises about information 
being provided. I want some information. I want to know, Mr. 
Minister, why you changed the cut-off date for the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation from December 31 to March 
31? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well you can question, and I guess that's 
your role when you sit over there, and you can indicate that you 
don't think this will happen or there'll be some hiding of 
information. You know, you can go ahead with that kind of line of 
reasoning, but I don't believe the people of Saskatchewan believe 
that in the property management corporation there's any type of a 
sinister or secret type of organization. There's all kinds of people, 
every day, who do business with these officials. They do business 
on contracting; they do business in the government; they do 
business with one of the largest corporations of this province. And 
I want to tell you, I haven't had one letter — not one letter — 
saying anything sinister or secretive. So if you want to continue 
that kind of line of logic, fine and dandy. 
 
However, getting down to the question that you asked, and that is, 
why did we change, and I'd like to give you an explanation of this. 
When it was first . . . and I told you when we started, this is . . . 
things evolve, and they will continue to evolve. And as I'm 
minister, I want to see them evolve in the correct direction. And if 
you want to question that, that's your role and you have every right 
to do that. And I welcome your questions if they're constructive, 
but if you're just going to try and paint some picture of a sinister 
and secret organization, I say you're wasting your time because 
nobody believes that in the province of Saskatchewan. But if you 
want to continue that way, you go right ahead. 
 
However, getting back to your question of why was the year 
changed. Well in most Crown corporations, most Crown 
corporations of this province, they operate on the calendar year. In 
the formulative stages it was thought by the people who put this 
together after viewing British Columbia, Manitoba, Quebec, that 
they would go for the calendar year. That was not a correct 
decision. It evolved to show that we should be on the same year as 
the government, because the basic clients are, in many cases, the 
line departments. So to be on the same budgetary cycle as them 
made more sense than to be on the calendar year. That's why the 
amending OC came through. 
 
But I think that proves the point that is said when I first started, is 
that this will be a Saskatchewan model, this will be a 
Saskatchewan corporation best serving the needs of Saskatchewan 
people and the clients of this corporation, and there will not be 
anything that is of a secretive nature, as you are attempting to 
indicate. It's straight business —  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3596 
 

business run the most efficient that we can do it, business that will 
benefit the people of Saskatchewan and the line departments that 
we deal with. 
 
They tell me there are about 1,500 accommodation manuals in 
circulation, telling about the operation of the property 
management Crown. And I have one here — Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation accommodation manual. It 
tells you all the things about the property Crown, property 
management corporation, nothing of a secretive nature at all. I 
hope you have one of these, and if you have not, I'd be more than 
pleased to send this one across to you at this time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes. Where have you been hiding those, 
Mr. Minister? I'd love to get a hold of a copy of that. 
 
Could you send me every piece of descriptive literature you've got 
about the structure and the personnel in the property management 
corporation, what their titles are, you know, who their names are, 
what their duties are? I'd like to get a hold of that because I haven't 
been able to get a hold of it in nine months. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well it's a secret. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, it is a secret. We have an agency here 
that has no legislative basis, absolutely no legislative basis. It was 
brought in even before, even before the Deputy Premier brought in 
his Bill 5, which allowed the cabinet to do things in the cabinet 
room that they would be charged with some offence if they did 
here in the Chamber. Before Bill 5, it was brought in by a simple 
order in council. 
 
(1045) 
 
And we're dealing with an agency where the ordinary budgetary 
expenses of the agency are over $8 million, and where the loans, 
advances, and investments total $143 million. And the Minister of 
Finance has no wind-up report for the previous year of the Supply 
and Services. He switched the date for the year-end of the property 
management corporation. That was a decision that the office boy 
could have made, Mr. Minister — the office boy — or in this day 
and age, the office person, whoever that may have been. 
 
It is patently obvious to me — and this has nothing to do with 
having been a former minister in that department — it's patently 
obvious to me that if you're dealing with government departments 
that run on a fiscal year ending March 31, that you would run your 
agency on a fiscal year March 31, not December 31, as dictated in 
the order in council coming out of the office of the Premier. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Minister, that you take hold of this agency. 
Quit knuckling under to the Premier and the Minister of Finance, 
who out of the blue pulled out the date of December 31 for the 
year end cut off, and get it on a practical basis as you have now — 
the end of the fiscal year being March 31. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the information that has been put out about the 
property management corporation, up to this point, has been 
minimal. Now we're dealing with a pretty  

big operation here and the minister says: — trust me. He says: — 
trust this government, trust this government who has betrayed the 
people of Saskatchewan time and time again, not necessarily in 
this department but elsewhere in this government. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, when is the report coming out for 
'86-87, Saskatchewan Supply and Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well we'll give you your last answer first, 
and that is that the auditors, they tell me, are in the department 
right now, and as soon as that audit is completed with the 
Provincial Auditor — and he audits, as you know, the entire 
government — then that information will be available. 
 
I'm surprised that you had not had one of these, and for your 
information I'd be more than pleased to send one across for you, 
and one for your researcher, one for your new leader, and one for 
your old leader, so I think that would provide you with the 
information you may need. 
 
Secondly, regarding the structure — and let me once again 
indicate to you that this will be an evolving corporation. And I 
have the structure here of the organization chart as of March 31, 
1986, and it is basically the same at this time, but there may be 
changes in the structure of this organization, as I've said at the 
beginning. 
 
I also have here a sheet that would indicate who the people that are 
serving in these positions are if you would want that. But I'm a 
little hesitant to send this to you because it is in rather small print, 
and I'm sure you will say I'm trying to hide something, so I would 
prefer to have it printed in larger print so that you can certainly see 
who every individual is, if you wish that. I said to you previously, 
though, that the permanent designations have not been made at 
this point in time. 
 
Once again let me indicate to you that this is a large corporation. I 
think we agree on this. This is an important corporation to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and this is a corporation that is evolving 
and being built. And whether you want to trust me or not, I tell 
you it will be designed to best serve the needs of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan and to run this aspect of government in 
the most efficient manner possible. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I want to advise you that right 
in your own agency you have a branch which can blow that up so 
that it won't look like you're hiding anything from me. Everybody 
does it every day around here. It's a photocopier that blows stuff 
up into a larger size, and I'll be able to see whether there's any fine 
print there or not. 
 
I think that's a poor excuse for not sending this information over in 
March, or at least when the House opened, if the minister had it 
available in March. And I asked for it in December '86. I'm 
surprised the minister hasn't sent the information over at this time. 
 
Now what I want to know, Mr. Minister, whether all of the 
functions that were in Supply and Services have been transferred 
over en masse to the Saskatchewan Property  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3597 
 

Management Corporation, or have some of them been dropped or 
done away with or put somewhere else in government? And I 
want the minister to give me a list of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Everything was transferred except the 
systems centre, and some of the systems centre went to 
SaskCOMP, and a small portion of the systems centre is still in 
Supply and Services, but everything else was transferred. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I don't need to know it right 
now, but if you can provide me with the information later about 
the breakdown in the systems centre, I mean the break-out in the 
systems centre. How much is retained and what function is 
retained in the department; what has gone to SaskCOMP; and if in 
any way your department and/or agency has been involved in 
discussions with regard to the new organization which is 
attempted to be set up within SaskTel dealing with computer 
operations and so forth, in conjunction probably with SaskCOMP? 
If the minister has anything on that, I'd appreciate receiving it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I'd be pleased to provide that to you, 
and I give you the commitment I'll get it to you as quickly as we 
can. There's about eight or 10 people left within Supply and 
Services regarding this aspect of the systems centre. In regard to 
your comment about SaskTel, there's been no discussions, or my 
officials have not been involved in anything of that nature at all, if 
that is . . . in fact is taking place. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — In the Minister of Finance's comments in 
the budget address, he says savings resulting from the new 
corporation will be substantial. I want the minister to indicate what 
savings have been obtained at this point, in detail, on how they've 
been saved, and indicate from where the saving occurred within 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I'm informed that because we're six months 
into the operation, actual operation, that we could not indicate at 
this point in time. With the completion of the first year, we'd be 
able to indicate by the figures where actual savings have taken 
place. And that may well be from a number of the areas. I mean, 
space is a big, big factor, and it may well be through this that we 
will be able to have more efficient space at better rents, which 
could be a saving. 
 
Certainly through the use of CVA (central vehicle agency) there 
may be areas there in which we will be able to bring in some 
savings, but until we see the first year of operation, the complete 
first year of operation, it would be pretty hard to say, well, we've 
got a big saving here. Until those figures have come in, I wouldn't 
want to indicate to you that there is in a certain area until we have 
the proof positive through the figures of the first year's operation. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, at least you're not giving me 
disinformation, you're just not giving me any information. I'm 
being notably unsuccessful in getting information out of you. 
 

You sent across the accommodation manual and you said, this'll 
give you a lot of information. Well it gives me a little information 
about a certain section of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, but there's no structure of the framework in which the 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well the minister says he won't send 
that over because it's small print. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You have it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, I know. But it's not the same; there's 
been changes. It becomes very difficult to ask a series of questions 
to the minister when in fact there's no basis on which to frame the 
questions. So the minister will understand the problem. 
 
I want to deal with leasing for a while in the property management 
corporation. I want to get the minister to indicate to me the theory 
that guides the property management corporation with regard to 
the terms of leases, the length of terms of leases. If he can do that, 
perhaps I'd have a couple of questions in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The policy is the same as was in place under 
Supply and Services, both with our government and with yours, as 
I understand, in that is that there are leases . . . there are some are 
monthly leases, there are various terms — one-year, three-year, 
five-year, 100-, and I believe even up to 20-year terms. The length 
of the term depends on a number of factors. I guess one thing 
could be, in some situations, that the type of function that would 
be provided within that space: — costs — whether we feel that 
we're striking a good deal and that it should be tied up for some 
period of time. 
 
So there's a number of factors that would come into the whole 
thing of leasing. But the types are very similar to what has been in 
place for a number of years. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I wonder if the minister, in due course, 
could send me the descriptive material which applies to the staff 
who will be implementing the policy on leasing, in detail, because 
I want to understand more thoroughly how the minister goes about 
leasing. 
 
We have a government here that is . . . they're not builders, and 
they're not buyers, they're leasers. And this . . . they're neither 
builder nor buyer, they're leasers. And this creates some 
interesting situations about who the leases are awarded to, and I 
will be dealing with that a little later on. 
 
But it raises an interesting question. If the Conservative 
government had been the Government of Saskatchewan back in 
1908, we wouldn't have been celebrating the 75th anniversary of 
this building today because we'd have it leased; we wouldn't own 
it. And this was a very good buy; the building was a very good 
buy, and I don't want the minister to get too . . . I think we should 
be builders as well as leasers. And I just wanted to impress that on 
the minister and ask him to be sure to send me that information 
about leasing and the guide-lines that his staff apply. 
 
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3598 
 

I want to deal for a moment about . . . and we are interfacing again 
with the Minister of Finance who has a very difficult problem 
there over in Finance, and he's enlisted the Minister of Supply and 
Services, now the minister in charge of the property management 
corporation to assist him in his troubles. And this has to do with 
the flipping of funds involving the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, which wouldn't have happened if the 
Department of Supply and Services was there. And the 
consequence of flipping these funds was to reduce the net debt of 
the Consolidated Fund by $69.8 million. 
 
This is a manoeuvre by the Minister of Finance to put himself in a 
better light, and the corollary of that is to put the minister of the 
property management corporation in a poorer light. And I wonder 
if the minister of . . . in charge of the property management 
corporation has some philosophical thoughts about the position the 
Minister of Finance puts him in, in an attempt to get out of an ever 
increasing deficit situation which he's got himself into. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Going back to what you'd asked previously 
about leasing — and I want to get it entirely straight so that you do 
not think I'm misleading you or hiding anything — you'd like to 
know the parameters for leasing, the leasing policy of SPMC. You 
would like to know the names of the people who work in leasing 
in that function. Is that the two things that you want to know? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, I want to know the parameters that 
guide the people in making the decisions about the type of leases, 
the length of leases, and I want to know the structure from top to 
bottom. I want to know it for the whole agency, but in particular, I 
want to know it for the property management corporation —- at 
least, function. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I said, you will be provided with that. 
But once again let me indicate to you that this is not a static 
corporation, that there are changes and they will be undergoing 
changes. So I can provide to you at the point of time that I said to 
you previously, that most of the positions are temporary and there 
may be some realignment within the corporation. So 
understanding that, that I will give you what you're asking for, but 
it may change as things develop further. 
 
Regarding the figure of 69 million — and I think what you're 
talking about there is the money that had previously been seen as 
grants, as grants to third parties, had now, with the corporation and 
the new way of doing business as I explained at the beginning, 
with those being loans amortized over a longer period of time, 
that's where they showed up in the property management 
corporation. I think that's what you're talking about in the $69 
million. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, just so we're 
completely clear on what I'm talking about, I'm referring to the . . . 
I'll refer to a comment in the report of the auditor, the Provincial 
Auditor, March 31, '86, wherein on page 10 the auditor says . . . 
He talks about the movement of funds within the property 
management corporation which was established by order in 
council March 25, 1986. And in that he says: — 

The reported effect of these related party transactions was to 
reduce the net debt of the Consolidated Fund as at March 31, 
1986 by $69,898,000. If summary financial statements had been 
prepared it would be apparent that the actual effect was no 
change to the Province's net debt since the overall net debt 
cannot be affected when someone is dealing with one's self. 

 
This is a report of the auditor. And the effect, the net effect is that 
it reduces a debt of the consolidated fund by $69.8 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. On the date of the start up there were 
projects that were undergoing. Okay. And that amount of money 
which previously had been a grant money, so that was taken from 
— and coming out of the Consolidated Fund — so that was taken 
from there and put into the debt as a loan under the property 
management corporation. And that is the way that we will be 
funding third parties on their construction. And that is, as we said 
earlier in our deliberations, the similarities between Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan — there is one of the similarities, exactly the same 
way, that under the property management corporation it will be 
part of their debt, the long-term amortization of these funds for 
capital projects, mainly. Health care is one of the big consumers 
and Education. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, this is not the same as 
Manitoba's. It doesn't line up with the policy in Manitoba, and the 
reason for the Manitoba Properties Inc. I think it lines up more 
with the Minister of Finance and his desires to get some . . . 
off-load some of his deficit onto different departments where he 
can hide it, or agencies or Crown corporations. And this was . . . 
The veil of secrecy was pierced by the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce. And this is in their circular that they circulated on 
February 4, '87, and they say: — 
 

. . . by selling the buildings to the Crown it will inject some 
badly needed cash into the provincial coffers. 

 
That's quoting in part what the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce said on February 4, 1987. So you're not fooling 
anybody, Mr. Minister. You may be fooling some of the voters, 
but people that are astute enough to see what the Minister of 
Finance is doing to you, realize that you're not fooling them. 
You're not fooling them a bit. 
 
I want to move on, Mr. Minister, to the levels of funding for the 
1987-88 fiscal year. And this has to do with the total for that year 
. . . is, I gather, $150,770,400; whereas, the previous year, in the 
Supply and Services '86-87, it was ordinary expenditure of 
$112,375,890. Mr. Minister, that's an increase of 34 per cent over 
the previous year. I wonder if you could just lead me through that 
and tell me why it's an increase of 34 per cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The difference is the amounts is mainly 
capital. You asked for the detail and we'd be pleased to provide 
that for you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, I'd like to know the difference and the 
explanation of the difference. I have here the  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3599 
 

supplementaries, Mr. Minister, for year ending March 31, 1987. 
And in there it shows supplementary ordinary expenditures for 
Supply and Services at $25.4 million. 
 
Is it safe to assume, where the largest figure in that grouping is 
payment to the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
of $23.2 million, is it safe to project that that figure will occur 
again in the next time we're discussing these estimates before the 
House, or is it unlikely that that magnitude of figure will appear? I 
wonder if you could enlarge on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Unlikely that that would happen again, they 
indicate to me, that you wouldn't see that type of a supplemental 
expenditure. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I would like to, Mr. Minister, get over to 
this new secret agency within the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. It's a security . . . perhaps you can tell 
me the correct name of it. It's headed, I believe, by someone who's 
title I'm not sure of, but whose name is Harry Stienwand. I want to 
know what kind of equipment has been . . . state of the art 
equipment has been purchased by that agency, the property 
management corporation. Sensitive electronic surveillance 
equipment — I want to know the type, the cost, and what its 
capabilities are, if the Premier has it in his office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well yes, there is a security division. We 
discussed this, I believe, in question period some time ago. And 
Mr. Stienwand is the director of that. 
 
As far as equipment, I can't indicate at this point in time what 
equipment that is. But I can give you this: — if there is any 
equipment that I will give you the serial numbers and the best 
description and so on of that equipment. I don't have that at my 
fingertips here at this point in time, but I give you the commitment 
that I will provide that to you of any equipment that he has. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I would appreciate receiving that, Mr. 
Minister, in due course. And while I'm on the subject, I want to 
know why you didn't answer my question that I asked in the 
legislature quite some time ago. The fellow that's reading the 
paper there took notice of it. Did he tell you about the question 
that you were supposed to answer? 
 
That was a question about this security agency, security branch 
within the property management corporation. And I wanted to 
know why the minister wouldn't have a bipartisan or a 
non-partisan group to override, oversight committee, to overview 
the decisions that are made by that segment of your operations 
which I don't know anything about and can't find anything out 
about. 
 
Now did the Deputy Premier tell you that I asked that question; 
and if so, what is the answer to it? Maybe you could answer the 
question now. It's never been answered. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That's wrong. I just did that. I believe that 
question was answered, but I'll answer it again. Seems to be the 
habit of the opposition to not get the answer the first time, so they 
feel that it is in the best  

interest to ask the same question three or four times. And if you 
feel that's what we should be doing in here, well, we'll do that. 
 
However, and secondly, had you come on the CBC show with me 
to discuss it instead of ducking, we might have been able to get 
some of the answers out there too. He was invited and took off at 4 
o'clock, if you want to know what the truth is. 
 
However, be that as it may, the security division is basically to 
look at government buildings and the security of those buildings, 
the security of the people that work in those buildings. 
 
(1115) 
 
And I believe that that is a responsibility, a responsibility assigned 
to the property management corporation of this province, and I see 
no need for it to be a joint part type of committee. I don't see the 
reason behind that. I mean, when the people of Saskatchewan 
elected this government, they elected this government to run the 
province of Saskatchewan. And looking after . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Now if the member wants to chirp, it's going to 
take a little longer. 
 
But looking after property is a responsibility that this government 
has, and I am the minister in charge of that. I am satisfied that the 
security division are well equipped to do this, and there is nothing 
sinister or secretive about this at all. I indicated to you just two 
minutes ago that I would provide the description, the serial 
numbers, whatever it may be, of any equipment they have but I do 
not see any need of any type of committee, legislative committee, 
to look after this unit. I wouldn't have a legislative committee to 
decide what chesterfields we're buying in the various offices. I 
think we have the capability to do that within the corporation and 
we take full responsibility for looking after the properties of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — That is incredible, Mr. Chairman. I was to 
appear with the minister in charge of this new secret security 
division and they cancelled — CBC cancelled. And I said, well 
why did you cancel? And they said, well the minister's got a 
banquet he has to attend that evening. And that is the last I heard 
of it, Mr. Chairman. So the question of who blinked: — it's the 
minister that blinked and wouldn't appear on that program when I 
was prepared to appear on that program. And let's put that to rest 
right now. 
 
Now in the Department of Supply and Services, where the 
functions of security were performed, and I wonder if the minister 
can tell me where those functions of security were provided in 
Department of Supply and Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well let's get back to the blinking first 
because there was an appointment for a meeting on CBC. I had a 
previous appointment and couldn't make that, which is quite 
normal for ministers of the Crown to have other appointments. I 
hope you realize that. However, the day that I was going on — 
until 4 o'clock of that day you were going on — and I have the clip 
to show the people of Saskatchewan that I went on and explained 
it. And I noticed a vacant chair where you were to be sitting. 
 
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3600 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, after you ducked the first 
time I was never called by CBC for a further programming. I'd 
have been there; I would have loved to have been there to discuss 
this new secrecy within the department. 
 
Now the minister didn't answer the question, Mr. Chairman. The 
question . . . he wanted to determine who blinked first. On page 9 
of the report of the Department of Supply and Services there is a 
section that says: — 
 

Security awareness: — A government-wide security awareness 
program and professional expertise assist security staff in their 
duties. 

 
Is that the . . . your new agency only in the property management 
corporation, whereas before, in this instance, it was in the Supply 
and Services, is that where it's housed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The information is that it was . . . 
Previously, the security part we're talking about was under 
operations maintenance and now is under corporate affairs, if that 
answers your question. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And this is headed by the former specialist 
from the RCMP Special I section which deals in electronic 
surveillance and undercover work, plus four other people. And this 
is a new agency laid over top of that which previously existed in 
the department, and it seems to me that justification for this new 
agency is laid out in a press release, I believe, with the deputy. 
And in this news item it says: — 
 

The unit had used SaskTel and the RCMP debugging expertise 
to electronically sweep outside government offices where 
cabinet ministers and senior government officials meet. 

 
To date they have found no bugs. So in that area we have no bugs. 
And it goes . . . this article goes on: — 
 

And the unit's work is primarily to oversee security for 
government buildings. 

 
This is a new five-person unit established on top of the previous 
unit which was there, and on top of Wascana police and the 
Speaker's security in the Chamber. And it says that there's been . . . 
the past year, burglaries have taken place with regard to some 
electronic equipment in Saskatoon, food vouchers from the Social 
Services offices in Regina, and a rash of purse snatchings from 
offices. And I suspect there were some cookies taken too. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, was it necessary to overlay the 
previously existing security system in Supply and Services with 
another five-person group in property management corporation, 
for which we can find no information about? Why is that 
necessary, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, first of all, I think you're a little 
confused when you . . . I don't know if you're reading something 
into I Division that Mr. Stienwand once headed with the RCM 
Police. I Division is like, for some divisions, F Division. It's 
simply just a number. It has nothing to do with intelligence or 
anything of that nature. 
 

So I think you're trying to insinuate or draw a longbow again. 
We're not laying anything on over. This is the security unit. This is 
the security unit for the operation of the buildings of this 
government. And as I said to you previously, at a $500 million 
property, it would seem logical to me that you would have some 
people to look at the security of these things. Now you may make 
light of burglaries and break-ins and the stealing of food vouchers 
and so on, but we are responsible for the maintenance and the safe 
maintenance of the buildings of this province, and for the people 
that work in them. 
 
And I do not think it is anything out of line at all to have a unit 
such as is in place, with whom I did say. And obviously you 
missed that answer too. Mr. Stienwand was recruited from an 
across-Canada selection in a very detailed investigation or 
interview, shall I say, and came out on top as being a very, very 
capable individual in this type of function. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — In due course, Mr. Minister, will you 
identify when you answered those questions that I directed to the 
Deputy Premier? I want to see it in Hansard. If you would identify 
that time for me because you'll be aware of it, and I'd like to check 
it back. 
 
I've got a few more cavities I want to fill in in information here, 
and it has to do with dental chairs. I understand your agency is 
responsible for disposing of a number of dental chairs that are 
surplus to the operation of a made-in-Saskatchewan program, and 
really what it represents here is a substitution of a 
destruct-in-Saskatchewan program for a made-in-Saskatchewan 
program. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, how many excess dental chairs you 
anticipated or have on your hands at the dissolution of the dental 
program, the school-based dental program for children. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Approximately 400 dental suites. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Four hundred dental what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Suites. That's a chair and a stool and a 
cabinet and an X-ray and a drill — a suite. You know, if you were 
going to be a dentist and I said, here you go, you could probably 
function with that amount of equipment. That's what I'm calling a 
dental suite. About 400. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Are you sure . . . Mr. Minister, are these 
surplus to operation, or is that the total amount that were in the 
province? I imagine you made an assessment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That was the total amount. That was the 
total amount that were brought in. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — My information, Mr. Minister, is that there 
are over 570. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Maybe yours is wrong. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — It could be mine is false. I wonder if the 
minister could give me a detailed list of these surplus . . . of the 
dental suites that were surplus to operation; and  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3601 
 

could the minister tell me what the original cost of these pieces of 
equipment would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think where you have an error in your 
figures is that somebody supplied you with the number of clinics, 
and some of the clinics were serviced by mobile units, so that 
would bring the number of units that I've told you into line. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I can't hear what the minister's saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well maybe if some of the fellows beside 
you quit chirping, it would be easier for me to converse with you. 
The member from Regina Centre continually has to disrupt good 
dialogue in this Chamber. So if he would be quiet, you and I can 
have a reasonable discussion about the . . . Well, Mr. Chairman, 
we'll wait until there's some degree of control in this place and 
then continue on. 
 
(1130) 
 
I indicated to you, there were approximately 570 clinics. Some of 
the clinics were served by mobile units, and that would indicate 
the difference between what I told you in suites and your figure 
that you have. 
 
Now you wanted to know the cost of the equipment. I think you 
would well realize that some of the equipment was purchased in 
1974, making it 13 years old by now. There have some subsequent 
purchases also. The best information I have on the total value of it, 
I guess as of a new purchase, would be about $3 million over . . . 
but as I say, some of it had been in service for that period of time. 
So the market value of it today, I guess, will be indicated by the 
market — depends what people see 13-year-old dental equipment 
to be wroth. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I wonder if, in due course, Mr. Minister . . . 
I know this particular operation is still moving along, judging by 
the information that I have. I wonder if the minister could provide 
in due course a more detailed explanation of the assessment of 
how many units or partial units were available to dispose of, how 
they were disposed of, the original cost, and the cost of equivalent 
equipment at this point in time. And if the minister can supply that 
later, I won't take any more time at this time. 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Chairman, to the leasing of space with regard to 
the new convention centre in Regina. And I want to ask the 
minister: — has his agency rented space or made arrangements or 
signed any agreements to rent space in the new convention centre 
in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I'll answer your question on the dental 
equipment and then move on to the next one. 
 
On the dental equipment, as you are well aware, we're looking at 
methods of disposing of it, and there has been tenders by the 
dentists and the dental therapists, them looking at other interest 
groups to sell this off to. I would be, in your request, I would 
certainly be willing to provide that information as it evolves and 
takes place. 
 
The only thing I don't think I would be . . . or do I see the  

reason, is the equivalent cost today. I mean, we're selling this off. 
The market will dictate. So the third caveat, or the last caveat you 
put on there, I don't see the rationale for giving you the equivalent 
costs of today because we're not into buying it or anything of this 
nature. 
 
And the equivalent in costs of today has very little impact because 
this is used equipment and it is the market that will dictate what 
the value of it is. But for the number that are sold and who gets 
them and these sort of things, no problem in providing that to you 
as it transpires. 
 
Now on to your question of the convention centre. For a moment 
I'll confer with my officials and provide that answer to you. Yes, 
we do have leased space in the new convention centre when it is 
open, yes. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, when do you expect it will be 
open; how much space have you leased; and how much space had 
you negotiated to lease in the initial stages, or confirmed that you 
are leasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It is indicated that the convention centre will 
open in January of '88. The commitment is for 6,000 square 
metres of office space, 700 square metres of permanent display 
space, and 700 square metres of semi-permanent display. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I wonder if, for someone who's in the 
imperial age, if you could just give me a conversion of the 6,000, 
700 and 700 in square feet — approximation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Approximately times 10. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — So what the minister is saying that you 
have firm leases signed for approximately 60,000 square feet of 
office space and approximately 15,000 square feet of display 
space, give or take a few centimetres. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we have. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — At this point the property management 
corporation is going ahead with this lease. It's not attempting to get 
out of the lease — or has there been any attempt by the property 
management corporation to get out of the lease that they have 
agreed to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There have been discussions between the 
developers and the property management corporation, ongoing, 
but certainly we have this lease, and we're going ahead with the 
lease. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — What will that space be for, the largest 
blocks of space be for, Mr. Minister? And . . . Well, I'll get that 
answer first. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We haven't made the final commitment or 
decision as to what department may be moving into there. As you 
know, there's reorganization and down-sizing and . . . 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask the 
member from Regina Centre if he's had his estimates before the 
House yet. I'd like to help him, too. 
 
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3602 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I appreciate that comment. 
 
As I said, we haven't made the decision yet as to which 
departments may be moving into there. We've been in a 
down-sizing government — there has been some reorganization 
— and I cannot give you a commitment as to which ones would be 
necessarily going in there. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay, that brings to mind another question, 
Mr. Minister. The efficiency of the use of space and the reduction 
of the amount of unused space by the agency — I wonder if the 
previous report of the department indicated what space was . . . 
how space was being handled, and what was not being used, and 
so forth. And I wonder if the minister can provide me with a 
detailed summary of space that is not being used. 
 
For example, the one that was brought up previously in the 
question period had to do with the Department of Co-ops where 
three employees were using space that was for significantly more 
employees at a large cost. And if the minister can provide that at a 
later date, would be fine. 
 
I want to move to the Saskatoon scene, and I want to find out how 
much space there is in the cabinet office in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will provide you with that. I think you 
want to know what there is in excess space. I should point out 
from the time, and the member from Regina North had questioned 
about the space in Credit Union Central, that that has been . . . that 
lease is terminated. And I believe the credit union are using all the 
space now. 
 
And it's as I said in question period, when you're into leases it 
takes a period of time sometime to negotiate out of them. And if 
your clients will not negotiate out, then you have no other 
alternative except to run the full extent of the lease. But I think this 
indicates with the Credit Union Central where the lease was able 
to be terminated, and they are using the space. I will get the 
answer for your next question immediately. 
 
Three hundred and sixty-six square metres of space. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The Executive Council is planning in 
establishing a new cabinet office in Saskatoon. Where will that 
space be leased from, or is it leased? And what are the terms and 
what is the cost and how much space? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The space is in what was called the old 
co-op store. It's a ground level space, right on the street level in 
Saskatoon, and it is a five-year lease. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — If I was you, I'd make it a shorter lease, Mr. 
Minister. I don't think you're going to last. How much space? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Three hundred and sixty-six square metres. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Exactly the same space as you have in the 
cabinet office now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Perhaps we misunderstood your  

question. You see, that's the problem. We gave . . . the first figure 
we gave you was the new one. 
 
I'll provide that information on the old space. They're looking for 
it. It isn't at fingertips right now. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — While the minister is having his officials 
search out the amount of old space in the cabinet office in 
Saskatoon, I want to ask him a question about the provincial office 
building, or the building that's used as a provincial office building 
in Rosetown. Is that building privately owned, and if so, who 
owns it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the building is leased, and the landlord 
is Western Developments Ltd. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — That's Rosetown. And what's the term of 
the lease? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It seems that these two questions are taking 
a bit of time to find the information. They're phoning for the 
length of the lease, and as soon it comes in we'll provide that to 
you. Perhaps though to expedite the use of time, if you have more 
questions we'll deal with those, and I'll commit to answering the 
two that we're looking for the information for. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay. Mr. Minister, I have two questions in 
a holding pattern. Now one is about the Rosetown and the other is 
about the cabinet office. I want to know the size of the cabinet 
office now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well you have the size of the present 
cabinet office and the holding is . . . the square foot in the old 
cabinet office and the holding is the length of the term of the lease 
in Rosetown. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I have the size of the new space for the 
cabinet office in Saskatoon as 366 square metres. I don't know the 
size of the old cabinet office . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Okay, 
that's holding then. Okay. 
 
One other building in Rosetown, and it's a building that's leased to 
the Department of Highways. I could go into the legal description, 
but the minister probably knows what building it is, and I want to 
know who are the owners of that, and what's the length of the 
lease there? 
 
On the cabinet office, Mr. Minister, I also want to know whether 
the space that you're leasing now . . . or the space that you have 
now in the old cabinet office is considered to be higher quality 
space than the space you'll be renting, and does the lease cost 
reflect that? You attribute, obviously in your property 
management you attribute a certain cost to the present cabinet 
space, and you'll have a lease figure for the new space. What is the 
difference . . . or what is the two prices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I want to correct something. I believe that 
the first information we gave you on Rosetown was for the second 
building — that's the Highway building. But you asked for a 
provincial building, I believe. So we will . . . and when I give you 
the breakdown on the space we will give you that. 
 
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3603 
 

As far as the value or leases of property, as you know, it has never 
been the . . . that has never been disclosed and we would not be 
doing that either, as you know, because it affects business deals 
you can make if the leases are all out public. Those never have 
been made public. I think you asked something about the value of 
space. Well I guess the only way you can tell the value of space, of 
course, is to give the amount of the lease. So I don't want to 
mislead you at all. What I will be providing for you, going back, is 
both the Rosetowns and the old office, cabinet office. But as far as 
the evaluation of the two, that would be indicating lease 
agreements, and I wouldn't be providing that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, your policy has given you a 
convenient shield to duck behind here on the cabinet office, and 
I'll tell you why. You have a cabinet office that is approximately 
2,400 square feet or less now. You're leasing new space which is 
3,600, in excess of 3,600 square feet. 
 
And here, once again, we have the philosophy of the Premier 
coming to the fore. Do not what I do, but do what I say. The 
Premier says, tighten your belts, batten down the hatches, we're in 
tough times. But the Premier is increasing the size of the cabinet 
office, I believe, in Saskatoon by about 50 per cent — a 50 per 
cent increase in the size of the palace for the Premier in Saskatoon, 
and his deputy, of course, who will visit Saskatoon on occasion. 
 
And I suggest to you that once again, from the fountain-head of 
government extravagance, the Premier, he's saying: — look, 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan, we're in tough times; you've got to 
batten down the hatches. Everybody's got to contribute to this 
serious situation — to get us out of this serious situation we're in. 
And we have the Premier of this province increasing the size of 
the cabinet office in Saskatoon by 50 per cent. There is no 
justification for that. That idea about extravagant government and 
expenditures runs through these estimates right from the Premier's 
office down. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in charge of the property management 
corporation, I'm surprised, but I accept it, you're caught up in this 
same web of deceit to the people of Saskatchewan — that they 
should sacrifice, but the Premier of Saskatchewan does not have to 
sacrifice. That is unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I know that some of my colleagues have a few 
questions they want to ask. I don't want to monopolize all the time, 
so I will give way to some of my colleagues. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
questions, a few short questions of the minister regarding the 
security unit that you've established. And I'd like to know, Mr. 
Minister, if there's been any special security arrangements or 
equipment undertaken with respect to private residences; and if so, 
I'd like to know which ones those might be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think that I could indicate to you that under 
the vital points program — and I believe you  

were in the House when I explained the vital points program 
previously in question period. And if you're not aware, I will go 
back over this. 
 
This was a program that came in, in '81, that was agreed to in 
which . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well it's part of the answer. If you want to 
interrupt, then it's going to take longer to answer the question. I'm 
asking the person who questioned me, if he wants to know about 
vital points. If he understands vital points, that's just fine. 
 
However, let me move to this, that certainly, under the vital points 
program, there was concern for the residence of the Premier, and 
there has been some expenditure of money there. I think it would 
be more advisable, and I indicate this to you, that I would be 
willing to discuss with you what security situations surround the 
Premier and his family. I don't know if we want to do that in a 
public forum. But if you want to see me about that you're quite 
willing to come to my office, and you and I will have a complete 
dialogue on this. But I don't know if this is the forum for those 
things to be indicated. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don't want the details 
of the security. Surely you could understand that. In terms of what 
type of equipment you may have in there, what I asked was: — if 
you have put security systems in any private homes, I ask which 
private homes they were installed in? And I think that's a pretty 
clear and a pretty fair and an open question, and I'm not sure if 
you've answered it completely, or partially, and I'd like to know 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will say again, certainly there are some 
things that have been done to the Premier's home. And I'd be more 
than pleased to discuss those with you, but I do not believe that 
this is the proper forum to do that, for obvious reasons. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, are there any systems 
installed by your corporation in any other private homes other than 
the Premier's? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My information is, no. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me if there's 
any bodyguard services provided by the security staff of the 
corporation; who assigns them; who might request them? And I'd 
like to know as well if this service is available to all MLAs, and 
who might authorize the assignments that are given to these 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In this building, of course, it's the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, that's in control of that. 
 
And the other things, certainly if the RCM Police, the city police, 
the Wascana police, indicate there is some security problem, then 
it is arranged with our security unit that that would be looked after. 
There's a close co-ordination between them, and that stands for 
any elected member. If there was something that indicated that 
there was a danger to you, you would be given that  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3604 
 

same provision. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, do you have any people 
contracted, other than those employed by the unit, to provide these 
bodyguard services outside of this Chamber? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have people contracted, but not for 
bodyguard service. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Can you tell me what the nature of these 
contracts are? What would the purpose of these contracts be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we have individuals contracted, and 
indicate that it's mainly for security provisions at Kelsey and STI 
(Saskatchewan Technical Institute). They're on monthly contracts. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — No other places other than Kelsey and STI? 
No services to Executive Council members, or the Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The only thing of that nature would be from 
time to time, if the RCMP indicate that there's a need for security, 
they may assist there. But mainly their function is the security of 
those buildings. And if there would be some other buildings in 
those areas, that would be an indication of a need for security 
there. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I have some other questions 
regarding the security unit, and I note in a newspaper clipping of 
September 12, 1987, I believe it was your deputy minister 
indicated that there was nothing cloak and dagger about the 
security unit and its expertise in electronic surveillance. 
 
I have one comment to make on that, and I would want to suggest 
that you don't hire a plumber to do accounting work. And I think 
that this is very much a similar circumstance. 
 
But I want to go on. And he says, he indicates that the unit has 
used SaskTel and the RCMP's debugging expertise to 
electronically sweep rooms outside the government offices where 
cabinet ministers and senior government officials meet. 
 
Now I would like to ask, Mr. Minister, if this service would be 
available . . . Have you swept the opposition meeting room where 
we caucus, and have you swept our offices as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well that's only provided on request, and I 
don't know if you've requested it or not . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . I say that service is only provided on request, and I 
don't know if you've requested a sweep of your office or not. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — What services then are available through 
this unit to the opposition caucus upon request? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you have a concern of your office or 
something, then I would suggest that you meet with the  

Sergeant-at-Arms, who's in charge of the security within this 
building, the head of my security unit, your caucus chairman, and 
have a talk about it. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, can I ask you if the debugging 
of the government side offices was done through the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, or was it done specifically by the security unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I understand that any sweep that was done 
was done by the RCMP on the advice of the security unit. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — So then it doesn't go through the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, it goes through the special security unit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I say, the minister's offices are under this 
jurisdiction. And the legislature, of course . . . these buildings are 
under the security of the Sergeant-at-Arms, so the minister's 
offices was done under the security unit by the RCM Police. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Another question I have, Mr. Minister. 
Would you then allow the opposition caucus to contract similar 
service to what you have supplied to the cabinet and the Executive 
Council and the PC caucus? Would you allow the opposition 
members to contract that same service that you supplied to 
yourselves, and would you allow us to submit a bill to the security 
unit or to your corporation for those services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I said previously, if you want this done, 
just let me know, and we will have the security unit meet with 
your caucus chairman, in conjunction with the Sergeant-at-Arms, 
so that he knows what's taking place in this building, and I gave 
you that offer 15 minutes ago. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, my colleague says you don't 
hire a hawk . . . a fox to guard the chicken coop. What I asked you 
was: — would you allow the opposition caucus to contract those 
services to the person or people or firm of their choice, and would 
this department cover the costs of those services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think, if you're looking at the costs for that, 
you should look at the Board of Internal Economy. That's the 
board that looks after member services. I did it for the cabinet 
ministers of this government, and I believe that is correct. But if 
you want that service, and if you want to contract it with 
somebody else, you have a Board of Internal Economy that looks 
after member services, and I would advise you to raise it there. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — So, Mr. Minister, you're setting two 
standards. They're setting one standard for the PC caucus and 
another for anybody else in this legislature. And I tell you that 
that's not fair. And what you're leaving is a perception that this 
security unit is something other than what you say it is, and the 
people of this province will understand that. 
 
I ask you again, through this department, not through the Board of 
Internal Economy — the Board of Internal Economy has enough 
financial difficulties right now. I  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3605 
 

happen to sit on that board and know how it's functioning and 
under what duress it's functioning. 
 
But I ask you again: — would your department, that has sprung 
funds to do surveillance checks in the PC caucus, would that same 
department, or Executive Council . . . he says not the PC caucus, 
so let's talk Executive Council and the government-side caucus 
rooms, would you offer the same services to the members of the 
opposition, funded through your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I indicated, for the cabinet ministers' 
offices we have done it with the security division, getting a hold of 
the RCM Police. You sit, you admit yourself you're on the Board 
of Internal Economy. If you want that service for members and 
their offices, I would advise you to raise it in the Board of Internal 
Economy where other members' services are raised. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, what about the office of the 
Leader of the Opposition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we would do the Leader of the 
Opposition's office. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, the Leader of the Opposition 
also meets in other offices in this building. Would you be willing 
to offer that service in the area where he caucuses with his MLAs; 
would you be willing to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Many, many cabinet ministers meet in other 
offices too, so we're giving the same privilege to the minister . . . 
to the Leader of the Opposition as we are to cabinet ministers. I 
said to you before, if opposition members want it, you have your 
own body which is the Board of Internal Economy that was set up 
some years ago to deal with the members' services, and this is a 
service to members, and that's where that should be raised. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I want to quote your deputy, 
and I quote: — 
 

That they have used . . . they have swept rooms outside 
government offices where cabinet ministers and senior 
government officials meet. 

 
Mr. Minister, you have swept other than cabinet ministers' offices, 
and you have swept other than your caucus office, apparently, by 
your deputy's own statement. I'm asking you again, will you offer 
that same service to the Leader of the Opposition that you've 
allowed . . . that you have given to your Executive Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I indicated to you that we would provide 
that service for the office of the Leader of the Opposition. I have 
indicated to you before, in question period, that yes, when the 
cabinet meets outside of the city of Regina, that there is a sweep of 
those buildings because that is government business that's taking 
place in there, and that's the extent of the operation. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — So, Mr. Minister, you are providing a half 
service to the Leader of the Opposition, full service to the 
Executive Council. Do you not see that that is a  

double standard? Do you not understand that that is a standard for 
one, and a different standard for another? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I don't accept that. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, I say that you should 
accept it because it's very clear, it's very clear that that's what 
you're doing. And I want to say that you're putting this security 
unit in very bad light by doing that because what you're showing 
here is that it's not an impartial body, it is there to serve some, and 
not others. 
 
And I want to go back, Mr. Speaker, to the one statement that I 
made that you don't hire a plumber to do accounting work. And 
the man that you've hired is an expert in one particular area, and 
that's electronic surveillance. And I want to suggest to you that it's 
very, very dicey here in terms of, first of all, who you've 
employed, and second of all, the kind of work that you're having 
him do. And I say if it's good enough for that side, it's good 
enough for this side. Do you not agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — — Once again, we see — and I think the 
same member did this previously — you know, casting aspersions 
on the person that we hired. I’ve indicated that in a cross-Canada 
competition he came out as the outstanding candidate. I think he’s 
serving this province very well, and I would certainly defend that 
individual.  
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — — Mr. Minister, I would like a complete 
list of all of the offices that have been checked, have been 
scanned. I would like to know where those offices are; I would 
like know when they were scanned; I would like to know by 
whom, and I would like a list of the equipment that was used. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Once again I don't think the member is 
really giving much thought to what he is asking before he asks the 
question . . .(inaudible interjection). . .No, let me illustrate to you. 
And I will sit down with you and with the security people and 
answer every question that you've asked, but I don't think it is 
wise, and I don't think it's in the best interest for me in this 
Chamber here, to give to you in a public forum the type of 
surveillance that is taking place in various parts of this province. I 
don't think that is in the best interest, and I caution you to think 
before you ask. 
 
Now I give you the commitment here that if you want to come as 
an elected member to me and to the head of the security division, 
you will be provided with that. But I caution you again to see if 
you think this is the type of discussion that you want to have take 
place in this Chamber within a total viewing audience of what type 
of security. 
 
Now I ask you that. And you give that careful consideration 
because there's some very strong implications to what you're 
asking, and could have some serious consequences. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, let me assure you that I have 
thought this through very clearly, and what we're dealing with is a 
public expenditure, and this is the forum that you deal with public 
expenditures, and you're not willing to do that. 
 
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3606 
 

I say to you that you are Americanizing this province. And if you 
want to set a CIA up in here, that's fine, but at least be honest and 
open and clear with the people that that's what you're doing. At 
least be open, honest, and clear that that's what you're doing. And 
you haven't done that. And I'm going to leave it at this, Mr. 
Minister, because I think the points have been made. 
 
It's very clear the direction your government has taken. But I ask 
you to reconsider your decision to offer the same kind of services 
in an independent fashion to the members of the opposition and 
the Leader of the Opposition that you're offering to your Executive 
Council, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Just in bringing this to a conclusion, this 
discussion, I have no intention of setting up any type of a secretive 
type of organization, but I just want to indicate to you, and I ask 
the members just to give a little bit of thought, not to ask foolish 
questions in haste. Because I want to, and I will give you the kind 
of answer I prefer to give. 
 
(1215) 
 
I want to say this to you: — I want to avoid and prevent any type 
of thing such as happened in the province of Quebec a few years 
ago. And I hope you share the same kind of viewpoint. And that is 
entirely what I want to avoid, and that is the reason why I would 
not want to discuss in a public forum with you some of the 
security measures that may in some day be of value to you and to 
other members of this Chamber. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On the same topic, 
just briefly, I have a couple of questions on that topic, and I at least 
can understand the sensitivity of answering questions in a public 
forum when you're dealing with security and surveillance and the 
activities that are associated with that. 
 
It would seem to me that the best way to handle this would be to 
have a legislative committee, a very small committee, at least 
having one representative from each of the caucuses that's 
represented in the Assembly, to oversee this special security unit. 
It doesn't make any sense. If it's not secretive, it's certainly appears 
to be secretive to people who'd be watching here today and people 
that are asking you the questions in this Legislative Chamber. And 
at least, if there was a non-partisan committee to oversee the 
security unit, then it would have increased credibility in terms of 
what you're trying to do, Mr. Minister. 
 
And in the long term, I don't question your integrity as an 
individual on this sensitive point for you, but you have to look at it 
in a longer term, and you're certainly not going to be government 
for ever in the province of Saskatchewan; you're not going to be 
the minister in charge for ever. 
 
And who's going to know what happens in the future? You 
certainly can't look into the crystal ball. And I think it would be 
very advisable to have a small committee, one representative from 
each party in this legislature, to  

oversee the security unit. 
 
Now I think that the minister should look at that and report to us 
that you will, in fact, set up a committee of this Assembly to 
oversee the unit. 
 
The question I have in conjunction with that, is that has the 
security unit not only swept cabinet meeting rooms, cabinet 
members' offices, but the security unit — and I'm not asking for 
any locations — has the security unit set up any surveillance of 
individuals or buildings? And have there been any electronic 
devices placed by the security unit to gather information for their 
unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think on your concern about sharing 
information, I think with my last offer to the member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake that I would be more than pleased to sit down 
with him and discuss it in confidence between us, indicates that 
there's no attempt to try and hide anything from anyone. 
 
As far as using electronic equipment for surveillance, my 
indication is no, that that has not taken place. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I have a question on the concerns of 
Saskatchewan Hospital. I remember earlier, before property 
management came into place to take over the employees and 
services of Supply and Services, your esteemed deputy minister 
met with employees in the city of North Battleford. And at that 
time the employees had the assurance that there would be no 
change, no change at all in their status, that things would operate 
as normal. It was just a change in management, and they had 
nothing to worry about. 
 
I'm particularly concerned about one aspect of the Saskatchewan 
Hospital, and that's the power plant at the Saskatchewan Hospital. 
The employees there have been continually decreasing over the 
years, and I assume that there's some modernization process that 
you have in mind or a possible closure of that plant. I'd like to 
know what your intentions are. 
 
First off, if you could just tell us a little bit of the history about the 
reduction in employees, say, in 1980, 1984, '87; what you planned 
for the future, as to whether or not you're going to have one 
employee per shift in the power plant; and what is going to happen 
to the employees that are there now if they are displaced by 
modernization of the plant. 
 
So first I'd like to know, what are your intentions of the plant? Do 
you plan on modernizing the power plant? And what is your 
projection on employees? And if there are surplus employees there 
now, what are your intentions to do with them? And what is their 
chain of command in the North Battleford Saskatchewan 
Hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As you probably are aware, it is a kind of an 
antiquated power plant and very costly to operate. There has been 
some down-sizing of individuals over the past years, mainly by 
early retirement. They tell me there was one temporary that was 
not renewed. And as to the future of it, yes, we would be looking 
at bringing in new technology that would be more efficient to 
operate. But the individuals that would be there would  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3607 
 

either be reallocated or retrained. They wouldn't lose their jobs. 
They'd find another job for them. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Just my final question: — are you giving us 
your assurance today that the people that work in the power plant 
at Saskatchewan Hospital at the current time that are permanent 
employees, or any others that work there now, today, at this 
moment, will not lose their jobs through modernization of that 
plant? Is that what you're telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I can't cast that in stone that they'd be 
for ever and ever there, but I can tell you that we will be looking at 
whatever ways we can to reallocate people, retrain people. There 
may be early retirement packages. I can't say what will happen in 
four or five years. I can give you the commitment though that we 
will look to try and accommodate the employees there as best we 
can. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Can you just tell us the time frame then, how 
soon will they know? They've been in a state of uncertainty ever 
since property management corporation took over. There are plans 
being considered but they never know. When will the employees 
know there what the status of the plant is and what's going to 
happen? Will it be a week, a year, two years, when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Approximately six months, we believe we 
should have that all figured out and they should know. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I've listened to you talk about the willingness to be accountable 
and the fact that you don't want to have secrecy in what you're 
doing with the property management corporation. And recently we 
passed a budget for the Parks, Recreation and Culture department 
with over $11.5 million amount of money to the corporation for 
the renting of facilities. 
 
And I particularly want to know from you how much the rent is 
that's being paid for the Archives Board in Regina and what the 
terms of that lease are. And I would like you to answer the 
question here because, as you say, the Department of Supply and 
Services and the property management corporation are in a state of 
flux, and this is the forum for us to get the answers to those 
questions right now. Please tell me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I indicated to some of the other 
members, we do not give out the costs of leases. We have a large 
number of leases. We'd have to dig that information up as we have 
about 1,500 of them. You're asking specifically about the archives 
building. I'll have to get that information for you. But the costs of 
leases, things of this nature, are not disclosed. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Are you saying that I can have that information or 
I can't have that information, if you say it's not disclosed? Are you 
saying you will give it to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I'm saying the same as I did to the member 
from Saskatoon, the critic. I don't recall the seat — Westmount. I 
will give you the terms of the lease . . . the term of it, if it's 
three-year, five-year, two-year, and so on,  

but you do not disclose the conditions of the lease, the dollar 
values, because you realize we are doing business with the private 
sector out there. 
 
And if the dollar values came out on the leases it's like playing 
cards with the cards up, and I don't think we would get the best 
deals for the province of Saskatchewan if those things were made 
public. I mean, if you were leasing a building you would want to 
go to the highest lease possible. So for that reason, and this is no 
change, it has been that way and was that way with the 
government — the party that you're with, when they were 
government. There's been no change in that at all. 
 
Ms. Smart: — The change is that you've put a lot more buildings 
under the control of the property management corporation and 
you're leasing out a lot more space in the private sector. And it's 
very much in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan to know 
what that rent is. And it's very important that we know how high it 
is, not because there's going to be competition from other people 
to get it, but because we want to know how much patronage you're 
paying out in the rents to people like McCallum Hill who own the 
building that the Archives Board is in. 
 
And I would like to know how much that rent is and the people of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about the archives want to know 
how much that rent is, and the terms for that lease? Because the 
understanding is that it's very high and that you could have been 
building or buying a space for the Archives Board for the amount 
that you're leasing it. 
 
And that information needs to be available to the taxpayers of this 
province because we have just approved $11 million in one 
department alone — lease money to the management corporation 
which is very rapidly becoming the patronage corporation. I think 
it's appalling that we don't have that information. I want to know 
who is renting that space, as well as how much, and for how long? 
 
And you say you don't believe in secrecy; you want to be 
accountable. This is the way you can be accountable. This is the 
way you can do away with the secrecy that you say you want to do 
away with. And we need that information. You should be giving it 
to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, really, if the member again would ask 
some of her colleague who perhaps were in the position of 
minister of Supply and Service, they will tell you that there's been 
no change, that we give out the term of the lease. There's nothing 
wrong with that, and where . . . who has the lease. But if you 
understand anything about business, and if you would want this 
government to try and cut some good deals, you sure don't go out 
and tell the world everything you're paying for rent. I mean, you're 
not paying attention. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Patronage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, it's not patronage. It's just common 
sense that you don't put all your bids out. It's the same throughout 
all the corporations. That's just the way it operates. I mean, you 
don't go putting out publicly what  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3608 
 

you're paying for this or that, because everybody else would go to 
the highest denominator in every case. They would say, well you 
pay this guy this much, then you have to pay me that much. So I 
hope you understand that. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make a few 
comments in an attempt to wrap up this estimate. 
 
And when I think of how these estimates have been presented to 
us, the situation we've been put in, the lack of information and the 
slowness of the response by the minister, it seems to me that by 
design or otherwise, information is being hidden; information is 
not being given. 
 
I recall an incident where a president of the United States got in a 
lot of trouble a while ago because 18 minutes on a tape was 
erased. Apparently his secretary leaned over and accidentally 
erased 18 important minutes in that tape. And it caused that 
president an awful lot of trouble, which he hasn't got out of yet. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we have a situation where we had a 
Department of Supply and Services which, for all intents and 
purposes, ceased to operate some time in 1986-87, but there's no 
report presented to this Assembly — no report, no information. 
We have a Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, a 
new Crown corporation established roughly in that 1986 period, 
which provides no information to the legislature, no information to 
the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
And the minister says we should accept this, that you should trust 
us. Well, the people of Saskatchewan are losing . . . their level of 
trust in this government has dropped drastically. And you need 
only take a look at the polls, you need only to go to talk to people 
out on the street to find that their level of trust of this government 
has dropped drastically. 
 
I don't want anybody to get the idea that I am saying anything 
about the staff of Supply and Services or the staff of the property 
management corporation. They are attempting to cope with the 
situation where the Minister of Finance is jerking them around, 
where the policy direction is not firm. At one point the end of the 
fiscal year is the end of the calendar year; at another point it's the 
end of the fiscal year for departments of government, March 31. 
They're attempting to do their job. But the problem, Mr. 
Chairman, is at the top. That is unacceptable; that is deplorable. 
Information is not provided to this Assembly, as it should 
normally be, and we can't accept that. We don't accept that for a 
moment. 
 
And topping it all off is the Premier, aided and abetted by the 
minister in charge of the property management corporation, 
opening a new cabinet office in Saskatoon with a 50 per cent 
increase in space, at a time when the Premier says we all have to 
make sacrifices. All except the Premier and his cabinet have to 
make sacrifices, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And what is happening in this new cabinet office? The same thing 
that would be happening in the old cabinet  

office. The cabinet has ceased to advertise that they're going to be 
in the cabinet office, Mr. Chairman. They've ceased to tell the 
public that they're going to be there at a certain time, that the 
Deputy Premier's going to be in the cabinet office on a certain day. 
And the reason they've ceased to do that is because they don't want 
the public to know when they're there. 
 
And I suspect they want a 50 per cent larger cabinet office so 
they'll have other rooms to hide in, in case the public confronts 
them at the Saskatoon cabinet office. I can see no reason, Mr. 
Chairman, for having more space in the Saskatoon cabinet office 
when the Premier says we all have to make sacrifices. 
 
Mr. Minister, you owe something to your staff. You owe them 
leadership. You, and your government, have not been able to give 
leadership in this area. I hold you responsible, Mr. Minister, and I 
hold your highest officials responsible. There are insufficient and 
incomplete answers offered by the minister and the information 
comes very late. There is a gap of at least one year where the 
accounting is not presented to us, nor to the auditor. 
 
Therefore, I take exception to the manner in which the minister 
and his high officials come before this Assembly and expect us to 
trust them. I am not going to trust them; I'm going to keep an eye 
on them, as are my colleagues. 
 
I think that the people of Saskatchewan, those that are watching 
this today, will be taking another reading on their level of trust of 
this government and they're not prepared, as I am not prepared, to 
trust this government. 
 
And that's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, when the common, ordinary 
routine of government falls into disrepute as it has under this 
disillusion of the Saskatchewan Supply and Services department 
and the creation of yet another Crown corporation, the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to indicate 
to the member that I have here a number of the things that the 
member asked for. I'd be more than pleased to provide them. If the 
page would come I'd send them across. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances, and Investments 
The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 168 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 168 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances, and Investments 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 

Vote 148 
 
Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Vote 148 agreed to. 
 
  
  



 
October 28, 1987 

 

3609 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Supply and Services 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 13 

 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 13 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I'd like to thank the minister's officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I'd like to thank the officials for their 
assistance, and some of the questions from the opposition. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 


