













































August 4, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 4, 1987 

 

1519 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Legal Aid Commission Fees 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was for 

the Minister of Social Services who is responsible for the legal 

Aid Commission. In his absence, I will direct the question to 

whichever minister is the acting minister responsible. 

 

Today is the day when the poor people of Saskatchewan have 

imposed on them a fee for legal services at the legal aid clinics 

in Saskatchewan, a fee which we can only call a deterrent fee. 

The ministers will know that a legal action is planned by a 

group of lawyers called the Lawyers for Equal Justice who 

claim that the plan is illegal because it is contrary to the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms and further, the Legal Aid Commission 

simply doesn’t have the authority to impose these kinds of fees. 

They must be imposed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

under the Act. 

 

I wonder, in view of the substantial objections to the plan, will 

the minister who is responsible for speaking for the Legal Aid 

Commission in this House undertake to contact the commission 

and ask them to suspend the implementation of this ridiculous 

program until after that legal question can be determined? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the 

second question by the hon. member, I think that if we were to 

follow his advice and suspend any action by government of any 

way, shape, or form because someone indicated that they might 

or would be taking legal action, would simply, and could 

simply, stop the functioning of the democratic process. So if 

these people believe they have a valid and legitimate case under 

the charter of rights, and we’re not sure exactly what the charter 

of rights obviously means, and I suppose they have the 

legitimate right to go to the courts and pursue it in that way. 

 

I think the other point the hon. member attempts to make is 

somehow that people on welfare will be denied services from 

legal aid. And as I understand the situation, is anybody that is 

on welfare does, in fact, qualify for legal aid and is not required 

to pay any kind of fees whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I was not referring to people on welfare. I 

refer to the poor people of Saskatchewan. And while the 

Minister of Justice is speaking on this subject, I wonder if he 

would advise the legislature whether his department has been 

asked for its opinion on the question, first of all, of whether this 

ridiculous plan is contrary to the charter, and secondly, whether 

it is outside the jurisdiction of the Legal Aid Commission to 

implement such fees. And I have in mind here section 40 of The 

Legal Aid Act which  

seems to put that into the . . . as a power that must be exercised 

by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. Was such an opinion 

requested, and if so, was it responded to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the hon. member knows full well, 

as being a former deputy minister in the Government of 

Saskatchewan, that there are various opinions asked for by 

various departments of the Department of Justice. I’m not 

aware of what each of those opinions are asked for, but it’s in 

the course of running government. And I assume and anticipate 

your next question: will you, in fact, table the opinion of the 

Department of Justice? And that has never been done, and I 

don’t believe the hon. member, in fairness, would suggest that 

that be done. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m not asking 

the minister to table an opinion which he doesn’t know whether 

it’s been rendered or not. I would ask him this question: if an 

opinion has not been requested, will his department undertake 

to look into these two very substantial objections to this 

ridiculous plan for recovering fees from poor people to 

determine whether or not they are legal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member in his first question 

indicated that a group of lawyers were going to challenge this 

particular case under the heading of the Canadian charter of 

rights. And if that in fact is being done, then I would make the 

assumption with not knowing that in fact the Department of 

Justice has been requested to look into this. I will undertake to 

find out whether the Department of Justice has been asked to 

review the file and report that particular point to you at next 

day. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, again to the 

acting minister. The problem, Mister, is that . . . was caused 

here by a reduction in funding to the Legal Aid Commission of 

some $500,000, which forced the Legal Aid Commission to 

come up with a variety of measures, among which was included 

this ridiculous plan. And it was subsequently approved by the 

treasury board of this province. 

 

What I’d like the minister to undertake to this House is, either 

he or the minister responsible, take this matter back to cabinet 

and find a way of restoring the funding of the Legal Aid 

Commission so the poor people of Saskatchewan don’t have to 

pay these fees. And while he’s taking . . . What I ask him . . . 

May I ask him, when he’s taking that submission to cabinet, 

will he take with him the suggestion that such a relatively small 

amount of money could be made up by cutting the amounts paid 

to the political staff of ministers of this government by a mere 5 

per cent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been advised that the 

cuts in this fiscal year to staff of various ministers is larger than 

20 per cent. And I think that’s probably larger than the cut to 

the legal aid situation. 

 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1520 

 

I think the hon. member must also bear in mind and recall that 

there are certain ways that the Legal Aid Commission and the 

legal aid service operates. And for the hon. member to 

somehow suggest that no changes should be looked at or no 

efficiencies looked at . . . I think the hon. member from . . . The 

Minister of Social Services raised the other day the fact that the 

legal aid commission of Regina, as I understand, acting for a 

number of prostitutes in the city of Regina, are taking their 

particular case to the Supreme Court of Canada. Now that is an 

expensive undertaking, as you full well know. 

 

Now are those types of things . . . should they be paid for totally 

by the people of Saskatchewan, or should the client pay for at 

least a small part of it? That seems to me to be a legitimate 

question. Now if you exclude welfare people, if you have a 

gauge that . . . or a set of billing procedures I don’t think are 

hard and firm, and perhaps we should see how the process 

works before we sort of cry that somehow the system is coming 

apart and all poor people will not have legal services. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A question 

to the same minister. Mr. Minister, it is obvious to everyone 

that the imposition of these deterrent fees that were imposed 

today will hardest hit the working poor of Saskatchewan. The 

Minister of Social Services previously said that those who are 

receiving social assistance will not pay the fees. 

 

But for those who are struggling to stay off the social assistance 

rolls, Mr. Minister, they’re left with two choices: either to try 

and get on welfare in order to be able to afford their legal aid 

fees, or secondly, to go unrepresented in court because they 

cannot afford the deterrent fee imposed through your 

government’s actions. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: will you not agree that 

this is the only choice that you are giving the working poor in 

the province of Saskatchewan, the people who do not qualify 

for welfare and cannot afford a lawyer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I would suggest to the hon. 

member, you have a fine line between where welfare cuts in and 

where legal aid would cut out. Now the services that I see them 

providing here, for example, homicide trial — $400, in a given 

type of situation. Now if that person just above the legal aid line 

was to attend to the member from Saskatoon Fairview or the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale to have them defend that 

particular murder trial, it would cost that person — maybe 

making $15,000 or $20,000 — perhaps 10, $12,000 for defence 

of that particular charge. Now where do you stop that line and 

where does it end? 

 

So that the costs that you have to pay to legal aid versus the cost 

that you would pay to the lawyer practising in the province 

today is significantly lower, and I think that should be borne in 

mind, plus the people on welfare pay no legal aid whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister,  

if there is a fine line between the point at which welfare cuts in 

and legal aid cuts out, will you not do the sensible and obvious 

thing and get rid of the deterrent fees to give access to 

representation in court to all of Saskatchewan’s poor people? 

Will you not do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think the Minister of Social 

Services has indicated several times that the Legal Aid 

Commission decided with the cuts that they had to take along 

with various other groups, that they would opt — instead of 

cutting back on any staff — that they would opt to bring in 

these particular fees. And that’s the approach that they have 

taken. It applies to people above welfare. And the question 

becomes should they have a right . . . or should they be required 

to pay a small fee for the use of a lawyer that a person that 

makes perhaps $3,000 more would have to pay because he 

doesn’t even get to go to legal aid, and he has to go to the 

private bar, who will charge perhaps 10 times more than you 

see in these particular fees. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, in light of the widespread 

opposition to this unfair plan imposed through your 

government’s actions, opposition that has been voiced by many 

groups including the Canadian Rights and Liberties Federation, 

The Canadian Bar Association, employees of the Saskatchewan 

Legal Aid Commission, the Saskatchewan association of human 

rights, the Saskatchewan Action Committee Status of Women, 

Lawyers for Equal Justice, Canadian Native Law Studies 

Association, and on and on. 

 

Mr. Minister, in light of the widespread opposition by caring 

people and caring organizations in Saskatchewan, will you 

please reconsider this unfair plan and take off those deterrent 

fees that you’re charging to the poor, and will you look for 

fairer ways to cut the deficit in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I was . . . on Friday heard an open-line 

show in Saskatoon, and perhaps you can’t gauge by an 

open-line show, but the bulk of the people phoning in on that 

open-line show were of the view that these people should be 

required to pay, that it shouldn’t be the taxpayers’ responsibility 

to cover the legal fees of everybody even those above welfare. 

 

Now in every given situation perhaps the Legal Aid 

Commission will have to have enough flexibility in their system 

to cover given situations, but I think the people of 

Saskatchewan believe that those people who are working, that 

are above welfare, making more money than people on welfare 

are making — and our rates are reasonably high relative to the 

rest of the country — people making more money of that should 

contribute some of the cost towards their legal defence or their 

legal fees for whatever that might be. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me. Before I take the next question, I 

would once again like to remind hon. members that in directing 

their remarks to another member, they should always preface 

their remarks by referring to the Chair. 

 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1521 

 

Fraser Institute Conference 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a 

question to the Deputy Premier. And my question is this: can 

you, sir, confirm that your government sent 10 or a dozen senior 

officials, Crown corporation executives, a cabinet minister, to 

Vancouver last week or the week before to attend a Fraser 

Institute conference on how to sell off public assets? 

 

Mr. Minister, you will be aware of the Fraser Institute, that 

radical right-wing research group which supports the sale of all 

public assets, including schools and hospitals. 

 

And since, Mr. Minister, you talk about saying that every dollar 

counts, and so do your other ministers, my question to you is 

simply this: can you tell us why you had to send 10 or a dozen 

people to this one conference in Vancouver to find out how to 

sell of the things we already own? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if we had 

any there. I hope, Mr. Speaker, we had some there. I hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that we had some there. And I will take notice of the 

question and bring the answer back to the hon. member. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, when taking notice, will you please check to see 

whether there was in attendance the minister responsible for 

SGI; her chief of staff; the SGI’s vice-president of finance; the 

chairman of the potash corporation, one Paul Schoenhals; the 

head of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation; the two top 

executives from Crown Management Board, including Graham 

Walker; a number of people from the Premier’s office, 

including the Premier’s principal secretary, and would you 

inquire whether Mr. Tim Embury, who was there, was there 

directly or indirectly at public expense? 

 

And can you find out, can you report why we needed that 

number of people there to tell us how to sell off assets we now 

own, and at what approximate expense? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not quite sure . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. We’re having a 

little difficulty hearing the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m having a little difficulty too, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m not quite sure where the member gets his 

information. I happen to know for a fact that the minister that he 

mentioned was not there. 

 

I have a bit of a curiosity, Mr. Speaker, as to where they get 

their information because I haven’t seen anyone of their 

particular political stripe that would have the courage to show 

up at such a forum, so I don’t know how they get their 

information. But I have said, Mr. Speaker, that I would 

undertake to find out how many attended and report back to the 

House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 

the minister, when taking notice, would you, sir, particularly 

note to see whether the minister responsible for SGI was there? 

 

And would you confirm that the conference fees were $600 per 

person, that the hotel rooms ran to well over $100 a day, and 

that therefore the expenses would probably amount to $15,000 

or more for the people who were there on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people — allegedly on behalf of Saskatchewan 

people — to assist them to know how the assets, which we now 

own, should be sold to somebody else — presumably people 

from the Fraser Institute, such as their board of trustees 

member, Peter Pocklington? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I did say, I think now 

three times, that I would take notice of the question, and I will 

do that, and I will report back to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sit down then if you’re finished. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And he says, sit down then if you’re 

finished, Mr. Speaker — the member from Quill Lakes. He 

shows so much respect for this place that he just sits there 

muttering from his seat. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that I took notice of the first question, 

and somehow or other we got in two additional 

supplementaries. 

 

Policy on Sale of Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 

to direct a new question to the Deputy Premier in the absence of 

the Premier. It may be, as the Premier says, that he does not 

know about the Fraser Institute-sponsored conference, doesn’t 

know who is there, doesn’t know anything about the expenses. 

This seems to be a characteristic of the government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I would like the Deputy Premier to answer this question: 

can he advise whether or not the chairman of the Crown 

Management Board, Mr. Graham Walker, states government 

policy accurately when he states, as he has reportedly said to 

this Fraser Institute conference, that every Saskatchewan Crown 

corporation, including SGI, is a candidate for a sell-off or a 

give-away to somebody outside the province of Saskatchewan. 

Is that an accurate statement of government policy, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The accurate statement of government 

policy, Mr. Speaker, was set out in the throne speech of a few 

months ago, where it said that in those areas that we believe that 

there is an opportunity for privatization or public participation, 

that that particular service can be delivered more efficiently or 

more effectively by going to the private sector, with the 

exception of those utilities that we all know are sacred in this 

province, then that opportunity will be pursued to see  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1522 

 

if it can be made to happen. 

 

That’s been our policy, Mr. Speaker, since I’ve been here. It 

hasn’t changed. And as it relates to what you have attributed to 

the chairman of the Crown Management Board, I don’t know if 

he said that; I don’t know if you know that he said that; I don’t 

know if it was even said. I have just told you, Mr. Speaker, 

what the policy is as set out in this House in the last throne 

speech. 

 

Funding for AMNSIS 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment I will direct my 

question to the acting minister — the Deputy Premier there? 

The Deputy Premier. 

 

It deals with the government’s blatant attempts to punish and 

silence one of its critics, the Association of Metis and 

Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan. 

 

For about 20 years, AMNSIS (Association of Metis and 

Non-Status Indians) has been receiving funding regularly from 

the province, and the banks have even forwarded loans this year 

in high recognition of that practice. But in June of this year, Mr. 

Speaker, the funds, without warning, were struck right out. This 

unexpected decision, which was announced two-and-a-half 

months after the start of the budget year, has created a financial 

crisis for AMNSIS in regards to its staff and everybody else. 

 

Since this crisis was created, in part, by your government’s late 

decision and lack of prior notice, will you agree to provide a 

wind-down grant to AMNSIS so that it can honour its 

commitments to its staff and suppliers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’ll take notice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Very perceptive. Obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, the hon. member doesn’t expect me to commit the 

minister who is responsible for that particular department in his 

absence, and I therefore will undertake to have that discussion 

with the minister and report back to this House. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. More information 

you could take to the minister. I have a letter from the minister 

to AMNSIS, informing them that the government has decided 

to withdraw funding for the 1987-88 budget year which began 

April 1. This letter is dated June 18, a full two-and-a-half 

months after the start of the fiscal year. Most other third party 

organizations have been informed of their funding levels weeks 

earlier. Why the late notification in this case? Was this just 

another piece of your strategy to beat up and pick on AMNSIS? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the same answer applies. 

I’ll take it up with the Minister and I’ll report back 

to the House. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Another supplementary, Mr. Speaker. AMNSIS 

says that throughout the spring of this year government officials 

gave them no reason to believe that their grant would be 

eliminated. In fact, they were told that even if third-party 

organizations like AMNSIS had their funding cut, the 

provincial government would provide them with three months 

of wind-down funding to help them to get their financial affairs 

in order. 

 

In light of these statements, why have you refused to provide 

wind-down funding for AMNSIS so that it can meet its 

commitments it undertook in good faith between April 1 and 

June 18? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that question was 

exactly the same as the first one, and so you can take the answer 

as being exactly the same as the first one. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Supplementary again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — At the first ministers’ conference in Ottawa last 

March, the Premier was soundly criticized by the head of 

AMNSIS, Mr. Sinclair. This decision to cut funding to 

AMNSIS is simply the Premier’s petty, rather cowardly, 

attempt to get revenge for that criticism. 

 

Isn’t that the reason for this unexpected decision to eliminate 

financial support for AMNSIS and to refuse wind-down funds 

which had been offered to other third-party organizations? Is 

the Premier trying to get revenge for having been humiliated in 

Ottawa? Isn’t this what this is all about? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I can say unequivocally 

that that is not the reason and in no way, shape, or form was 

part of that decision. I will . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I will say, Mr. Speaker, that I thought 

the statement by Mr. Sinclair displayed something of a lack of 

class. I do not blame Mr. Sinclair for that; I blame his counsel, 

the hon. member for Riversdale for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Notaries Public Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Notaries Public Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1523 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 13 — Attacking the Problems of Drug and 

Alcohol Abuse 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today bringing forward a 

motion that deals with a very complex and serious problem that 

faces the youth; and not only the youth, but many members of 

our society today. 

 

The problem, Mr. Speaker — and I’m sure all members in this 

Assembly will agree with me that drug and alcohol abuse is a 

problem that creates a lot of controversy in our society as well 

as in our homes. 

 

The motion I am reading reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly urge all organizations which deal with 

youth to join with the government in combating drug and 

alcohol abuse. 

 

Drug and alcohol abuse is taking a very serious toll on our 

society, especially amongst our youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recent surveys indicate that one in four teenagers 

have used marijuana. They also indicate that two out of three 

persons convicted in drug-related offences are between the ages 

of 20 and 29. It is estimated that alcohol abuse in Saskatchewan 

tends to cost our province about $1 billion a day. That estimate 

includes costs to employers, social costs, and property damage. 

 

I’m sure that the figure of $1 million a day is a figure that is 

deplorable to all of us, that cost. In Saskatchewan it is estimated 

over 50,000 people have a serious alcohol problem, and many 

young people are afflicted by alcohol-related problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are serious and startling realities that the 

government and this society must address in a constructive way. 

In the summer of 1985 Saskatchewan’s Minister of Health 

appointed an advisory committee on alcohol, drugs and youth. 

The purpose of this committee was to examine drug and alcohol 

abuse by Saskatchewan youth and, more importantly, to 

identify gaps in current programs and to set new directions in 

dealing with these social problems. 

 

During its deliberations, the Health minister’s advisory 

committee on alcohol, drugs and youth met with over 160 

individuals from all over Saskatchewan on drug and alcohol 

education, prevention, intervention and treatment issues. At the 

same time, this committee met with more than 300 adolescents 

at 30 schools and youth centres across Saskatchewan. 

 

The committee, through its report to the Minister of Health in 

May of 1986, made recommendations with respect to 

addressing drug and alcohol problems among youth. The report 

of the Health minister’s advisory committee on alcohol and 

drugs and youth set the tone for future policy and program 

initiatives by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in September of 1986, the member for Estevan, 

the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, announced a 

five-phase attack on drug and alcohol abuse. 

 

The Premier’s initiatives included the establishment of one of 

Canada’s first specialized youth drug treatment centres at the 

former Canadian Forces base — Whitespruce — just outside of 

Yorkton. 

 

Other phases in the Premier’s campaign on drug and alcohol 

abuse included the following: a major public awareness 

campaign including the establishment of a toll-free number to 

provide information and advice to young people and parents; 

the development of resource materials for schools in 

co-operation with teachers, school officials, and the 

Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission; a 

co-ordinated justice program involving police, courts, 

education, and other government agencies; a community 

preventive program involving local organizations and local 

educational of authorities. And, Mr. Speaker, this government 

increased financing for drug and alcohol counselling and 

treatment. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the Premier 

for his leadership in recognizing the impact of this complex 

problem on society. I commend the Premier for having the 

vision and courage to establish a comprehensive program to 

address drug and alcohol abuse. We are all aware that drug and 

alcohol abuse are a threat to the stability and harmony of 

Saskatchewan families, and abuse of any sorts that contributes 

to a wide range of social problems and takes a serious toll on all 

people. 

 

Recently public concern about adolescent alcohol and drug 

abuse has increased, and this government has recognized that a 

comprehensive approach was necessary to deal with these 

problems. Take for example, Mr. Speaker, the 1.5 billion 

Whitespruce Drug and Alcohol Treatment Centre. This will be 

the first specialized adolescent treatment facility of its kind in 

all of Canada — here in Saskatchewan. This is a good example 

of the government’s commitment to protect Saskatchewan 

people. Mr. Speaker, we believe such a treatment centre shows 

that we do care about young people who have encountered 

problems with alcohol and drugs. 

 

Let me take a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to address a question 

of the role of the school system and drug and alcohol education. 

The school system is showing real leadership in educating 

young people about the consequences of alcohol and drug 

abuse. 

 

Firstly, the health curriculum is giving increasing attention to 

the subject of alcohol and drug abuse. Second, students are 

encouraged to have alcohol-free celebrations, such as Safe 

Grad. And on this project alone . . . I commend the parents and 

the students and the members of the communities for the Safe 

Grad approach. 

 

But I would also suggest, as one of my constituents said, that in 

reality we are not fighting the problem, we are just keeping our 

teenagers off the roads after they’ve been at a  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1524 

 

grad party. 

 

The reality is that we, as parents, are there, and this . . . 

Personally speaking as a parent, we are there, and what are we 

doing? We are not encouraging our children to say no. We are, 

instead, handing them the alcohol. To me, that proves . . . shows 

us that we as parents have not accepted our responsibility of 

teaching and educating our children, even though governments 

and schools and school boards are doing all within their power 

to provide Safe Grad graduation exercises. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, many boards and schools are developing 

policies to deal with today’s complex alcohol and drug issues. 

In all cases, the provincial Department of Education has and 

continues to work with all groups to provide educational 

resources for Saskatchewan young people. Mr. Speaker, this 

government believes drug and alcohol abuse among youth can 

be prevented. We have to provide young people with effective 

ways to say no to drugs and alcohol. 

 

Even though this government, Mr. Speaker, has increased 

spending on addressing drug and alcohol abuse by 90 per cent, 

it also spends over $60 million per year on alcohol and drug 

abuse services. This figure represents the total spent across all 

departments, and includes the costs of alcohol and drug-related 

services. 

 

At this time I would like to recognize the work being done by 

the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission or 

SADAC. SADAC carries out a broad range of services for the 

province-wide delivery of drug and alcohol abuse preventive 

programs. Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission 

conducts research on alcohol and drug abuse with an aim to 

improving prevention and treatment services. SADAC provides 

education programs on alcohol and drugs for youths. And this 

agency, Mr. Speaker, has been responsible for implementing the 

comprehensive drug and alcohol abuse initiatives announced by 

the Premier last fall. I commend the professional staff of the 

Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission for their 

work with young people in combating the abuse of drug and 

alcohol. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the increase in funding for alcohol and drug abuse 

programs is part of the Progressive Conservative commitment 

to building a better health care system. We recognize that these 

new initiatives in heath care continue our commitment to 

protecting Saskatchewan families. It is our goal to protect 

Saskatchewan families and young people from the hazards of 

drug and alcohol abuse. 

 

Society’s attitude, Mr. Speaker, towards alcohol and drug 

problems is that we must address them as social concerns that 

must be treated and prevented. In 1951 the World Health 

Organization formally recognized alcoholism as a disease, and 

in later years the Canadian Medical Association did the same. 

And like any disease, this disease should be treated in the most 

effective ways possible. 

 

Addictions such as drugs and alcohol are complex and serious. 

Education, prevention, and treatment are all part  

of the efforts to address these problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the fact that our Premier and the 

Progressive Conservative government have taken the initiative 

and leadership in dealing with the problem of drug and alcohol 

abuse. Allow me to quote what our Premier had to say on the 

subject. The Premier said, and I quote: 

 

It is impossible for government alone to solve this serious 

problem. It requires the effort of everyone. We must 

examine our own attitudes. We must do whatever we can 

to help young people, and we must all recognize illicit use 

is wrong. 

 

The Premier went on to say: 

 

We can deal effectively and compassionately with this 

serious problem by working together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I view that quote of our Premier and his 

concerns for the youth of this province, I have to agree with him 

as well that the problem we are facing is not totally a problem 

that government alone can combat, but it’s a problem that we 

all have to work together on. 

 

Personally, I believe it’s a problem that is related right back to 

the home — the leadership within the home. I would go so far 

as to suggest that every member of this society needs, as well, 

to provide leadership. I would suggest as Solomon of old said: 

 

(That) we are to train up a child in the way he should go, 

and when he is old he’ll not depart from it. 

 

If we as parents, before we even contemplated the aspect of 

becoming parents, decided how we were going to educate and 

train our children, if we were concerned about the youth around 

us, concerned about the problems they face with the alcohol and 

with drugs, provided the teaching in their home, provided 

direction — we’re the examples — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

a lot of the problems we are trying to address today would be 

very insignificant, that that problem wouldn’t be as large, and 

wouldn’t loom as large as we are seeing it today. 

 

In fact, it bothers me to a degree when individuals — and I’ve 

been in homes where people have complained about drugs and 

about alcohol and about what’s happening to our young people; 

been in homes where parents have been sitting in front of the 

TV, Mr. Speaker, and whatever they’re watching, whether it’s a 

sports program or a movie — sitting there drinking a bottle of 

beer with their young family running around and just observing 

their actions, and then they will curse the problems with youth, 

and they’ll downgrade their youth, they’ll curse the problems of 

alcohol, and in the very next breath, Mr. Speaker, order their 

young child, their son or daughter, to go and bring another 

bottle of beer out of the fridge. 

 

In my opinion that is not setting the example. That is not 

showing the leadership that we need, and I would encourage all 

the members of this House, of this Assembly, to take the 

initiative and become examples for our young people and the 

people of this province to  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1525 

 

follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is because of the leadership of the Premier of 

Saskatchewan that our government is taking the initiative to 

deal with the problems of alcohol and drug abuse. The 

Government of Saskatchewan is determined to work towards 

positive solutions to these problems. Your members have 

listened to public concerns of those mattes, and we are not 

providing protection for families and individuals — especially 

for our young people. 

 

As the Premier pointed out, Mr. Speaker, government alone 

cannot provide all the answers. We need to recognize the value 

of volunteer groups, professionals, and community-minded 

people in dealing with these addiction problems — groups such 

as Students Against Drunk Driving, Parent Resources Institute 

for Drug Education, or PRIDE, Alcoholics Anonymous, 

AL-ANON, Narcotics Anonymous. These community 

organizations will help society combat the problems of drug and 

alcohol addictions. 

 

(1445) 

 

I’m especially gratified when I see young people themselves 

reaching out, trying to help their peers and help the youth of 

their age. And I suggest as more young people become 

involved, and as the alternative is no, such as we are seeing in 

the tobacco industry where people are butting out, we may 

indeed find a lesser use of the greater drug addiction, and that is 

alcohol. 

 

We also see the clergy, church leaders, school teachers, and 

social workers are also showing leadership in working with 

young people to help them recognize the seriousness of drug 

and alcohol abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion I have introduced in the Assembly 

today urges all organizations who are working with young 

people to join with the government in combating drugs and 

alcohol abuse. When the Premier announced the program of 

action and initiatives in the campaign against drug and alcohol 

abuse, I recall that the theme of the campaign was, “Facing the 

problems together to find the solutions.” 

 

We are facing a very serious problem with a comprehensive, 

preventative, and treatment program. Saskatchewan has a strong 

tradition of communities working together to overcome 

problems. With new approaches, and building on what has 

helped in the past, this government believes today’s problems 

can be reduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to again emphasize the leadership of 

our Premier, the leadership he has shown in putting forward the 

new initiatives to combat drug and alcohol abuse. Your Premier 

has shown a high degree of responsibility and foresight in doing 

what is needed to deal with the abuse of drugs and alcohol in 

our society. And, Mr. Speaker, all the initiatives are part of the 

Progressive Conservative government’s commitment to 

protecting the people of Saskatchewan. They are part of the 

Progressive Conservative commitment to build and expand 

upon our health care system. The 90 per cent increase in 

funding to alcohol and drug abuse programs  

spells out how serious that commitment is. 

 

Let there be no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier, the 

Minister of Health, and the Progressive Conservative 

government recognize the importance of addressing the 

complex problem of drug and alcohol abuse. We value the 

young people of this province and their potential for the future. 

 

In fact, I believe all members of this Assembly, along with the 

government, will make every effort to protect young people and 

Saskatchewan families through an increased public awareness 

and education programs on additions. This government will 

provide the resources to encourage young people to say no to 

drugs and alcohol. We are committed to social responsibility 

when it comes to drugs and alcohol. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we as a government seek to help 

and co-operate with all people in this province in dealing with 

these abuses of drugs and alcohol. That is what the motion 

before the Assembly is all about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government will 

continue to meet the challenging health care needs of our 

province. We must adapt our health system to meet and address 

such serious questions as those related to drugs and alcohol. 

Protecting the community, building a better health care system, 

and protecting our children’s future is what our initiatives in 

facing alcohol and drug abuse are all about. 

 

I therefore ask this Assembly to support the motion. I urge all 

organizations and members which deal with youth to join with 

the government in combating this very serious problem. 

Working together, facing these problems, we are a province can 

find the solution. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to bring forward a 

motion, seconded by the member from Yorkton: 

 

That this Assembly urge all organizations which deal with 

youth to join with the government in combating drug and 

alcohol abuse. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 

 

Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to participate in this debate 

in support of my colleague’s motion, from Moosomin, and the 

introduction of his motion. And the motion before us calls on 

this legislature, Mr. Speaker, to seek the support of all 

organizations who work with young people to join with the 

government in combating alcohol and drug abuse. 

 

All over North America the abuse of drugs and alcohol are 

causing serious social problems in society. All over North 

America there are families who have been hurt by the tragedy 

of drugs and alcohol abuse. Lives have been ruined, families 

broken up, and people hurt by the ravages of drugs and alcohol. 

That is why I believe government must show moral leadership, 

Mr. Speaker, in combating these social ills. 

 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1526 

 

As I listened to the member from Moosomin speak to this 

House, I could not help but agree with him on all his points. 

The member from Moosomin is quite right in his observation 

that government must show leadership in combating this drug 

and alcohol abuse problem. I agree with my colleague that the 

Progressive Conservative government of Premier Grant Devine 

has shown leadership in the attack on drug and alcohol abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is very concerned about this 

abuse amongst our youth. Research suggests that about one in 

five teenagers experience problems because of drinking or drug 

abuse. It has been estimated that one in 50 teenagers have used 

alcohol or tried drugs — and these are very, very alarming 

statistics, Mr. Speaker. That is why the Minister of Health 

appointed an advisory committee on alcohol and for drugs and 

youth — it is because this government wants to protect 

Saskatchewan young people. 

 

As part of the commitment to protection, this government saw a 

need to help young people and their families deal with the 

issues relating to alcohol and drug abuse. The Premier, 

personally, announced a five-phase attack on drug and alcohol 

abuse in 1986. The Progressive Conservative government 

increased funding to combat drug and alcohol abuse to a record 

90 per cent increase this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier’s program to attack drug and alcohol problems 

includes the establishment of one of Canada’s first specialized 

youth drug treatment centres at Whitespruce. 

 

Drugs pose a clear and present danger to society, Mr. Speaker. 

Those who deal in illegal and illicit drugs are a menace to 

society. They are hoodlums and gangsters who would inflict 

dangerous drugs on our young people. I praise the Premier of 

this province for declaring war on those who profit from the 

illegal drug trade; and the Premier has called these drug dealers 

the leeches of society, and the Premier is right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The vast majority of Saskatchewan families, and indeed the vast 

majority of Saskatchewan people, are decent people who 

believe in high moral standards. They support the Premier and 

this government in the belief that there must be a harsher 

approach with those who profit from illegal drug sales. I 

congratulate the Premier and the government for having the 

courage and the leadership to stand up for morality in the battle 

against drugs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, President Reagan declared war on illegal drugs in 

the United States. Other world leaders have done the same. And 

we in Saskatchewan can be proud our Premier and government 

who have said we will not tolerate drug dealers. 

 

For the record, I would like to point out that the federal New 

Democratic Party has in past come out in favour of making the 

drug marijuana legal in Canada. Marijuana is an illegal and an 

illicit drug that has harmed many, many young people. It has 

caused them many emotional and health problems. So I find it 

amazing that the NDP members of this legislature to . . . or I 

challenge them to  

denounce the policy of their federal party. I would urge the 

NDP members in this legislature to clearly state that you, too, 

are opposed to illicit use of drugs, and by doing so you will 

show a good example to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government has put 

in place a five-phase campaign against the abuse of drugs and 

alcohol. They are the Premier’s initiatives. I should like to take 

a few minutes to discuss them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, new directions in dealing with drug and alcohol 

abuse include the expansion of alcohol and drug treatment 

services throughout Saskatchewan. The education of young 

people with respect to drugs and alcohol is very important. New 

initiatives in Saskatchewan’s education system have been 

introduced to educate our young people, and these education 

programs will help young people deal with the pressures of 

drug and alcohol issues. This government will work with 

community organizations to increase public awareness and to 

address the questions of drug and alcohol abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not exaggerate when I say that the extent of 

the problem is serious. I believe it is important that this 

government has made a commitment to combat these social ills 

by increased funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, encouraging a healthy life-style is part of 

preventive health care. A healthy life-style means saying no to 

personal abuse of drugs and alcohol. That is why I commend 

the government and the Minister of Health for increasing the 

health funding for the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission and the programs to combat drug and alcohol 

abuse. You could call it part of our efforts in preventive health 

care. After all, we know the serious health tolls of addictions. 

As a government we believe that protection of the public is 

very, very important. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many of our tragic accidents on our 

highways are the result of drinking and driving. Drunk driving 

is the number one killer of young people between the ages of 16 

and 24. Nothing could be as sad and as tragic as a teenager as a 

teenager killed in a car wreck because of liquor. 

 

The Progressive Conservative government has shown 

leadership through public awareness on the question of drinking 

and driving. We as a government have campaigned against the 

use of alcohol while driving a vehicle. This government has 

worked with such organizations as Safe Grad and Students 

Against Drunk Driving to stop teenagers from drinking and 

driving. And I’m sure every member of this legislature would 

agree with me that it is important for government to continue 

promoting public awareness against drinking and driving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, society is becoming more enlightened in dealing 

with alcohol and drug addictions. There was a time when 

alcohol and drug abuse were deep and dark secrets that people 

did not openly discuss. Today, governments and community 

organizations in our province, in our country, and in fact around 

the world,  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1527 

 

are starting to work together to help people with these 

problems. 

 

Betty Ford, the wife of the former American president, Gerald 

Ford, has written a book on her drug and alcohol problems and 

how she overcame them. She opened a treatment centre in 

California, and from time to time we read in the newspapers of 

some celebrity who has gone there for treatment. These public 

accounts of people with the courage to deal with drug and 

alcohol problems go a long way in educating the public of the 

importance of dealing with these addictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan the Progressive Conservative 

government is establishing a new drug treatment centre for 

teenagers that will be the first of its kind in all of Canada. It 

shows that we are keeping with the times in establishing such a 

treatment centre. It shows we want to offer quality health care 

and protection for our young people and, Mr. Speaker, today we 

in Saskatchewan are meeting the challenges of combating drug 

and alcohol abuse. In doing so, we recognize the need to work 

closely with the various organizations in the community 

 

(1500) 

 

The Rev. Billy Graham, a man I have great respect for, has said 

that church leaders must become more active in working and 

counselling with people facing such social problems as 

alcoholism. The clergy of this province have always been at the 

forefront of helping people, and indeed many churches have 

established family health programs that help families deal with 

the modern problems of alcohol and drug abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, special recognition must be given to the efforts of 

Alcoholics Anonymous in helping young people deal with 

stopping drug and alcohol abuse. I am told that countless young 

men and women have been helped by this self-help organization 

that exists in nearly every community in Saskatchewan. And 

during the course of the speeches in the House today, it will be 

obvious that a close working relationship exists between 

government and organizations in this province to combat this 

major problem. 

 

I cite the example shown by the Minister of Health in increasing 

funding for programs to combat the drug and alcohol abuse 

problems, and I point out the Health minister’s advisory 

committee on alcohol, drugs, and youth, and most importantly, I 

point to the Premier’s five-phase program to combat drug and 

alcohol abuse, which has led to a 90 per cent increase in 

funding for such programs. 

 

Let me say that special recognition must be given to the Premier 

for his leadership in making the battle against drugs and alcohol 

abuse a priority with this government, and I am sure no member 

of this legislature would disagree with me that increased 

funding to combat this problem is not important to the Province 

of Saskatchewan — or that it is important to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’d like to take a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to talk about 

the associations in my own constituency that are very, very 

active in following up on the five-phase  

program that our government has come with. And I would like 

to mention the PRIDE (Parent Resources Institute for Drug 

Education Inc.) association of Yorkton, where they have held 

countless meetings, seminars, workshops And people in the 

hundreds have been coming to these meetings, Mr. Speaker, to 

learn more about this major problem in our society. And I want 

to congratulate a number of people in my constituency who 

became involved with the Yorkton assessment committee to 

find a use for the radar base that was being closed down in 

Yorkton. I was a member of that committee, and I can assure 

you, Mr. Speaker, that this group of people spent hours and 

hours to find a use for the base, and eventually came up with 

the idea of turning it into a drug and alcohol rehabilitation 

centre for our young people. 

 

And many people of . . . or my colleagues here in the legislature 

worked with us in obtaining that facility. And I’m pleased to 

say that work is going along very well indeed to renovate the 

base and get it set up for the first clients to be registered in that 

facility later on this year and early winter. 

 

What pleases me, Mr. Speaker, that we had the foresight to look 

at this facility and build it up to be the centre for rehabilitation 

for this problem, and not to be using that kind of money going 

around the province building Liquor Board stores by the 

hundreds, which was done by the former government. 

 

I was very pleased indeed also, Mr. Speaker, for young people 

that came forward at some of these meetings and offered their 

names to go on the advisory committee of this government to 

help in the planning and the programs that would be set up to 

bring these young people that are . . . have got involved with the 

drug problems, and bring them back into society where they 

belong. 

 

The motion introduced by the member from Moosomin is one 

worthy of support of this Assembly, as I’ve mentioned, Mr. 

Speaker. And I am pleased to have had the opportunity to draw 

the attention to the leadership of this government in combating 

drug and alcohol abuse. And it’s my pleasure to second the 

motion of the member from Moosomin. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some 

observers of the social scene, Mr. Speaker, would suggest that 

alienation is at the root of many of the problems that our young 

people face — alienation or a smell of hypocrisy about our 

society, alienation that leads to drug abuse, alienation that leads 

to a number of behaviours that we would not necessarily 

condone or accept for ourselves, but which young people 

espouse, and which young people cling to as a means of 

indicating and showing their sense of disgust and their sense of 

betrayal by society. 

 

Young people see people that claim moral leadership, but they 

also see these people prevaricate and cheat in order to hand on 

to their tenuous footholds of power. Young people see leaders 

that claim to seek peace but wage war instead, and again, 

prevaricate and cheat in order to maintain their footholds in 

power. 

 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1528 

 

They see adults that drink, smoke, and otherwise abuse 

themselves, and at the same time admonish young people about 

not abusing drugs and alcohol, and encourage young people to 

desist . . . lecture young people to desist from those very same 

things. They see a society that promotes consumer acquisition, 

but yet denies them meaningful opportunities to acquire 

employment and the opportunity to participate fully in the 

society that’s thrust upon them. 

 

And I find it sad, Mr. Speaker, that today, that the words of the 

government members perpetuate the hypocrisy that our young 

people see, and perpetuate the alienation that they must feel 

about our society. We heard wonderful words from the 

government members about what the government was doing, 

about all the wonderful things that the government is 

supposedly doing. But when we look at the record, and when 

we look at the action, something . . . a different picture comes 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I agree with the member of Moosomin. And I don’t think 

that there’s any need to go over again the serious problems that 

are posed for our society by drug and alcohol abuse. I think the 

statistics are there and one would not quibble with them. 

Whether it’s a loss of $1 million a day now, as opposed to 50 

per cent or 60 per cent of that in 1979-1980, one would not 

quibble with that. 

 

I think that it can be readily accepted that, given the widespread 

integration, especially of alcohol in our society, that there is 

bound to be abuse, and abuse is a real problem, and that this 

represents a significant health and social problem for our 

society. 

 

But again, the major problem that young people will see with 

the address on this motion by government members is that it 

purports to illustrate a government that’s doing wonderful 

things, but they know that the record is something else. 

 

And let me just begin, Mr. Speaker, by talking about the single 

greatest act that that government has performed in recent years 

which has encouraged alcohol consumption and alcohol abuse 

in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last night on television there was a program called 

Live It Up, and this program runs during prime time. I believe it 

was between 7 and 7:30, and that’s prime time for young 

people. Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that during the course of 

that program, that six advertisements were aired, all of them, all 

of them, encouraging people to consume alcohol? 

 

And that’s the single greatest act that this government has 

performed that has encouraged alcohol consumption, that has 

encouraged alcohol abuse — namely, the allowing of alcohol 

advertising on or in the media in Saskatchewan. And this was 

done notwithstanding the protests of many people in 

Saskatchewan, notwithstanding the protest and the opposition 

of many learned people and people of authority in the area, that 

we should not have advertising because of the harmful effects it 

would have. 

 

People such as Dr. Saul Cohen, the chairman of the alcoholism 

commission of Saskatchewan, or what was then the alcoholism 

commission, stated in the Leader-Post in 1983, and I quote Dr. 

Cohen: 

 

We in the Commission feel that advertising has to increase 

sales and lead to increased consumption and therefore an 

increase in social and health problems. Our greatest fear is 

the effect it will have on teen-agers. 

 

And Dr. Cohen is not the only one — not the only individual or 

the only organization — that warned the government and that 

tried to discourage to government from participating in alcohol 

advertising, or allowing alcohol advertising in the media in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A researcher from Michigan State University in 1981 indicated 

— this is Atkin and Block, and I quote: 

 

Advertising accounts for a 10-30 per cent increase in total 

consumption. 

 

The greatest effect is on young people. 

 

Those exposed to ads are more apt to drive after drinking. 

 

The British Medical Journal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Lancet, 

in 1980, and I quote: 

 

A total advertising ban would achieve a reduction of 

consumption of approximately 13 per cent. 

 

The likely reduction of consumption by heavy drinkers has 

been reckoned as high as 25 per cent, so a ban on 

advertising might save the nation much illness and misery. 

 

The ban on alcohol advertising is, of course, supported by the 

Alcohol — or was supported by the Alcoholism Commission on 

Saskatchewan, Canadian Medical Association, The Royal 

College of Physicians of Britain, and the World Health 

Organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’ve tried to point out here is that although 

the government says that it’s doing great things to discourage 

alcohol and drug abuse, what it has done — what it has done — 

is to permit alcohol advertising in Saskatchewan’s media. Yet 

many experts point out that this has grave consequences — that 

advertising will encourage, will increase alcohol consumption. 

And if you increase alcohol consumption, you will at the same 

time increase the potential for abuse. 

 

And so I say to the government members opposite that it is one 

thing to spout words about the wonderful things that you’re 

doing, but it would be far more meaningful for you to put 

pressure on the Executive Council, to put pressure on the 

cabinet, and to withdraw the permission of Saskatchewan media 

outlets to allow the advertising of alcohol. I think that would be 

a meaningful act. That is one way in which we can all 

participate as members in joining with the Government of 

Saskatchewan to discourage drug and alcohol abuse. That, I 

think, would be action, Mr. Speaker, rather than mere words. 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1529 

 

And I don’t . . . the members may shrug, and the members may 

say that’s water under the bridge, and the members may shake 

their heads, but it’s a real concern, and we should not take 

lightly the words of experts in the field. Again, Dr. Cohen 

indicates: 

 

The ban on media advertising stems from the negative 

consequences, such as advertising is likely to promote, 

especially among young people. Furthermore media 

advertising of alcoholic beverages fosters the integration 

of alcohol as part of everyday life-styles, and this results in 

an increased use and abuse of the substance. 

 

And: 

 

There is evidence that youth are the most influenced by 

alcohol advertising. 

 

Youth are at a very impressionable age and are especially 

susceptible to the relentless push of advertising in today’s 

media, Mr. Speaker. And it’s just not Dr. Cohen and other 

authorities. The Government of Canada itself — and here I refer 

to a report to the Special Senate Committee on Youth, Mr. 

Speaker, which was published in February of 1986. And that 

special Senate committee concluded: that the advertising of 

alcohol and cigarettes, in which products are invariably linked 

with sexuality and the good life, appears to have a powerful 

influence on young people, and we recommend that the 

advertising of alcohol beverages be banned from television. 

 

(1515) 

 

So there is all kinds of evidence that alcohol advertising leads to 

increased consumption, has a powerful impact on youth, will 

likely encourage and increase the consumption of alcohol by 

young people, and as a consequence of increasing the use, it 

increases the potential for abuse by young people. 

 

And for the members to talk about, well, we’ve put money into 

a treatment centre — and I agree that treatment is needed and 

that we should do whatever we can to help young people with 

problems through a treatment centre — but to talk about the 

treatment centres and to not talk about the things that cause the 

problems in the first place for which treatment is required, is 

again an indication of the hypocrisy that young people see all 

around them, the hypocrisy that young people want to end. 

 

And for once I wish that the government members would come 

clean, and would be honest and recognize that it’s the alcohol 

advertising that is partly to blame for the increase in alcohol 

consumption and for the abuse in our society, and that we 

would be providing real leadership, rather than echoing words 

written by someone’s researchers in the caucus office, that we 

would provide real leadership if we were to bring pressure to 

bear on the government to withdraw alcohol advertising in 

Saskatchewan’s media. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s just not advertising that again provides a 

different picture than has been painted by  

government members about alcohol in this province. The 

government itself, through its own Liquor Board, promotes the 

use of alcohol, and I refer, Mr. Speaker, to a memo dated July 

26, 1982, and it’s from A.R. Wareham, the director of retail 

operations to all liquor board store managers, and it’s regarding 

an update on customer service programs. And one of the 

recommendations that this director of retail operations makes, 

Mr. Speaker, is concerning shelf lay-out. And he says: 

 

We have been experimenting in a number of stores around 

the province with changing the lay-out of product on the 

shelves to put more emphasis on merchandising. 

 

And he goes on to say that: 

 

Since rye is by far the most popular selling product in this 

province, we have moved rye to the back of our stores and 

put slow-selling items up at the side shelving. 

 

And he goes on to say that there are a number of reasons for 

this: 

 

It is much easier to find these products as opposed to 

having them scattered all over the place and thirdly, and 

most importantly, in the stores that we have tried this, 

there has been a marked increase in purchases by 

consumers. Where there was a regular customer picking 

up a 25 ounce bottle, they have now moved to a 40 ounce; 

and where there were customers coming in and buying a 

40 ounce, they are now buying a 40 ounce and a mickey. 

 

And this is the direction that the government is taking. And this 

is a concrete example of what the government is doing. The 

government, through allowing alcohol advertising, the 

government, through its merchandising philosophy in the 

Saskatchewan Liquor Board stores, is encouraging alcohol use, 

is encouraging the increase of alcohol use in Saskatchewan, like 

a pusher. And again, that leads to the potential for abuse of 

alcohol. And that is the thing that we’re concerned about, and 

that is the motion that we’re addressing today. 

 

And it’s sad. It’s sad to see the government members beat their 

breasts and proclaim all the wonderful things that the 

government has done, and at the same time pushing alcohol, 

whether it’s through the media outlets or whether it’s in their 

own stores. And it’s a sad thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Moosomin who moved the motion 

said at one point, and he quoted the Premier about how the 

Premier recognized that alcohol is more than a matter for 

government to deal with and that it “requires the efforts of 

everyone.” And I think I quoted him accurately where he says 

“requires the efforts of everyone” to combat the problems of 

abuse in our society. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, if we really need the 

efforts of everyone to combat drug abuse, alcohol abuse in 

Saskatchewan, and notwithstanding their complicity,  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1530 

 

their complicity in increasing the use of alcohol, what about 

other groups, and especially non-governmental organizations 

that deal with families and that deal with individuals? What 

about them? What about the level of support that government 

normally has provided them as opposed to what they’re 

providing them today? 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will know that there are many agencies in 

Saskatchewan that deal with families, that deal with them — 

marital problems, life-style problems, various kinds of 

problems, and they seek help from these agencies and it’s not 

surprising — and I think the member from Moosomin 

recognizes this — it’s not surprising that many of these 

problems that they seek help for are problems that involve the 

abuse of alcohol or the abuse of drugs. 

 

So one would think that if we’re going to get a concerted effort 

from all of Saskatchewan people, and especially those 

organizations that deal to a very great extent with those that 

have the problem, that we would want to find ways to 

encourage those agencies to do that through meaningful 

support. But yet, again, what we find is something else again. 

What we find is the contrary. What we see here are the words of 

the Premier inviting everyone to join in to fight drug abuse, to 

fight alcohol abuse, but at the same time his Minister of Finance 

slashes budget for those organizations, won’t let them do the 

job that they were supposed to be doing to help combat drug 

abuse, to help combat alcohol abuse in this province. 

 

And the list is a long one: The Prince Albert Mobile Crisis Unit, 

cut; the closure of the Sun-Star home, a home to assist troubled 

teen-age girls in Saskatoon. And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

The John Howard Society, a core operating fund lost; the 

Opportunities ‘87 student summer employment program, cut; 

the Contemporary Women’s Program, cut; Mobile Crisis 

Services in Regina, cut; Saskatoon Crisis Intervention, cut; 

Regina Women’s Community Centre, cut; Regina Transition 

Women’s Society, cut; the Welfare Rights Centre; and the list 

goes on. 

 

It’s just a long, long list — a number of native friendship 

centres, many of them who provide counselling help for native 

people who are experiencing drug and alcohol problems, but yet 

we find that their funding has been cut. 

 

And especially the main service agencies in Saskatoon and 

Regina such as the Catholic Family Service Society in Regina, 

the Catholic Family Services of Saskatoon, the Regina Family 

Service Bureau, all agencies that deal with families 

experiencing problems, and again in large part due to drug and 

alcohol abuse, they find their budgets have been cut. 

 

And they wonder how are we to join with the government, as 

the member from Moosomin is suggesting — how are we to 

join with the government in a meaningful way to combat these 

problems of drug abuse and alcohol abuse when the government 

says, on the other hand, we want you to join but we’re not going 

to provide you the help that we have in the past to do that. And 

surely this is contradictory messages for the helping agencies in 

Saskatchewan. And again, it’s a message of hypocrisy, 

hypocrisy for the young people, and increases  

their sense of alienation about our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one particular problem that I wish the 

members had addressed and had dealt with that I think is very 

fundamental, very key. And I guess it’s not surprising that they 

don’t. This government has a record of ignoring root causes of 

problems and skimming the surface and providing hype and 

gloss and smoke and mirrors to try to indicate that some action 

has been carried out, to try to indicate that something is being 

done. 

 

But again they fail to deal with one of the more significant 

problems in Saskatchewan’s society that is at the root of the 

problems that we are talking about. And I refer to youth 

unemployment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, young people are being pushed relentlessly 

through the media, through a simple looking at our society, to 

consume and to acquire products and to be consumers in a 

major way. 

 

In order to participate fully in society they need the means to do 

that. They need meaningful employment. They need the 

opportunity to have jobs. They need to have meaningful jobs. 

They need to have jobs that are decently paid so that they can 

plan for a future. But what we find, Mr. Speaker, is an increase 

in youth unemployment. What we find is that there are less 

young people finding jobs or able to find jobs, well-paying jobs 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

There seems to be an increase in part-time work, but there 

seems to be a decrease in the opportunities for full-time, 

meaningful employment — the kind of employment, Mr. 

Speaker, that enables young people to begin to plan for a future; 

that enables them to begin to think about buying a home, 

getting married, raising families. 

 

But they are increasingly denied those opportunities because of 

the economic mess that we have in this province, a mess which 

has been created by the PC government, and especially denied 

these opportunities because the government opposite has taken 

the view that they are well advised to cut back on youth 

employment programs as a means of trying to balance the 

budget, as opposed to taking the point of view that we are better 

advised to provide as many opportunities as we can for young 

people so that they can contribute meaningfully to our society, 

and so that young people more, rather than less, will have some 

sense of hope for our future in this province. 

 

Yet that’s the thing that the government members opposite have 

failed to talk about. They don’t talk about that. They talk at 

great length about how the government has done this wonderful 

thing to set up a treatment centre. And again, I agree, I think all 

people in Saskatchewan agree, that it’s a good thing that we 

provide treatment centres. But I think Saskatchewan people 

agree that it’s even more important to try and discourage the 

kind of abuse that is taking place; to try and discourage drug 

abuse; to try and discourage alcohol abuse. Many people in 

Saskatchewan, many people in Saskatchewan, even if the 

government doesn’t, believe in that simple saying: an ounce of 

prevention is worth a pound of cure. 

 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1531 

 

But that seems to be lost on the government. Their record in 

youth unemployment and youth employment is a sad one, Mr. 

Speaker. They cut out, as I indicated earlier, the youth 

employment program that was in effect, and those jobs that 

have been maintained are primarily to private businesses which 

are ill-equipped to handle the requests from young people for 

seasonal employment opportunities. They’ve denied urban 

municipalities, as an example, the opportunity to participate in 

the summer employment programs. 

 

And I know that the Minister of Urban Affairs shrugs his 

shoulders and says, well what can you do? But, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s one opportunity that has been denied to Saskatchewan 

young people, because their record is a sad one, and 

employment opportunities for young people are something 

that’s desperately needed. 

 

We look in 1982, we had 112,000 people, between the ages of 

15 and 24, employed in Saskatchewan; in 1987 that number had 

fallen to 98,000. Unemployment, the number of in 1982, there 

were 13,000 young people, between the ages of 15 and 24, 

reportedly unemployed; in 1987 . . . in ‘87 that number had 

increased to 16,000 - an increase of 3,000 or 23 per cent in five 

short years, or long years of PC government in this province. 

 

(1530) 

 

And there are psychological and social costs of unemployment. 

And I hope, if my remarks do nothing else, that it might get 

through the thick skulls of the government members opposite, 

that there are these costs, and that these costs needs to be 

recognized, and that we cannot talk about alcohol abuse, and we 

cannot talk about drug abuse and solving those kinds of 

problems, unless we begin to deal with the root causes. 

 

One of the submissions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the senate 

committee — the special senate committee on youth — came 

from a professor of the Faculty of Social Work at the University 

of Regina in May of 1985, and this professor, a Dr. George 

Maslany, states, and I quote: 

 

If we do not address the matter of youth unemployment, 

which we currently foresee as very much of an individual 

problem, of individual hardship and of individuals not 

achieving their potential could very well become a 

collective problem and not one that is inwardly directed 

but outwardly directed and that could, in the long run, 

prove to be a very real difficulty in terms of civil unrest on 

a large-scale. 

 

I wouldn’t go so far as Dr. Maslany to say that we’re on the 

brink of civil unrest, but I would go to say that as long as you 

fail to address the problems of youth employment in 

Saskatchewan, as long as you fail to recognize that that is one 

of the root causes of the problems that young people face, you 

will continue to see an increase in drug abuse; you will continue 

to see an increase in alcohol abuse; you will continue to have to 

deal with treatment and problems in the tail end of the whole 

cycle as opposed to having a society that can take that in check 

and deal with it in a meaningful way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to turn to one 

further quote, and this is from a David Brazil, who’s the 

member of the Newfoundland and Labrador youth advisory 

council, and he provided this . . . these are part of his remarks to 

the special Senate committee on youth in June, 1985, and he 

states: 

 

The unique nature of youth unemployment showed that in 

terms of a cause and effect relationship, unemployment 

may lead to certain problems or stem from others . . . 

People who had experienced unemployment, or that of a 

close relative, generally experienced lower self-esteem, 

lower satisfaction with life and feelings of social 

alienation and they were incapable of controlling their 

own lives. Through these psychological factors and their 

link with unemployment, it is very easy to see how early 

experiences with joblessness can lead to social problems 

such as alcohol and drug abuse or crime. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I hope that is one message that the 

government members will listen to, and that if they really want 

to see action in terms of combating drug abuse, in terms of 

combating alcohol abuse in this province, that they will do a 

number of things. One is that they will begin to pressure that 

insensitive cabinet about doing away with alcohol advertising in 

Saskatchewan media. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Secondly, they will encourage the 

minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor Board to 

encourage his managers to come to their senses and to quit 

pushing this stuff. That’s one. 

 

Second . . . or thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the government 

recognizes that if they truly want, if they truly want all of 

Saskatchewan’s people, and especially those who are 

historically, traditionally involved in dealings with problems of 

drug abuse and alcohol abuse, I hope that they will recognize 

that adequate funding is required, especially for those agencies 

that historically and traditionally provide counselling in those 

areas, and that unless that adequate funding is there, they cannot 

do an adequate job; they cannot join with you as you ask, to 

join with the government in combating these kinds of problems. 

And I hope that’s something that you recognize. 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I hope, I really hope that you do 

something with the problems of youth unemployment in this 

province so that young people have some sense of hope; that 

they have a real hope for their future, a real hope that’s based on 

some real vision as to where we’re going; some vision that 

allows them to plan; some vision that allows them to participate 

meaningfully in our society, as opposed to the dashed hopes 

that we see all around us and that encourages alienation, that it 

leads to the kind of alcohol and drug abuse that we see around 

us. If the government members opposite, in their own way, in 

their own way, would begin to put pressure on cabinet, would 

begin to put pressure on their colleagues to  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1532 

 

address these types of concerns and problems, then I think we 

may begin to see some turn around and some resolve of the 

problem that we have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to say that, although I can 

agree with parts of the motion, that I feel that it’s necessary to 

add a brief amendment that more adequately expresses our 

concerns and our feelings on this side of the House about this 

very significant problem of drug abuse and alcohol abuse, and 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move, and seconded by the 

member for Cumberland: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 

and the following substituted therefor: 

 

regrets that the lack of meaningful job opportunities, 

inadequate funding to social services, cut-backs in 

education and training, increased social and economic 

stress on Saskatchewan families, and increased alcohol 

advertising are causing an increase in alcohol and drug 

abuse among young people. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak in favour of the 

amendment. I would like to deal with it in the general topic of 

comprehensive approach on dealing with the issue of alcohol 

and drugs. And my contention, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

so-called comprehensive approach that is adopted by this 

government is, as usual, a continuation of their narrow approach 

to resolving issues in this province. I would state that a 

comprehensive approach not only requires support for 

institutionalized strategies in alcohol and drugs, but also has to 

deal with the issue of youth unemployment. 

 

People have mentioned — United States sources — in regards 

to some of their . . . in regards to their two initial speeches . . . 

it’s as if, Mr. Speaker, that we already have a free trade 

agreement. It seems that we are talking about Betty Ford and 

more Cadillac approaches to resolving the issue, rather than 

talking about the real people that exist in this province. The 

members have said that they have declared war on alcohol and 

drugs, but I think they also have declared war on youth because 

of the high unemployment situation that they have failed to 

resolve in this province. 

 

I will start out by relating a story in regards to some of the 

many experiences that I have had in northern Saskatchewan. 

And this relates to, of course, a particular community in the 

North which I will not name. Since the PC’s have come in, of 

course the unemployment rate has risen, especially for youth in 

northern Saskatchewan. This has caused untold stress on not 

only the individuals but also on the families of the youth. 

 

As I was teaching in the northern teacher education program in 

the mid ’70s and the latter ’70s, many of the people always 

related to me the top issues of the North, and of course the top 

issue was unemployment. But the other two issues that always 

come up either second, third,  

or fourth, was the issue of youth, the issue of youth 

unemployment, and the issue of alcohol and drugs. 

 

What the parents related to me was this. There was . . . because 

of the high unemployment rate, they were having . . . it created 

a lot of relationship problems between the present youth and the 

parents and grandparents of the youth. 

 

For many years people had gotten jobs in the mining and 

forestry sectors, but also in the traditional resources that had in 

fact been improving in the ‘70s. And it became more important 

when people recognized that the housing crisis which came 

about in ’81-82 brought the problem on a more acute level. 

 

Many of the people recognized that they had to deal with the 

problem on a comprehensive level. By comprehensive, they 

meant we have to find jobs for these people at the same time as 

we provide them with support services in dealing with the 

alcohol and drug problems. And that was a key basic premise 

and statement that people in northern Saskatchewan have stated 

for many times. They said, unless we deal with it on that 

comprehensive scale, we will be restricting ourselves only 

dealing with the symptoms of the problems. We want to get at 

the underlying root causes. We want to get at the solution, 

which is productive activity. They said, if we do not have the 

jobs when we come out of the rehab alcohol and drug centre, 

what alternative do we have? 

 

(1545) 

 

The government does not provide a sufficient amount of money 

for recreation programming that the parents at the community 

level talk about. The key point that people have said time and 

time again: our young people cannot find the work; it creates 

friction for us. It creates friction, they say, between ourselves, 

as parents, and the youths. 

 

Sometimes, as parents, we tend to say that the youth may be too 

lazy in the heat of an angry debate, and we tend to blame the 

youth for the situation that they’re in. But the youth did not 

create the high unemployment, people have said. We want to 

make sure that this aspect becomes an integral part of a 

comprehensive strategy. 

 

As a lot of people said, we have tried very hard. Mr. Speaker, 

they said, we have tried extremely hard. As I talked to one 

parent whose child had committed suicide in their youth, he 

said: I tried the regular strategies that a loving parent would 

give to their children; I tried to improve my relationship with 

my child. But he said it didn’t seem to work because they didn’t 

have anything to look forward to in the future. They said, what 

do we do? Most parents aid, we tried. Those parents said, we 

tried hard to keep them in school, but there was no future — no 

future to look forward to. They said . . . This person said, I even 

tried a strategy where I would be more strict, in the hopes that 

my authority — you know, as a parent — would prevail. And 

that, in fact, if they wouldn’t listen to me in the regular, rational 

conversation that, in fact, they may listen to authority. And the 

parent said, I tried hard as a parent, then, to provide the greatest 

authority figure to my child. But he said that didn’t work. I still 

found him hanging in the closet a few months down the road. 

 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1533 

 

And that story has been told by many of the parents in the 

North. As I look back at that particular community, there were 

13 young people that had taken their lives in a three-year 

period. And that’s just one community. That amounted to about 

1 per cent of the population of that community. In figures — in 

comparative figures to Regina — it would mean that 2,000 

people — 2,000 youth — would’ve committed suicide in 

Regina. That’s the comparative figure in this community in that 

three-year period. 

 

A lot of the people have said, we have tried hard as parents. We 

have tried to get the alcohol rehab program controlled at the 

community level, but we don’t seem to find the funding for it. 

We cannot get the dollars. Most of our people are working 

under volunteer arrangement. We have the buildings and the 

people committed, but we don’t have the money to provide for 

a locally-evolved and -controlled situation on alcohol and 

drugs. 

 

The people have said, we are the most concerned about the 

problem. We want to be able to deal with it at our community 

level. It’s our children that we are talking about. It’s nobody 

else’s children but our own. We want to be able to work with 

them because many times that we’ve tried other approaches, 

where we send our children away — away from their 

community — they come back, in many situations, worse than 

they have left. We were told in the past, they said, that things 

would improve when these children were sent away, but such 

has not been the case. Many of the children who have come 

back to regain their roots at the community level have done that 

with a lot of struggle. A lot of struggle has taken place in 

regards to developing a relationship. It’s very hard, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

What people are saying is this. It’s extremely important to 

develop a sound relationship between the youth who have come 

back, especially with drug and alcohol problems, and coming 

back to the community. Not only is there a problem with 

alienation of the individual to the parents, but there’s also an 

alienation factor from the social and cultural wrongs. Many 

times, as a youth is trying to express in broken English to their 

grandparents and their parents about the problems, many of 

them cannot relate back into the language of the community 

that they were raised in on a very early age, that they later had 

to leave — that in fact the cultural bonding that is an essential 

aspect of part of any comprehensive strategy and approach to 

rehabilitation and development of an individual is no longer 

there; that in fact has been taken away from them. 

 

The other thing that a lot of people mention is this. The youth in 

many cases are brought into the urban environment for 

treatment, and so on, in the past. And they said while that has 

been the stop-gap measure in the past, many times it is also a 

social problem in terms of building social relationships when 

the youth come back. Many times the youth will come back and 

talk about a new experience that they’ve had, but their parents 

are unable to relate to that because of their experience at the 

local level. So there is a problem and a barrier at the social level 

as well. 

 

Many cases a lot of the urbanite psychology, the social 

psychology that is developed — the social psychology of 

urbanization becomes the social psychology of an individual 

when they move back to the community level. 

 

And I must say that the social psychology is an important aspect 

of a comprehensive strategy, that in fact we regard not only the 

urban experience as an important aspect for people living in the 

urban centre in terms of rehabilitation, but we also look at the 

aspect of the rural situation and an urban situation. But I must 

add that you must also include the cultural aspect. 

 

As I talked with people in northern Saskatchewan in the past 15 

years in regards to dealing with the issues of a comprehensive 

strategy and solution to issues that affect the youth, they have 

always looked at productive activity and jobs, the social 

environment and the cultural environment, which has to be part 

of the comprehensive approach to the issue of youth. 

 

As I look at the government strategy — this government 

strategy in the past five years — the government has been, I 

would suppose, dealing with the area of symptoms rather than 

on the idea of a comprehensive approach which includes 

productive activities. The symptoms approach to the resolution 

of the alcohol and drug problem for youth is too narrow of an 

approach. It’s way too narrow. 

 

When we talk about the immorality of drugs and alcohol, I 

would also add that there is an immorality to unemployment. A 

strategy becomes immoral, especially when it calls itself 

comprehensive and it is, indeed, only very narrow. To me that 

is also immoral. 

 

I do not disagree with dealing with the symptoms of a problem, 

but they have to be dealt with, as I mentioned, not only on a 

narrow textbook approach to development, but a large scale and 

broad approach to the issue. 

 

I would state that it’s also immoral today to continue 

advertising liquor for increased consumption, because that’s the 

end goal of any advertisement, is to increase the consumption. 

Although people will give you all kinds of statistics in terms of 

lower consumption rates, and so on, in regards to that, again it’s 

taking a very narrow approach to statistics. The fact still 

remains is that no business in the world advertises because they 

want to decrease the consumption of what they are advertising. 

Any business in the world will advertise because they want to 

increase the consumption of their advertisement. So I would say 

that it is immoral indeed to preach for control, to preach for 

rehabilitation, but at the same time you permit the increased 

advertising of alcohol. 

 

(1600) 

 

And it is indeed a lot more immoral, Mr. Speaker, when you 

consider that subsidization for liquor still occurs in northern 

Saskatchewan. The place where the greatest and most 

comprehensive strategy is required is the place where we still 

have liquor advertisement. 

 

At the same time, when you look at the strategy of this PC  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1534 

 

government, the strategy is such where, in regards to subsidies, 

they have knocked off the full subsidy system that we had 

before; but also they have introduced and knocked off the 

transportation subsidy for fishing in northern Saskatchewan, 

where it means resolving part of a comprehensive approach, 

which is productive activity, having fish to eat and having fish 

to sell and getting the youth involved. 

 

What we have this government doing is this. They decrease the 

subsidies — 100 per cent subsidy knock-off in regards to 

fishing for pickerel and for sturgeon, and those are the most 

productive fish in northern Saskatchewan. And these are the 

very fish that they knock off the subsidy on. People who fish 

have a tough time making a living, especially with the 

regulations on fishing where sometimes they’re only allowed to 

use five inch mesh nets. It makes it extremely hard for them to 

catch their limit. But on top of it all, they have to pay more now 

for transportation with this new government policy of this year. 

 

When you talk about youth, and training youth for the future, I 

find in the traditional areas that there was proposals this year 

from this government wherein a lot of parents were saying, if 

we can’t find . . . and this government won’t push for jobs in the 

mines, and this government won’t push for jobs in the forestry 

sector for our youth; we will at least train our youth to be in the 

traditional resource area; we will at least teach them how to 

trap, fish, and also do guiding. But what they found out this 

year was you couldn’t even do that. The government is 

introducing a policy where the youth cannot be trained . . . to go 

with the parents and act as guides, you know, where it would be 

an apprenticeship-type system of training. 

 

So what the people have found out is that the subsidies continue 

to be pushed by this government. The government members 

from across, the two members who spoke, say, we got to attack 

the pushers. But this government is a pusher of unemployment; 

this government is a pusher of a narrow strategy; this 

government is, indeed, a pusher in its own right. 

 

As I look to the question . . . I’ve talked a lot about the question 

of unemployment as part of the comprehensive strategy . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . so I will talk about youth 

unemployment because, as a member from across asked: what 

are we debating? 

 

An Hon. Member: — He should pay attention. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — He has not paid attention to the fact that a 

comprehensive strategy requires employment, requires social 

and cultural development. It hasn’t sunk into his head, Mr. 

Speaker, after I’ve been talking for the past hour. We’ve had an 

amendment which includes more of a comprehensive strategy, 

but also to do away with the advertising. 

 

When I talk about the unemployment figures for youth, in 1982 

it was 10.4 per cent; in 1987 it has risen to 14 per cent. This is a 

rise of 34.6 per cent unemployment for youth in this province. I 

would say to the members across that they are, indeed, pushing 

unemployment on the  

youth. 

 

As we look at the numbers . . . We have to look at the numbers. 

In ‘82 it was 13,000. In 1987 it has risen to 16,000. Here we 

have a rise in 3,000 unemployed youth in this province — 23 

per cent rise. When I talked about the importance of 

unemployment, you needed the factual evidence in the 

argumentation, so I produced to you the factual evidence. 

 

I must add, Mr. Speaker, that the unemployment situation for 

youth in northern Saskatchewan is a lot higher than what the 

official statistics show. The parents say that, because of the 

many years of unemployment, a lot of the youth have given up 

looking for jobs. So you will not find them in the registry at 

CEIC (Canada Employment and Immigration Centre) offices. 

You will not find them in any other registries because, in many 

cases, they have given up after being denied, you know, jobs for 

a period of many years. 

 

I must say too that, as I spoke about the crisis in more 

comprehensive terms, I also mentioned the fact of the suicide 

rates — you know, that 1 per cent suicide rate in that particular 

community in the North. That is also backed by factual research 

in the past 60 years of research in unemployment in this 

country. 

 

One has to look, for example, at the 1982 report entitled 

“Unemployment: Its Body and Soul,” written by Sharon Kirsch 

and published by the Canadian Mental Health Association. She 

mentioned that in quoting the different researchers in the past 

60 years, that unemployment increases suicide rates, wherein a 

1 per cent increase in the rise of unemployment will create a 4 

per cent increase in suicides. 

 

That becomes even a more crucial problem where 

unemployment rates in northern Saskatchewan communities hit 

60 to 80 per cent. It becomes to be a critical problem for many 

of the communities. 

 

The only thing that’ll save a lot of the communities for the stats 

to become higher has been a lot of the parents’ own attempts at 

individual counselling. The parents have tried hard in trying to 

resolve the issue. I have seen parents in northern Saskatchewan 

in the past 20 years, organizing AA centres, AA groups that has 

never been seen to that rate in Saskatchewan. 

 

I have seen people organize on the issue of dealing with 

suicides, and suicide counselling, and trying to deal at that 

level. And what they have said in many cases was that while 

there is a great type of programs in the South, we never get 

them in the North. We will get maybe a small centre here, and 

we’ll wait another 10 years, and we’ll get another small centre 

there. But there is never a comprehensive strategy to build a 

network of a community-based resource approach to alcohol 

and drug rehabilitation right in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I must add, but as I read the reports on the alcohol and drug 

abuse to youth with regards to treaty Indians in this province, 

and also having spoken to people in the drug and alcohol 

program in the Association of Métis and Non-Status Indians of 

Saskatchewan, I find that . . . and  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1535 

 

what I have noticed in the North where there was a higher and 

greater rate of the problem, that was also the case in Indian and 

Métis communities throughout the province. 

 

And a lot of the people, again on both groups, have recognized 

that a comprehensive approach requires not only the 

development of institutionalized centres here and there 

throughout the province, but more community-based centres 

that involve the parents of the youth who are having the 

problems in alcohol and drugs. That, in fact, they also add the 

same things that I heard the parents of northern Saskatchewan 

talk about, that you required productive activity alongside the 

institutional approach. You also require, in the institutional 

approaches, social and cultural development alongside them, 

because without that comprehensive overview, any approach 

becomes only a partial strategy. 

 

So, in summary, I would state what I hear people from northern 

Saskatchewan state — what I hear the Indian-Métis community 

state — is this: we want the Government of Saskatchewan to 

change its policies and practices. We want them to make sure 

that all those subsidies to big business, all those subsidies to 

alcohol, all those subsidies to an indirect form of advertising — 

that they stop, that they in fact channel them more in the 

comprehensive, economic, social and cultural development 

program in conjunction with an institutionalized program on 

alcohol and drugs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — They say we want our subsidies on fishing and 

on food to be brought back to us. We want subsidies for the 

economic development programs that we have had. The Indian 

community says, we fight hard for jobs; we try and get jobs, but 

now you cut us from $3 million to $1 million. What can we do 

with $1 million? When there’s over 70 communities — over 

100 Indian and Métis communities in this province, what can 

you do with $1 million? 

 

(1615) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I support this amendment: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted, 

and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

regrets that the lack of meaningful job opportunities, 

inadequate funding for social services, cut-backs in 

education and training, increased social and economic 

stress on Saskatchewan families, and increased alcohol 

advertisements are causing an increase in alcohol and drug 

abuse among people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I support this amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will attempt to 

make my comments brief, succinct, to the point, and I’ll try to 

stick to the facts, unlike some of the previous members who 

have spoken. 

 

When you’re talking about the problems at hand, everyone 

recognizes that it’s a serious issue. But just by talking about it, 

you recognize that you’ve got it out of the cellar, you’ve got it 

out where people can look at it, debate it, and see what can be 

done. And that’s an excellent step, an excellent first step. 

 

Unfortunately, we’ve heard members of the NDP decry the 

attempts at trying to overcome the problems and calling the 

Tory government down for bringing it out into the open. Well, 

substance abuse has been around for a long time. It’s been here 

since time immemorial. And I’m sure the member from North 

Battleford could tell us about the ’60s and substance abuse. The 

idea of the ’60s was “turn on and tune out”. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — The inference made by the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena . . . and maybe he could expand on what 

he’s trying to say. Are you making an accusation against me as 

a member of this House, or what is the thrust? I ask you, Mr. 

Speaker, to ask him to withdraw those comments from the 

record. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member from Kelvington-Wadena, does 

he wish to speak to the point of order? The member from North 

Battleford has raised a point of order and the intent of the 

member’s remarks from Kelvington-Wadena are rather unclear, 

so I can’t ask him to withdraw a remark that is unclear. So the 

debate will continue. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With regards to the 

remarks that the member took exception to, anyone who was 

around in the ’60s, and I presume the member from North 

Battleford was, saw drug abuse rampant on the streets. The era 

and the age of “turn on and tune out” was at hand. Marijuana, 

LSD, promiscuous living was the order of the day. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, although we saw very little of that out here in the 

prairies, we were touched by it. And I’m quire surprised that the 

member would think that I would be singling him out as the 

only person who saw or ever heard about any of those activities. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s part of the sanctimonious attitude 

that we’ve seen by the NDP opposition today. Many of the 

comments that they’ve made have strayed a little off the truth. 

We’re talking about drug and alcohol treatment centres, and 

they got into the area of liquor stores. They did not talk to any 

great extent about drug abuse or substance abuse, but rather 

about liquor stores, advertising, and alcohol . . . and the 

advertising of alcohol, I should say. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you drive down the streets of any town in 

my constituency, there in big bold letters for all the world to see 

is a sign that says, “Liquor Store,” in big flashing letters in 

many cases. And who built those liquor stores with the big 

flashing neon signs? Well it wasn’t the Tory government. It was 

that NDP opposition when they were in power that built them. 

And what could be more attractive, what could be more 

eye-catching than main street advertising of liquor stores, in 

many cases built right on the edge of a major highway. 

 

And the NDP opposition that built them says, oh no, we’re good 

guys; it’s the Tories that advertise alcohol; it’s the Tories that 

advertise alcohol. 

 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1536 

 

Well let’s take a look at another jurisdiction. Let’s look at 

Manitoba for example — NDP Manitoba, as a matter of fact. 

When you’re too drunk to get down to your local liquor store, 

they’ll deliver it for you. They have home delivery in NDP 

Manitoba. Talk about pushing alcohol. Talk about pushing 

alcohol. 

 

The member for Regina Victoria conveniently, conveniently 

neglected to talk about that particular aspect of alcohol 

advertising, and I understand he lived in Manitoba for some 

time when he worked for the NDP government there. He should 

know. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He was behind the whole scheme. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — I don’t think he was behind the whole 

scheme, although he may have had something to do with it. 

 

And we talk about morals, Mr. Speaker. Morals is what we 

were talking about. I listened to members from the opposition 

talk about morals. Well let’s talk about morals then for a while. 

Let’s talk about entrenching gay rights. Let’s talk about laws 

concerning that. Let’s talk about legalization of drugs — 

marijuana. 

 

Members of the NDP party have gone on record as saying, yes 

sir, we should make marijuana legal — soft drugs, I believe, is 

the term they used. Well what is a soft drug? What is a soft 

drug? 

 

They want to legalize prostitution as well, Mr. Speaker. Now I 

don’t know, when we’re talking about morals, what could be 

more immoral than many of those things. And yet the 

opposition stood up today and condemned the government, the 

PC government, for being immoral. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

case of the pot calling the kettle black, if you would. 

 

Let’s talk about the ads. Let’s talk about alcohol advertising. If 

the members who spoke had been watching carefully, they 

would have seen that the ads were directed towards a particular 

brand of either, or any, of all the spirits available. 

 

Beer sales are down; wine sales are level, and hard liquor sales 

are down in the province as well, Mr. Speaker. However, if you 

go brand by brand, there are some brands that are selling better 

than they did in the past, and some brands that are selling at 

much lower levels. 

 

And when you talk about prevaricating upon the truth, as the 

member for Regina Victoria was fond of saying. I think he 

mentioned the word three times — that’s his word for the day, 

prevarication. He neglected to point out that a number of the 

ads, a large percentage of the ads on alcohol, have to be 

awareness ads and have to point out some of the problems 

involved with alcohol abuse. The member chose to ignore that 

part. That’s most interesting when you talk about 

prevarications. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the most interesting comments 

was made by the member who spoke just previous to me. He 

spoke of a comprehensive approach — a comprehensive 

approach, especially in the North. He talked about community 

involvement, which I agree  

with. And then he talked about the problems of unemployment 

and how meaningful employment was necessary. And I tend to 

agree with him. I tend to agree with him. 

 

However, he neglected to tell me how that meaningful 

unemployment was to come about. He kept asking for subsidies 

on this and subsidies on that, but didn’t talk about jobs that 

would sustain themselves, Mr. Speaker. He wants employment 

in the North. Why are the members of his party against uranium 

development, Mr. Speaker? Why do they want to sell the 

uranium mines? Mr. Speaker, that would provide thousands of 

jobs for Northerners. 

 

He neglected to talk about some of the initiatives of this 

government in the area of agriculture in the North — 

agriculture, aquaculture, silviculture. He doesn’t know anything 

of those, Mr. Speaker, or else he chose to ignore them. 

 

Wild rice development — and I’ve spoken in this House before 

about wild rice because I happen to believe it has the 

possibilities to be the Cinderella crop of the North, just as 

canola was the Cinderella crop for the South. And many of the 

members opposite chuckle a bit, but they should take a look at 

some of the production that’s going on. They should look at the 

million dollars that was provided by the provincial and federal 

government to the northern wild rice council for the 

development of that important agricultural crop, which would 

lead directly to the comprehensive approach the member spoke 

of. But he chose to ignore that, Mr. Speaker. I can’t imagine 

why. 

 

If the member took time to go around his constituency, he may 

take a look at some of the development in the gold industry. 

Mining — it’s there. The Star Lake mine is open. The 

development in the mining industry in the North is taking off, 

Mr. Speaker, but the member neglected to talk about that. 

 

Surveying the North — he neglected to talk about that, Mr. 

Speaker. The member should go back home and do a little 

homework and then come back to the House and speak. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you increase the budget to $13.2 million for 

the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, I 

think that’s significant — a 63 per cent increase. The previous 

member who was fond of quoting percentages and numbers — 

well that’s a 63 per cent increase. 

 

The Whitespruce centre at Yorkton is one of a kind, Mr. 

Speaker — the first of its kind in Canada. I think it’s a response 

to a problem, a very significant response to a problem that’s 

among the most important health concerns we have today. 

 

And for us in this Assembly to get down to petty politics, as 

members of the opposition resorted to, when you’re talking 

about the lives of countless young people in this province, I 

think that’s terrible, Mr. Speaker. They talked about quantifying 

the value, quantifying the damage done — the damage done in 

this province. 

 

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1537 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I contend that you cannot put a price-tag on 

it. It may be $1 million a day. It may be $2 million a day. But, 

Mr. Speaker, what’s more important are the people, the people 

themselves. And the Whitespruce centre is an attempt to try to 

help people who have a problem with drug and alcohol abuse. 

And I think rather than condemning this government, 

opposition members should be standing up and applauding it for 

the effort that has been made. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude by saying I will not be 

supporting the amendment, I will be supporting the main 

motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that there is 

nothing so sad as to see a young person whose mind and whose 

life has been messed up by the abuse of a mind-altering 

substance. The most common mind-altering substance are 

alcohol and drugs, and they’re correctly identified by the 

resolution. 

 

But it is a baffling and a frustrating problem to try to understand 

how we in this legislature, or any of the agencies that we create 

or fund, can reach past the surface that we create or fund, can 

reach past the surface of that problem and actually reach the 

minds of the young people concerned, and have them 

understand the nature of the problem and the perils that lie 

behind the alcohol or the drug that they’re partaking in. And 

that is the challenge that I wish to address in my few short 

remarks this afternoon. 

 

I was very, very interested in the program announced by the 

government with respect to drug and alcohol abuse. And I was 

particularly interested in the treatment centre that has been set 

up at Yorkton and which was referred to by a number of 

speakers opposite including the member from that city. And I 

personally support the notion of a treatment centre for those 

cases that have reached the point where treatment has become 

necessary. I caution all members of the House though, that that 

centre, while it is important, is not by itself a major part of a 

solution to the problem of drug and alcohol addiction. 

 

(1630) 

 

It takes young people at a certain point in their addiction and 

sets them on their feet, in a sense. But their stance is shaky and 

their stance is precarious and they’re vulnerable, and they leave 

the treatment centre at some point and return to the community, 

and then we had better have the other programs in place that 

will help those young people continue their recovery which can 

take many, many years. 

 

So you have a lot of space on both sides of the treatment 

program, Mr. Speaker. You have, of course, all of the months 

and years of alcohol and drug abuse that precedes them being 

admitted into the centre, and then the follow-up from that after 

they’re released from the treatment centre itself. It is to those 

areas that we ought also to concern ourself and to apply the 

resources that we have. 

 

And I wish particularly to deal with the programs that  

were included as part of the government program in dealing 

with this problem outside of the treatment centre. It is 

important, as speakers have said, that we consider this a matter 

of education. Actually I think it more correct to say that we 

must consider it as a matter of communication with young 

people. It’s not enough to simply put the subject of alcohol and 

drug abuse on the health curriculum as a unit, and have a health 

teacher walk into a class-room and spend one or two or three 

weeks lecturing the students on the subject of alcohol and drug 

abuse. I mean, I know it’s better than nothing, but it is a far 

distance short of actually reaching the minds of those young 

people and impressing on them the perils that lie before them if 

the use of alcohol and drugs becomes a habit with them. 

 

So it is more than simply a matter of education, although, I 

repeat, that is important. It is a question of actually getting to 

their consciousness, of reaching through and grasping them. 

 

Now an hon. member said that parents are important in this 

process, and of course they are. But that is not a simple answer. 

That is not a simple panacea. It is a responsibility of parents, 

and I acknowledge it and agree with it. 

 

But it is a larger question than that. I think that the challenge 

that faces us as legislators, as parents, as concerned people, is to 

find ways to reach the minds of the children so that they’ll 

understand it — the minds of the young people. I can assure 

everyone, if assurance is needed, that it is a difficult process and 

it’s not happening. For all of the things that we’ve done, for all 

of the well-meaning lectures that are given at our high schools, 

for all of the material that is available, it is simply not getting 

through to the kids. They’re taking their drinks, and they’re 

smoking their substances, and they’re eating their substances, 

and they’re shooting it into their arms with a clear 

understanding of just how terribly dangerous it is. 

 

Now that, of course, is a generalization, and obviously in the 

case of some substances they know that they’re on a very 

slippery slope. But the young man or the young woman who is 

drinking to excess, or trying marijuana, just doesn’t have a clear 

understanding in his or her mind of just how perilous that 

situation is. 

 

I don’t know what the answer is to that, but I do know that it is 

not simply a matter of putting it on the health curriculum. It’s 

not simply a matter of asking the health teachers to give that as 

part of the health course. Nor is it enough to distribute 

pamphlets, or hand them out to the kids, or have them available 

in the school. Something more is required. I hope that the 

government, in designing its programs, will try and find new 

and imaginative ways to actually penetrate into the 

consciousness of the young people. 

 

Perhaps it’s through the use of videos, or television, or some 

kind of new informational technology that we haven’t yet tried, 

but perhaps it’s also by using, to a larger extent that we have 

before, some of the people who have been there — some of the 

AA people, for example, who understand addiction and abuse 

better than anyone who  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1538 

 

merely sees it on a theoretical level, ever can. 

 

These are the people who have experienced it firsthand and who 

know and who are able to describe their experiences in terms 

that other people can understand, and that is true no matter what 

the age level. And I think that it would be an important part of 

this program to encourage Alcoholics Anonymous veterans — 

some of them not so old, Mr. Speaker, some of them quite 

young — to be available as a resource to the schools, to go in 

and actually share their experiences with students and tell them 

on the basis of that experience, just what can happen if alcohol 

and drugs are continued to be used in an abusive way. 

 

Another element of the government program is counselling, and 

I don’t know what flesh the government has placed upon the 

bones of this promise. I can say one thing, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is, counselling as part of the duties of a school counsellor 

who is there primarily as a career and personal counsellor, will 

meet with mixed success. It is an extremely tricky and 

dangerous prospect to counsel an abuser of alcohol and drugs. It 

requires extraordinary sensitivity and an extraordinary amount 

of knowledge of the subject, and it’s not going to work if all 

we’re doing is taking the counsellors in our high schools and 

adding that duty on top of all their others and hope that they’ll 

be able to do it. 

 

Now we’ve seen in my city a number of examples of 

counselling situations that simply haven’t worked; in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, counselling situations which have probably done more 

harm than good. 

 

And again, I don’t purport to be able to stand here and give the 

answer except to say that I think it’s necessary for the schools 

to reach outside of their own staff, outside of their own boards, 

reach into the community to get the assistance of some of the 

people who’ve been there, some of the people who can counsel 

on the basis of a personal, direct knowledge of the kind of 

problems that those kids are going through. And again, I have 

no better suggestion to make than the very excellent people at 

Alcoholics Anonymous, who would be pleased, I know, to be 

able to help in this way. 

 

One of the outstanding characteristics of a serious Alcoholics 

Anonymous member is to be prepared to go out at any time, at 

any hour of the day or night to assist a person who is having an 

alcohol problem. So there are two situations, in the education 

field and in the counselling field, where I suggest the use be 

made of resources which are in the community and are available 

on a volunteer basis in order to reach past the resistance that 

young people have to suggestions from older people and to 

reach into their minds and communicate with them with respect 

to this very important problem. 

 

Now we’ve been talking again and again about liquor 

advertising in this Assembly this afternoon, and we’ve been 

talking about it in many different terms. I can stand here, Mr. 

Speaker, and say that . . . I know I speak for many members in 

this House not only on this side but on the other side of the 

Chamber, in expressing my concern about the advertising that’s 

taking place on our television in Saskatchewan today. 

 

This is not, I think, what the government intended when it made 

liquor advertising legal in Saskatchewan. My recollection of the 

original proposals being put forward by the government was 

that liquor advertising would only take place at times of the day 

where young impressionable children were not likely to be 

watching television. My impression was that this was to take 

place after they went to bed at night. And that’s not happening. 

 

The people on this side of the House who referred to a popular 

young people’s program, Live It Up, last night, were not 

kidding. I mean, it actually aired, Mr. Speaker, with beer 

advertising as the sponsor. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Six times. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — And we’re told that during the duration of 

that program six different commercials were played. Well that 

was not the intention of the government, as I understood it, 

when that program was announced. 

 

The second part of that original program that has not worked is 

the counterbalancing advertising that was to take place. It is not 

counterbalancing, Mr. Speaker. I haven’t logged it but it seems 

to me, on the basis of my watching of television, which I admit 

is not extensive, that liquor advertising wins by a large margin 

over the anti-advertising. In other words, the products are 

pushed through advertising a great deal more than people are 

cautioned about the use of alcohol. 

 

And the other point is that the advertising is not balanced in 

terms of quality. The quality ads of the beer companies are 

winning that battle hands down also, Mr. Speaker. Those ads 

are good ads, are good in the sense of selling a product. I mean, 

they really make a person thirsty. And the anti-ads, the ads that 

are intended to caution against alcohol use, are losing. They’re 

not up to the same standard, and they’re not as persuasive. 

 

So in those two important aspects, I think that the government’s 

original intentions with respect to liquor advertising have not 

been lived up to. And at least the government should ensure that 

those original policies are being observed. 

 

Now I think, and a lot of members on this side of the House 

think, that the experiment in liquor advertising in Saskatchewan 

was a failure and it ought to be reduced, and I know I speak for 

some members on that side of the House when I say that. But at 

the very least, the cabinet, or whoever it is that’s continuing the 

policy of liquor advertising, should insure that the original 

policy is adhered to so that kids aren’t watching what a great 

idea it is to have a certain kind of beer after you’ve moved a 

piano; or a great kind of beer after you’ve had a hockey game; 

or a great kind of a beer if you want to socialize with a lot of 

pretty women and nice-looking young men. These are surely 

not the way in which the government saw liquor advertising 

when it announced the policy. 

 

And the member for Kelvington is quite wrong, Mr. Speaker — 

quite wrong if he thinks that what’s at stake here is a question 

of brand. This is not a battle between one company and another 

for beer customers. I mean it is  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1539 

 

in a sense, but in the sense I’m concerned with, is that it’s 

teaching our young people that it’s okay to have a beer; that’s 

it’s a good thing to have a beer; it’s the kind of thing you do 

after you have a good game of hockey; or the kind of a thing 

that you do after you’ve helped a buddy move some furniture; 

or if you want to have a good time with a bunch of 

good-looking girls or good-looking boys, that’s the thing to do 

— to have a beer. Well, surely this is not the message that we 

want to imprint on the minds of our young people. 

 

If it’s a matter of brand selection, run it at 10:30 at night. Aim it 

hard at the beer-drinking audience, and that’s bad enough, Mr. 

Speaker, but at least it’s better than this prime time viewing at 7 

o’clock in the evening with heaven only knows how many 

young, young people watching it and growing up with the 

impression that this kind of life-style is okay. That’s not what 

we want to do. 

 

(1645) 

 

Now, I would have preferred, and I’ve tried myself, not to 

debate this matter on a political basis because I don’t think it’s a 

political question, and I don’t think the mover of this motion 

considered it to be a political question. We regard it to be a 

question of common concern to all people in Saskatchewan, and 

that’s the base on which I choose to put it. There are elements 

of the government’s program that I think are constructive and 

worthy of support — any step in the direction of helping people 

with alcohol and drug problems is a good step, and I will 

support it. It goes beyond politics, and the criticism that I make, 

I try to make in a constructive, positive sort of way. 

 

This is a grievous social ill, one of the worst, Mr. Speaker, 

because it affects not only the mature elements of our society, 

but it affects our youth and affects it in drastic ways. It blights 

careers. It blights the prospects of people who otherwise would 

have gotten a good education, a good, sound accumulation of 

life skills, and have gone on to have a happy and successful life. 

And alcohol and drugs has the ability to nip that development in 

the bud and leave a person permanently incapacitated with 

respect to both their educational qualifications and their ability 

to cope with the life that they’re going to be facing over years 

and years and years. 

 

We must do all we can. My theory that I’ve tried to describe in 

this House is that it is a problem of communication. It can’t be 

addressed in the normal, rather bureaucratic classroom setting. 

It’s not sufficient to put it on the curriculum of the school. It’s 

not sufficient to give counsellors and teachers a half-day or 

one-day seminar in alcohol and expect them to go out there and 

be able to deal realistically with these problem. It’s going to be 

necessary to reach into the community and draw on other 

volunteer resources in the community to come in and actually 

reach the minds of those kids and be able to persuade them, to 

make them understand the perils that exist. In that way, I think 

real progress can be made. 

 

I’ll be supporting the amendment, Mr. speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I commend the member from  

Fairview, Saskatoon Fairview, for his attempt to be impartial, 

and his intelligent remarks regarding some of the issues that 

related to drug and alcohol abuse. And I compliment him for 

that. However, the previous two speakers, I would like to make 

some comment on regarding the remarks that they made. 

 

For instance, it’s a known fact in advertising, gentlemen and 

ladies, that the reason for advertising liquor and alcohol, or 

cigarettes, or whatever, is strictly for brand identification. You 

do not sell more beer by advertising beer. Beer drinks switch 

from brand to brand. The whole purpose, and whether you’re 

buying a Buick — when you see a Buick advertising on 

television, we’re trying to get the people driving Chryslers to 

switch over to Buick — that’s the whole purpose of brand; it’s 

brand identification. 

 

So the liquor advertising is not in any respect responsible for 

the increase in alcohol in some parts of the country. However, 

I’d like to point out that in Saskatchewan there has been a 

decrease in the consumption of alcohol in this province. The 

peak periods of alcohol consumption in the province were 1976, 

1977 during the heyday of the previous government. 

 

And when I’m speaking of the former government, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to point out in 1972, I believe it was, the Faris 

report — my date may not be correct, but it was the Faris report 

on alcohol — and he stated at that time that the only way to 

control alcohol abuse was to raise prices. That’s the conclusion 

that he came to. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it has been brought to my attention that not 

too many years ago, not too long ago, the former member from 

Shaunavon was a member of the government of the opposite 

side until this last election, advertised for one of his family 

outings that children should come along with their parents, and 

alcohol and beer would be available at that particular function. 

 

And I am amazed at the sanctimonious attitude of the members 

opposite when related to drug and alcohol abuse. The member 

from Fairview was fair in his comments and made some sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the majority of advertising — liquor advertising 

— is on American television. And during the time when this . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. It seems that 

there is more than one speech going on at this time. Let’s listen 

to the member from Regina Wascana. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Another brief historical fact, Mr. Speaker, 

related to the previous government. Back in 1972 they reduced 

the drinking age to 18, which shows their concern for the youth 

of the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when alcohol advertising was allowed on 

television in this province, certain regulations were set down. 

These regulations have been respected and used in other 

provinces across the country. 

 

For instance, the ads were not to be aired during young people’s 

prime viewing time. And although that is not a  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1540 

 

stipulation for many television stations, it is a policy that they 

have. They show liquor advertising, for the most part, during 

sporting events on a Saturday afternoon. They run some 

between the hours of 5:30 and 7 o’clock, which is news time, 

for the most part, all across North America, and not that many 

children of the age that we’re trying to think about would be 

watching television at that time. No liquor advertising is used 

during children’s hours. The ads are not associated with 

life-style messages, celebrities, minors, or activities which are 

illegal. 

 

In relation to the use of celebrities, Mr. Speaker, the member 

mentioned that there is a shortage of counter-type ads on 

television. Well I think the rule is something like 15 per cent. 

But you can’t tell me, and no one can tell me, that the use of 

Reuben Mayes as a celebrity, as a role model for the young 

people of this province, can have anything but a positive effect 

on young people of this province. And that’s been on now for 

over a year, and it’s a very effective campaign. 

 

The number and length of ads is controlled during any hour 

period. No more than two 30-second ads may be used during 

any particular time, and there are a number of regulations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Let’s talk about educational initiatives by this government, Mr. 

Speaker. The Saskatchewan education system plays a major 

role in providing opportunities for students, for teachers, 

administrators, and trustees to participate in the prevention of 

adolescent alcohol and drug abuse. 

 

The Department of Education will provide assistance to schools 

and communities in the following areas: consultation and 

co-ordination of efforts on alcohol and drug-related issues 

through conferences and advisory committees; students in 

community involvement and developing and carrying out 

projects that promote healthy life-styles, including student 

resource materials; increased opportunities for teacher 

in-service training in alcohol and drug education, including 

promoting the use of resources such as the Lion’s Quest 

program; the development of policy guide-lines in consultation 

with key educational organizations and other agencies to 

address today’s problems of drug and alcohol abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talked a great deal about the responsibility or 

the failure of governments to do certain things. I’d like to talk 

for a moment about something that I feel very strongly about, 

and that is the role of the parent in regards to their own 

children’s behaviour. We have a family of four daughters. They 

have gone through that age when I’m sure they experimented 

with the various drugs and alcohol that were available. 

Fortunately for us, they’ve all come through it in good form and 

have a very strong feeling about drug and alcohol abuse. 

 

Members of my family, on various sides of the family, have 

been involved in the AA program, a program that I subscribe to 

very strongly. And I again commend the member from 

Saskatoon for his mention of AA. And there is a follow-up 

program, by the way; it’s a program called Alateen. So I would 

assume that when our young adolescents are returned from the 

Whitespruce program in Yorkton that they will be encouraged, 

and indeed  

helped, to join such programs as Alateen, which is a program 

originated by Alcoholics Anonymous, directly designed for the 

young people, and it’s an excellent program. 

 

In addition, the spouses of alcoholics have an opportunity to go 

to Al-Anon, which is for men and women whose spouses have 

alcoholic problems. And they’re very successful programs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I wanted to talk for a minute about the treatment initiatives put 

on by this government. An in-patient adolescent alcohol and 

drug treatment facility will be located at Whitespruce. We hope 

it will open this fall — October 1 is the date. And that will be, 

Mr. Speaker, the first adolescent drug and alcohol abuse centre 

for adolescents in the country. 

 

Up until now most of our young people have been going down 

to Heartview down in Mandan, Montana, at great expense to the 

province, but a very successful program. I know a number of 

youngsters who have gone down there, and it’s worked out very 

well. And we would hope that our adolescent program will 

attract youngsters — other governments around the country to 

send their young people to this province to the Yorkton 

Whitespruce adolescent treatment centre. It’s a first of it’s kind. 

It’s designed to address the needs of youth with chemical and 

dependency problems; provides assessment services, individual 

and family counselling, recreational and occupational therapy, 

and comprehensive consultation services. 

 

I speak with some authority when I speak of young people who 

have gone through an adolescent treatment centre. Fortunately, 

none of our daughters have gone through that exercise, but I’ve 

seen a number of youngsters who have been in that program. 

It’s an excellent program. The program will last anywhere from 

28 days to 40 days, depending on how serious the program is. 

Many of these youngsters are then brought out into the 

community, as the member from Saskatoon mentioned. Then 

they go to Alateen, as I mentioned, just for young people. 

 

It’s a program that’s working extremely well. And the program 

that we’re going to develop in Whitespruce, in Yorkton, is 

developed after the program that’s worked so well in the 

Heartview, in the Mandan area, at the Heartview treatment 

centre. Many of the counsellors who were coming from . . . who 

will been working in Yorkton, have been trained through the 

Heartview centre. And it’s recognized around the world, and 

certainly in North America, as one of the finest treatment 

centres from which we can acquire qualified people — it’s very 

important to have qualified people. And so that’s . . . The 

Whitespruce program, we think, will be very successful. 

 

I had an opportunity some months ago to meet the chairman of 

the Alberta drug and alcohol committee. He spoke very strongly 

and very positively about the need for the alcohol and drug 

treatment centre in Yorkton, and how important it will be to 

young people throughout Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and 

perhaps even British Columbia. 

 

I say again though, Mr. Speaker, that I think that the  

  



 

August 4, 1987 

1541 

 

parents of our province have, themselves, a large responsibility 

in teaching the youngsters the pitfalls and the dangers of drug 

and alcohol abuse, by themselves demonstrating to the children 

some control over their use of alcohol and drugs. 

 

Strong programs, of course, exist throughout the schools. We 

certainly cannot expect, nor I would think any of the members 

across the way would expect us, the government, to accept all 

the responsibilities for teaching everyone the pitfalls of drug 

and alcohol abuse. Nor should we expect our school system to 

accept that responsibility totally; they have a big enough role to 

play as it is. 

 

So I think that the parents of this province must realize that they 

have at their . . . a large, large responsibility in taking control of 

their children’s lives, and through their own use of alcohol and 

drugs and whatever it may be, show some restraint in . . . so the 

children can get a good idea of how to handle their own lives. 

 

So I say again that the people of this province have that 

responsibility, and the province of Saskatchewan, the 

government, can only respond to the needs of those people. And 

we will be doing so, Mr. Speaker, by the development of the 

Whitespruce centre in Yorkton, and of course through the 

initiatives that we will continue to place in the school system, 

and of course by those ads that we see on television all the time, 

the Reuben Mayes type ads that are so effective in teaching our 

young people that the role models of the world should be those 

who are achieving something, whether it be educational, 

whether it be musical, or whether it be in the sports field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken a great deal on the Whitespruce issue. 

I would like to mention again that it’s a four-point plan that this 

government has designed: the educational, that is through the 

teaching the public at large; the preventative, the school system 

that I’ve spoke about, and other community services that are 

available from this government through the Social Services 

department; the treatment centre in Yorkton, which will soon 

become the famous Whitespruce Centre throughout Canada; 

and post-treatment. And as the member from Saskatoon 

mentioned, such programs as Alcoholics Anonymous, Alateen, 

and again, Al-Anon — all very strong programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal more to say on this subject; 

however, I would like, at this time, beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


