













































September 29, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 29, 1987 

 

2953 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It 

gives me pleasure to introduce the officials that will be assisting 

me tonight in the estimates of our department. Seated directly 

behind me, Mr. Chairman, is Don Shalley, who is the acting 

executive director of tourism within our department; seated 

beside Don is Harvey Murchison, who is the director of 

administration; and seated to my right is Walter Keyes, the 

secretary of the northern affairs secretariat. Joining me in the 

House now, seated beside me, is my acting deputy minister, 

Ken McNabb. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin 

my questioning tonight I’d like to make a few remarks, if I 

might. I would like to talk a little bit, if I could, about the small 

business department and tourism as well. 

 

It appears to me that, Mr. Chairman, this government has 

emphasized its commitment to a comprehensive and stable 

long-range plan for Saskatchewan’s economic development. 

We’re all aware of the open-for-business rhetoric and the 

Partnership for Progress and Saskatchewan Builds. We’ve 

heard all of that. But I would like to suggest in reality, we’ve 

seen a wide assortment of job creation and economic 

development programs initiated at the politically appropriate 

moment and always abandoned it not long thereafter — not 

necessarily when needed, but when politically appropriate. And 

this government has proven itself to be incapable of developing 

or sustaining a co-ordinated economic plan or strategy. And I 

would like to say tonight, Mr. Chairman, that business wants 

action, not slogans. 

 

In the hope of diverting attention away from the failure of this 

government in the promotion of small business growth, it’s now 

turning to the tourist sector. Economic diversification hopes are 

now almost exclusively pegged on this sector alone, and the 

small business community is left to fend for itself in tough 

economic times. 

 

This government has clearly displayed that it has no game plan 

but is reacting to the terror of its $3.5 billion deficit, a deficit 

that’s been amassed since 1982. A government that inherited a 

surplus, turned it into a massive deficit, and I say now they 

react in terror. 

 

Literally all of the business grant programs have been 

eliminated in this past budget. The industrial incentives 

program introduced last June with $17 million in incentives that 

was intended for small business to create jobs and attract 

investment to the province, was cancelled this spring. And 

apparently, through cancelling that grant, the government must 

be satisfied with the present level of economic growth in the 

small business  

sector. Well I say, Mr. Chairman, that we on this side of the 

House surely are not. 

 

Similarly, the small business interest abatement program, which 

was promised in the ‘82 election campaign, then delayed for 

two years, and finally implemented in May of ‘85, was also 

cancelled this spring. The entrepreneurial training program 

established last spring to meet the individual needs of people 

planning to start their own business, once again this spring was 

eliminated. 

 

The list goes on, Mr. Chairman. Also eliminated in this year’s 

budget were the community economic development program, 

the Saskatchewan marketing benefits, venture capital tax credit 

program, northern business development and grants for 

northern economic development, grants for general business 

and tourism development, the Main Street program, industrial 

and technical assistance — all were scrapped. 

 

The government claims to have reviewed all of these programs 

and come to appreciate the needs to simplify and streamline our 

operations. Simplifying and streamlining has really meant 

abandoning small business. All of the various programs 

designed to assist economic development and diversification 

have been consolidated into a single fund — the economic 

diversification and investment fund, a fund of $22 million. An 

overall loss in funding when compared to all of the previously 

existing programs that the fund has incorporated. 

 

Now one might think that in the interest of stability and equal 

access and the reduction of bureaucratic red tape, that the 

government wouldn’t constantly be reorganizing support 

programs to small business. We can’t expect stable 

programming from this government. Their record indicates that 

we can’t expect it. It’s just not going to be there. The 

reorganization taken to create the Department of Tourism, 

Small Business and Co-operatives has created a nightmare, a 

nightmare of bureaucrats and programs for the business 

community. Reorganization is how this government makes it 

look as though it’s doing something, when in fact it isn’t. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think the most important thing to note, 

however, is that we are five months into the current fiscal y ear 

and there are as yet no program guide-lines for the economic 

diversification and investment fund. The fund which has taken 

the place of all of the ones that I mentioned that were there to 

support small business — this fund — five months into the 

fiscal year and nobody knows what it’s about. Business leaders 

in this province had initially adopted a wait and see attitude 

about the new fund, but now they are wondering about its 

priorities — research and development, trade and tourism — 

specific industrial priorities, and they are also wondering about 

the entrepreneur institute promised. But without a shred of 

detail in this year’s budget address, we hear about the programs; 

five months later we still wait. 

 

It says to me that perhaps the minister doesn’t have a 

commitment to small business in this province. If he had a 

commitment, why then would that program not have been 

outlined during the budget, or shortly thereafter, so  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2954 

 

the business community knew what to expect. We find on this 

side of the House that that’s an appalling situation, and I say we 

commend small business for their patience. 

 

We’re all clear and, I think, we’re all sure that the two main 

strengths in the Saskatchewan economy are agriculture and 

small business. Saskatchewan small business is dynamic, 

creative, and innovative. It provides the goods and services for 

our people in all communities and particularly in the small rural 

communities. It provides jobs and job opportunities. In fact, Mr. 

Chairman, if each of the 30,000 or so small businesses in 

Saskatchewan could create just one new job, the serious 

unemployment problem that we face in this province could be 

very much reduced. 

 

But all across Saskatchewan small business under this 

government is experiencing difficulties in our cities, in our 

towns, and our smaller communities. Many of those small 

business people right now, whether they be in urban or in rural 

Saskatchewan, are having to make some very tough decisions. 

They’re having to look at what’s happened to their businesses 

over the months, the past months and the past year since this 

government’s been in power. And they’re having to make 

decisions that affect people’s lives, Mr. Chairman. Those 

decisions I speak of are whether or not they’re able to keep 

those people under their employ. 

 

Mr. Chairman, by any reasonable and objective economic 

indicator, we see that the Devine government’s economic 

performance has been bad for small business. It’s not just a 

question of ideology; it’s a question of performance. Small 

businesses much more interested in the reality of their own 

bottom line than in the rhetoric of open for business. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, for business the bottom line is that 

business growth in Saskatchewan has declined. Budget cuts and 

new taxes and the deficit have taken the edge off of spending 

and business growth in 1987. And a member opposite, I didn’t 

hear which one, was hollering, wrong. Well I ask you how 

much time you spend out there asking small business whether 

their gross has been increasing. You wouldn’t hear that kind of 

a statement from someone who understood what was happening 

out there because the reality is, is that business growth just isn’t 

there. 

 

Decreases in government programs have caused 

unemployments — cuts in discretionary spending and a 

downturn in retail sales. And if you don’t believe that, you go 

out there and you talk them and look at the small little 

businesses that have closed. Walk down any street in Saskatoon 

or Regina or Moose Jaw or Prince Albert. Look at the numbers 

of bankruptcies and the number of businesses that have closed. 

That’s the indicators you should be looking at. But not you 

guys, open for business, we’re building, we’re growing, we’re 

diversifying. But while you guys are doing your hype, 

businesses are going bankrupt. 

 

Mr. Chairman, since this government took office, the 

unemployment in Saskatchewan’s doubled from an average of 

21,081 to an average of 38,000 or more in ’87. How do those 

people spend? People on unemployment insurance don’t spend 

lavishly. The bankruptcy rate in  

Saskatchewan is sky-rocket to unprecedented levels, and we’ve 

had four consecutive years in which business failures have 

topped the 300 mark. We’ve got the second highest bankruptcy 

rate in Canada, and I say, Mr. Chairman, this government 

should be ashamed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — In both ’85 and in ’86, Saskatchewan had 

record low levels of new housing starts — the lowest in a dozen 

years, and that hurts small business. In fact ’86, Saskatchewan 

had the fourth lowest rate of increase in new housing starts in 

Canada. Is that a record to be proud of? I say not. 

 

Investment capital, expenditures show little improvement, and 

recent forecasts indicate that capital spending by large 

corporations will decline over 20 per cent in 1987. 

Saskatchewan is expected to have the biggest decrease of any 

province, and I say that this illustrates a less than enthusiastic 

response to pour investment dollars into this province. 

Saskatchewan’s annual percentage increase in gross domestic 

product has been consistently lower than the annual rate. 

Saskatchewan’s growth rate has been less than the rate in the 

majority of the province. From 1982 to ‘85 the Atlantic 

provinces, Quebec, Ontario, and Manitoba, all out performed 

Saskatchewan’s economy in terms of gross domestic product 

and growth. 

 

And I say that the bottom line is that while the PC government 

managed to find large sums of money for large corporations and 

their political friends, Saskatchewan’s small business are 

abandoned to face tough economic times. And not only has this 

government abandoned small-business grant programs, it totally 

ignores the growing tax burden of small business and the real 

concerns that small business has. It ignores the whole issue of 

municipal tax, business tax, or of how it should be applied to 

avoid inequities. 

 

Reduced provincial funding causes increases in municipal 

taxes. The Minister of Finance says that it’s a problem at the 

municipal level. But this government used public funds . . . if 

they used public funds more efficiently, increased municipal 

taxes wouldn’t be necessary. 

 

(1915) 

 

And the 7-cent-a-litre gas tax they introduced in this budget, I 

want to say that the Saskatchewan business community is not 

very happy. I tell you, when I talk to truckers who are spending 

$28 a trip twice a week and they’re doing that 104 weeks out of 

the year, they’re not happy with you. And when I talk to 

salesmen who make their living in their vehicles, who aren’t 

exempt from that 7-cent-a-litre gas tax, they’re not happy. I say 

that these are decisions by a PC government that have been 

directly harmful to small business, both in urban and rural 

areas. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this government has also scrapped smaller plans 

— the cancellation of many small business collection agents for 

Sask Power who provided service to the people of the province 

and a little bit of revenue to themselves by bringing people to 

their stores; dramatic increases in world car dealers fees; 

auction company  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2955 

 

license rates have been tripled. I say these are actions of a 

government that cares little about small businesses, and small 

business is losing confidence in you. 

 

I’d like to turn to tourism, and I’d want to suggest that, not only 

do I have major criticisms and questions about the small aspect 

in this department, but I’ve got some questions and concerns 

about the new tourism initiatives that this government has 

taken. 

 

The minister espouses a lot of hot air, but he’s never revealed 

the priorities or specifics of this year’s budget for tourism. We 

have yet to see any of the details of the government’s proposals 

made in October of ’86. I’d like to know what they’re talking 

about in terms of the Saskatchewan tourism and hospitality 

institute, and we’ll be asking the minister about theirs. I’d like 

to know where it is. The institute was to be in place by this fall, 

we understood. Well, Mr. Minister, this fall has come, and 

many of our young people have been waiting for training 

opportunities in the hospitality industry in this academic year. 

Symbolic initiatives, I say, not real initiatives. 

 

But I want to suggest as well that I feel that they feel tourism to 

be their new lift raft. Open for business clearly didn’t work, so 

now they switch to tourism. I recall during the last election 

campaign the government referring often to the 

Canada-Saskatchewan tourism agreement as though it was a 

new program or entirely new provincial money. But what’s the 

reality, Mr. Chairman? When the tourism subsidy agreement to 

provide $30 million over five years was signed with the federal 

government in December of ’84, the industry had high hopes, 

but it, too, has been mismanaged. 

 

A lack of spending on the part of the province is preventing the 

industry from receiving all potential funding. I say that’s a 

shame in a province and from a government that wants to hang 

its hat on tourism. And similarly, many people in the tourist 

industry believe that if the agreement wants private enterprise to 

be responsible for promoting, marketing the province, then the 

program must be properly funded. And I say that this is 

especially important if tourism is to become the great revenue 

producers. 

 

One million dollars, Mr. Chairman, was to be made available 

for industry support under the federal-provincial tourism 

agreement of 1984. The funding hasn’t been used to develop 

Saskatchewan’s tourist industry until now. TISASK, the 

Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan, with limited 

funding, has received for tourism promotion and the operation 

of visitor information centres, makes it look as though the 

government is going to create a great deal of development and 

work towards developing tourism potential in the province, but 

I say in reality, the government has been remiss and is not doing 

an adequate job, not in comparison with other provinces once 

again. Once again, an example of inadequate and incompetent 

management. 

 

In reality, Mr. Chairman, this government has so badly 

managed the public finances that it is now in the process of 

abandoning the operation of provincial camp grounds. It is 

tendering — and given their track record, I would say,  

probably unfairly — 26 provincial camp grounds and asking 

eight other local communities to take them over. This 

government is asking the same municipalities, which will be 

getting less in government funding this year, to add on the cost 

of running camp grounds and recreational sites, passing those 

taxes directly on to their taxpayers. I say that this government 

has not only failed in its tourism initiatives and its management 

of existing tourism facilities, but it’s adopted contradictory 

policies which prevent growth in the tourism industry. 

 

And the PC gas tax has helped to increase the price differential 

between the U.S. and the Canadian gasoline. And I say that this 

has got a negative impact on the economy generally, but I say 

that it’s got a big impact on tourism. This government has 

claimed to make a substantial financial commitment to the 

tourism industry on one hand, and on the other hand, levies a 

tax which is going to keep people out of the province. 

Eighty-five per cent of tourism travel in North America is done 

by automobile, and surely this government can appreciate the 

harm done to the industry by the unfair gas tax. They’ve shown 

incompetence and contradiction. 

 

The underfunding and deteriorating highway system in this 

province is just another example of contradictory policy which 

hurts the development of a more viable tourism industry. When 

the rate increase at our provincial parks and recreational sites 

are added to the gas differential, our province becomes a far less 

attractive tourist destination. 

 

I say, Mr. Chairman, that it’s not surprising that tourism 

industry statistics are beginning to show a decline in the number 

of tourists visiting this province. The number of visitors 

checking in at Saskatchewan’s tourist information centres 

decreased by 20 per cent this year. And I say that those aren’t 

good signs. I say that those are signs of a government that has 

embarked upon a new Messiah, embarked upon this new 

Messiah, setting up rules that won’t make that industry flourish. 

 

I think when we look back on this year and these debates, we’re 

going to see in a couple of years that their initiatives haven’t 

worked. I suggest to you the failure will be as dismal as what 

the open-for-business philosophy was. And I would say to you 

that the small-business people involved in the tourist industry 

will feel no more favourable to you than those who are involved 

in the retail industry, who have had a look at your kind of 

government. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to turn to a few questions, if I may, and I 

mentioned before in my opening remarks that it seemed that 

every one of your business initiatives in terms of programs were 

short-lived. And I indicated I felt they were a nightmare of 

bureaucracy and the kinds of things and the kind of 

requirements weren’t what business were looking for. And I 

would also say that they were poorly and unfairly administered 

and that they were based on wrong priorities and improperly 

targeted. A big business bonanza but nothing for small business. 

And I want to say that these facts are widely agreed to and 

becoming more widely agreed to by the business community. 

 

Mr. Minister, if I might . . . and if I can just take a moment  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2956 

 

to get my papers in order, I’d like to ask you about business 

development grants and tourism development grants, and I’d 

like to know if the minister might explain to me how these 

grants will operate. I’d like to know who they will be targeted 

toward and when we can expect some details. And I’d also, as 

well, Mr. Minister, like to ask about who has been consulted in 

terms of the structure of these grants. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I feel it only right 

to, at the outset, correct some of the misinformation and some 

of the incorrect statements that the member opposite indicated. 

 

He started out talking about small business. I want to tell you, 

Mr. Chairman, the background of the development of the 

department of which I have the honour of heading at this time, 

the Department of Small Business, Tourism and Co-operatives, 

along with the northern secretariat. 

 

In 1983 my predecessors went out to the business community of 

Saskatchewan, who had not had a very conducive attitude 

towards it under the previous government, and asked them what 

are the major problems facing small business in this province 

today. Basically there were three things, Mr. chairman, that was 

brought to their attention. Number one, they said: we need 

information; we need information of how to access government 

work, for example. We need information on how to have the 

best types of accounting procedures, the best types of support, 

where we can find opportunities for business, where we can 

find opportunities to expand. Because as you know as I do, Mr. 

Chairman, coming from a rural constituency, not all of those 

things are at the beck and call of each individual out there who 

may be interested in starting or improving a business that he 

has. 

 

So based on that, we saw the necessity to institute business 

resource centres, and I can stand in this House today and 

announce to you, and I’m very proud to do this, that we have 

some excellent business resource centres across this province 

— 12 of them. Street-front resource centres where men and 

women from all walks of life can walk in to very competent and 

capable people and sit down with them and analyse their 

businesses as they’re functioning now or ask them for help and 

direction in how they can start new businesses and where the 

opportunities are. We have these across the major parts of the 

province, and I can say that we have request after request after 

request. I believe something — I’m going from memory now — 

around 34,000 requests in the last year or the last two years. So 

I want to say to you that there was one of the things, a need that 

existed in this province, obvious need that this government and 

this department are now filling. 

 

There was a second question that was brought to the people 

who went out there to ask what are the needs of business in the 

province of Saskatchewan today, and that was in 1983. And 

they said we need financing; we know that is always a need of 

business and especially starting business. I guess if I have 

learned anything in this portfolio in the last while, it is that that 

first year and a half or so of operation is crucial to any business. 

 

And then we have seen previously, time after time, where  

people have had fairly good ideas but did not have that 

financing to get them over that initial hump. So we though, how 

can we address this? And some of my predecessors who had 

this portfolio said, yes there is a way. Let’s form a venture 

capital corporation; let’s allow other people in Saskatchewan 

who have some money and would like to see that money 

funnelled into small businesses in to help these young 

entrepreneurs and people who want to start businesses. So let’s 

look at a vehicle by which we can address this. 

 

And that gave growth to the venture capital corporation — the 

venture capital corporation of which we have about 113 of them 

registered today in the province of Saskatchewan; in which we 

have a large number, a large amount of dollars that have come 

together to allow these people who needed that capital to give 

them the opportunity to get that financing that’s so necessary if 

your business is going to survive. And also with these, the 

people who invest that money get a tax break, so that they will 

put their money into helping Saskatchewan grow and develop. 

 

(1930) 

 

And thirdly, the people said if there was anything that really 

was hampering small business and was frustrating small 

business, it was the red tape of which they had to go through. 

Mr. Chairman, I know I don’t have to tell you and members on 

this side of the House that that was one of the things that the 11 

years of the Blakeney government were known for; not to give 

the helping hand, not to make it easy, not to put the financing 

there, but to put in a myriad, a myriad of useless regulations. 

 

Since taking over the regulatory reform, our department in 

co-operation, in co-operation with the private sector, have at 

this time taken around 1,500 regulations off the books of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I can tell you that that 

regulatory reform is ongoing between members of the 

department and members of the private sector. 

 

But that isn’t all, that isn’t all. Another aspect that we saw and 

an opportunity and an avenue in which business could develop 

in this province was to have a program that would allow 

Saskatchewan people to supply the needs of Saskatchewan 

business and industry. It started, I remember, in I think it was in 

1982, when one of colleagues was the minister in charge of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation is a large corporation by 

anybody’s standards, consumes an awful lot of consumable 

products. This minister looked at it as he inherited it from the 

previous government, and he was appalled to see the number of 

things that were purchased outside of this province for Sask 

Power that could be made and produced here, that could start 

new businesses and start new industries right here in 

Saskatchewan. And that was the birth of the Buy Saskatchewan 

program. 

 

Today we have a very active Buy Saskatchewan program that is 

designed to help the small businesses of this province source 

right here in Saskatchewan the things that we should be 

producing here, the things that will help our businesses have 

greater employment of our  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2957 

 

people and produce those needed commodities for our Crown 

corporations and for other businesses right here in the province 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, those are some of the things 

that we have done in the field of small business. 

 

I listened with interest to the critic give his introductory speech, 

and he mentioned about tourism, and I will branch into tourism 

for a moment. And he picked a few statistics, and he says, entry 

into the province is down. He talked about tourism, about some 

small parks, some areas in Saskatchewan, the communities have 

taken over operation. And you know, I sat and I listened to him, 

and with all due respect to the member opposite, that indicated 

to me exactly, exactly where he party’s view of tourism is. 

 

They don’t understand the magnitude of tourism and what 

tourism means to this province and the people of this province. 

You can talk to any statisticians across North America who will 

tell you that one of the fastest growing elements in the 

economic activities of any state or province is that of tourism. 

And that is true of Saskatchewan. Tourism is the wave of the 

future, and that tourism is much bigger than some park and 

some point of entry. 

 

I didn’t hear him mention the largest tourism attraction in the 

province of Saskatchewan that has grown up over the last few 

years, in the Big Valley Jamboree. I didn’t hear him mention 

about Folk Fest and Mosaic, rated in the top 100 by the 

American coach drivers — top 100 attractions to see, right here 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I didn’t hear him give the slightest mention about our world 

famous Western Canada Agribition, the greatest show of its 

type in this country. I didn’t hear him mention about the Farm 

Progress Show. I didn’t hear him mention about the new 

convention centre that’s being built in this city of Regina. 

 

I didn’t hear him mention about the all-season resort 

complexes, four-season resort complexes that are being built 

around this province. The Western Development Museums. The 

private enterprises like Gopherville, out on the west side and the 

east side of our province, where one man with a vision and a 

dream and a family built a first-class and world-class type of 

attraction. 

 

That’s what tourism is. That’s what we believe in and those are 

the things that this government will try and foster and try and 

develop. 

 

So when I hear the member opposite talk about some roadside 

park and talk about perhaps one point of entry into the province 

of Saskatchewan, and the one he probably picked was Fleming. 

And yes, the entries into Fleming are down this year because, 

Mr. Chairman, Fleming is the point of entry on the east side of 

our province, and as we all know, people that cross the 

Trans-Canada Highway where I live, know very well that last 

year there was a large number of people came right through the 

port at Fleming, that eastern entrance into our province on their 

way to Expo. So that traffic isn’t there this year, and that’s 

understandable. So therefore the number of people coming in at 

Fleming, that number  

is down. 

 

But there are some other interesting statistics which I would 

like to put forward just to indicate that the member opposite 

was attempting . . . and I hope he wasn’t trying to purposely 

mislead; I think it’s more from misinformation. He has a speech 

prepared by the research department, and from what I know of 

their research department, I wouldn’t put an awful lot of faith in 

them. So I don’t want to be too hard on the member. He was 

providing and reading what was written for him, and that’s fine 

and dandy. 

 

But I have a few other facts which I would like to give you, and 

this is for how is tourism doing in 1987 — that’s this year. U.S. 

residents entering Saskatchewan by automobile for one or more 

nights’ stay from U.S. — up 7.7 per cent. Park statistics, 

January till June, vehicles entering provincial parks — up 11 

per cent. Visits to provincial national historic parks — up 3 per 

cent. Visitation to the Western Development Museums, January 

to June — up 2.8 per cent. 

 

Attendance at annual events, Regina Exhibition — 9.2 per cent 

up. Western Canada Farm Progress Show, which he failed to 

mention — he doesn’t have that concept of understanding the 

bigger part of tourism — up by 25 per cent. Restaurant receipts, 

January to April — up by 20.4 per cent. And the value of 

Tourism recreation construction in major cities, the construction 

— I mentioned the new tourist centre and the convention centre 

that is coming here in Regina — up by 349 per cent. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think some of those statistics would indicate to 

you that certainly here in Saskatchewan we’re on a building 

mode in tourism. Mentioned something about the building 

permits, and I’d like to indicate to him that the building permits 

issued in 1986 were worth $741.5 million — the highest level 

in the 1980s and considerably higher than the previous year, 

which was 1983, of $613.5 million. Retail trade in 1986 had 

also increased by 24 per cent. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, at the beginning I would like to indicate to 

the member opposite that some of the information that he 

provided in his opening remarks just simply isn’t the way it is. 

It’s simply not correct. I understand that the member has to 

operate from the information that he has at his fingertips. 

 

But let me tell you, and I’ve sat in this House . . . And the 

member from Moose Jaw chortles and laughs in his seat; he 

laughs and he chortles from his seat. But I can tell you, I sit 

here day after day, and I listen to the comments, and I look at 

some of the times that the members, especially the new 

members, are sent up with just what is simply inaccurate 

information. And if I were giving you a little bit of advice as a 

new member, I would look very, very seriously at the research 

department of your caucus. They are not serving you well. You 

could probably spend your money in a better way. For them to 

give you some of this misinformation that tourism is down, that 

entrance is down, is just simply not fair to a new member in this 

House. 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2958 

 

With that, Mr. Chairman, I imagine there are some pointed 

questions, and you did ask one at the end of your introductory 

remarks. If you would like to repeat that, we can get on, and we 

can answer and have a very good dialogue. 

 

And I challenge you, I challenge you as a critic of the 

department to take a high road tonight. You know, you can 

come out, and you can kick everything and say it’s all bad and 

it’s no good and so on, and then I can get up and I can say it’s 

all find and it’s all dandy. But that isn’t really what . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well if the member from Moose Jaw 

would be quiet, I think the critics and I could carry on a 

dialogue that would be beneficial to the province of 

Saskatchewan. But if you want to keep chattering from your 

seat and disrupt these estimates, that’s fine; we will put up with 

your chatter. 

 

I was just going to say to the member opposite, and I challenge 

him, I ask him . . . And the member from Riversdale will well 

remember when I sat on that side of the House, and he will 

remember this exactly, that in the dialogue and the discussion of 

the estimates of education and continuing education — he will 

remember this — that we had a dialogue in which there were 

positive suggestions and alternatives. And that’s what I 

challenge you as a new member in this House, a new critic in 

this portfolio, if you have ideas and suggestions that are better, 

if you believe there are ways that we can improve the tourism 

industry and the small business industry in this province, I 

welcome those suggestions, because really that’s what this 

place is about. 

 

I don’t know what they told you when they first came in, and it 

may have been that every time a Tory says something, get up 

and say it’s all wrong and all negative. But that doesn’t serve 

you well as a member; that doesn’t serve the process well; and 

that wastes a lot of time in this House. 

 

So I ask you, and I ask you most sincerely, let’s have a question 

and answer; let’s have a dialogue; but let’s have some positive 

suggestions brought from your side. And I can tell you, I can 

tell you and I can give you that commitment, if there are things 

that make sense and can be undertaken, they will not fall on 

deaf ears. So with that, let’s get into a good dialogue that can 

benefit and build small business and tourism in this province. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Perhaps, Mr. Minister, we could start 

with some answers to the questions I ask you. I certainly didn’t 

expect a lecture this evening, but since I’ve just received one 

I’ll take it in good faith. 

 

In terms of suggestions to improve the department, I think 

members on this side certainly have suggestions as to how to 

improve the department, as a matter fact, to improve the whole 

government. You could start by a little honesty and some sound 

management. 

 

The question, Mr. Minister, that I asked was under the Tourism, 

Small Business and Co-operatives, the business development 

grants, you have estimated some $9,000,512, and under tourism 

development grants, you have estimated some $2,000,766. I 

would like, Mr. Minister, an explanation as to how these grants 

will  

operate, who will they be targeted towards, when can we expect 

some details, and I’d like to know who you’ve consulted about 

the structure of these grants. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, in regard to the $9.5 million 

budgetary item is the first one you asked me, and that’s 

regarding the business development grants. 

 

The breakdown on them is that there’s a general business grant 

and that can be for various and sundry things of $10,000. An 

entrepreneurial institute — grant or money set aside for that of 

$150,000; the small business interest reduction program, which 

of course is ongoing of $8.3 million; the commerce student 

consultation grant of sixteen thousand eight; Big Valley 

Developments, a grant of a $126,000; Special ERDA 

(Economic and Regional Development Agreement), 60,000; 

NEDSA (Northern Economic Development Subsidiary 

Agreement) or Northern Economic Development grants of a 

$100,000; and the venture capital tax credits of $750,000 — so 

that should come to nine five twelve. If I went too fast, if 

there’s any of those you want repeated, I’d do that for you. 

 

(1945) 

 

An Hon. Member: — If you could just send those over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I can give you some . . . And under 

the tourism and development grants, under the tourism 

sub-agreement, a million one; the tourism opportunities 

program, $1 million; hospitality institute, 400,000; and the 

support to TISASK, $266,000. So those are the figures. 

 

And then you ask me, well when we would see some action. 

That’s the budgetary amounts as far as . . . and I’m sure you’ll 

have some other questions regarding the hospitality institute 

and entrepreneurial institute, and we can get into those in more 

detail. I’ve given you the amount of money. 

 

The consultation . . . I guess the consultation is the same as you 

do in any budgetary process in any department, is that ministers 

have contacts with people who come into their offices when 

you’re out visiting various chambers of commerce, various 

groups and functions that you may attend. The bureaucracy 

have continual dialogue and discussion with various aspects of 

the business sector, and it is from those type of discussions and 

dialogues that one structures a budget. 

 

So to tell you who all the dialogue would have been with is 

almost an impossible task. But it’s ongoing, and that’s just the 

way it operates in government. You have groups, cabinet 

continually have groups that will come and put forth their 

concerns and how they think you should be improving the 

business climate in the province. And certainly you have 

personal contacts with people coming into your office, your 

bureaucrats have a lot of contact with the population. 

 

Conferences, you hear what other provinces are doing, other 

initiatives which may be very interesting, and you follow up on 

some of these. So I guess the consultation and who you talk to 

is very wide-ranging. It goes on all through the year, and then 

all of those kind of  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2959 

 

consultations and dialogue comes some decisions that the 

cabinet eventually makes as to how they’re going to structure 

the budget, what’s in the budget, and what the expenditure 

levels for the various components would be. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I trust you’ll be sending 

those lists across this evening, then, so that we can have a look 

at where the money is allocated and to whom. 

 

I had asked to who these grants or who these dollars will be 

targeted to, and I guess I was asking as to whether it’s going to 

be Saskatchewan small business, whether it’s going to be large 

multinational corporations, or out-of-province operators, and I 

don’t believe I had an answer to that. Perhaps when we have a 

look at how you’ve broken those dollars down, we may have a 

better understanding but at this point I certainly don’t. 

 

Mr. Minister, going back just one step, you quoted retail sales 

figures up some 24 per cent. I would like to know where in the 

world you would have found retail sales in Saskatchewan up 24 

per cent, out of which particular document that may have came 

from, and I would certainly appreciate if you would undertake 

to send that over to us this evening as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s retail sales. I was stating figures 

and maybe you were misled by 1982-86 figures. That was over 

that period of time. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Oh, so we’re talking retail sales figures 

from 1982 to 1986, an average of roughly 6 per cent a year. If 

we were to take inflation at 5 per cent and give you 1 per cent 

for increased retail sales growth, that would be the actual retail 

sales growth perhaps. Is that what I’m understanding? 

 

I have a hard time following those kinds of figures that you’re 

putting before the people of this province because I think any 

small-business man in this province knows that retail sales 

certainly haven’t been up on any one year since you guys have 

been in office, and so that figure was . . . that was a little, I 

think, misleading, Mr. Minister. 

 

But we’ll be getting into the retail sales figures, I hope, in a 

little while down the road, because those are the questions that 

I’ll be asking and will be comparing to other jurisdictions in 

Canada as well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My colleague 

tells me from ’82 to ’86 inflation’s been up some 34 per cent. I 

have no figures to document that right at this point, but 

certainly I don’t find it terribly hard to believe. 

 

I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, under the 1987 tourism 

marketing program, just . . . and I believe it’s subvote 8 in the 

amount of $1,011,400. I’m having a hard time to understand. 

You were quoted in a Yorkton paper, I believe it was, as 

indicating that you’re going to be taking a more regional 

approach to marketing. I’d like some explanation of that, and as 

well, if you could explain joint promotions, and I’d like to know 

how TISASK is going to be involved in tourism marketing in 

this program, or marketing the tourism program this year. If 

you’d give me a breakdown as well of that 

million-and-whatever dollars as to how that’s going to be spent. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think what you have interpreted, or what 

the . . . I don’t know the paper that you’re quoting from, but I 

do recall being out in Yorkton about a week and a half ago or 

two weeks ago, in which we had one of our consultation 

meetings — well-attended I should say — by people in that area 

on tourism, small business, and things of this nature, co-ops, 

and northern development. 

 

Perhaps I think what they were referring to is the tourism 

opportunities program, when you talk about regional marketing. 

And by that, I believe very strongly — and it was reinforced by 

the people that were there that day — that there are many things 

in Saskatchewan on regional basis at the community level that 

could have a very significant tourism attraction and impact, and 

that we should be looking at ways and means of trying to 

develop these. So in discussion . . . I remember the reporter I 

was talking to. We were discussing just that aspect, that 

certainly there were things in that part of the province that could 

be developed and could be built into tourist attractions, that 

people in another region of the province would be most 

interested in seeing. 

 

I think it goes without saying that there are many things that can 

be developed in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people to see. 

One of the things that we find in our analysis of tourism 

visitations and so on, which is a part, I guess, of our culture and 

our heritage, is that a lot of the people coming into 

Saskatchewan as tourists come because of family connections. 

In other words, it can be people coming back for school 

reunions which we know are big things and happen from year to 

year in various parts of the province. There’s also the 

anniversaries of towns and areas. 

 

So what we are trying to develop and what we were talking 

about is saying, then, if the people in the province would, from 

one area, realize that there were attractions of significant 

importance in other areas, that we would get the Saskatchewan 

people moving around to see these various things with their 

guests who may be in to see them. So that’s what we’re really 

talking about by the regional marketing. I hope that explains to 

you what I meant by that type of development. 

 

I’m sure you know from your own area in Prince Albert. I 

suppose you’re a little more blessed there with the Prince Albert 

National Park and a strong tourist attraction there. But I’m sure, 

as I’ve said to you previously, that you could suggest some 

areas in that part of the province that that type of development 

could take place. I think of the areas in the historic importance 

of the Duck Lake, Batoche, Fort Carlton area, which certainly 

has good potential for developing some first-rate facilities and 

attractions that could benefit that area of the province, as well as 

the province in its entirety. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I asked that you would 

undertake to give me a breakdown of the spending in terms of 

that particular million dollars. I trust you’ll be sending that 

across tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Is it the tourism sub-agreement program? 

Is that the $1 million you wanted to breakdown on, the tourism 

sub-agreement program? 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2960 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — It’s under tourism marketing, item 8. 

 

Mr. Minister, while you’re finding those figures, you had 

spoken about regional development and you mentioned my 

particular riding and my area. I have some questions regarding 

regional development in the Prince Albert-Duck Lake area. 

During the election campaign the former member, Mr. Dutchak, 

was in the press and was indicating that there was to be a major 

development in our particular area, which we certainly are 

looking forward to, if in fact it’s there. 

 

Apparently there is a study ongoing, and it’s been ongoing for 

some time, of the Fort Carlton-Batoche area. It’s referred to as 

the Fort Carlton-Batoche destination area study. I wrote to you 

on January 13, 1987. You indicated to me that your department 

— in a response on February 12 — that the initial target dates 

were set for the end of March or mid-April of 1987. This was a 

letter on February 12. Again, I inquired, and your last response 

was September 3, 1987, and you indicated that the study is not 

yet complete and there have been some study items in the 

process that have taken longer than anticipated. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would want to suggest that there are a lot of 

people that felt it was a little political play during the election 

campaign, and given the length of time that we’ve been waiting 

for just a study, a simple study to be complete as to the 

development in the Fort Carlton and Batoche area, a lot of 

people are becoming a little sceptical. 

 

Now you indicated that you are all for regional development 

this evening, and I would like to know this evening if you have 

that study completed and if you are seriously committed to that 

proposal that the former member, Mr. Dutchak, was in the 

election campaign. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials indicate to me that the study 

is still going on. There’s been some new market information 

that has been brought to the study team, and they are hopeful 

that the study will be completed in the not too distant future. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I’d like some indication of 

what the “not too distant future” means. Does that mean 1987, 

’88, ’89, or just prior to the next election? The people of the 

province, and I think the people of Duck Lake and that area 

have a right to know if they were just being duped by the 

former member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake or if, in actual 

fact, he was serious and your department is serious is about that 

study and about that development. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The not too distant future, to me, would 

be somewhere around the end of the year. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — That would be the end of this year, I 

would hope, Mr. Minister. I’d like to know, did you indicate to 

this House that the study has been completed or has the study 

not been completed? 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — It hasn’t been completed. Could you give 

us some details as to why it hasn’t been completed?  

What specifics are holding you back? 

 

That area has been there; it’s been a historic site for, you know, 

not decades, it’s been a historic site for over a hundred years. 

Surely to goodness if your department is concerned and really 

interested in that area, you shouldn’t have any problems in 

getting that study completed and getting on with the work and 

getting on with development in that area. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Phase two of the study started in May of 

this year, and as I indicated just a few minutes ago, but 

obviously you were not paying attention, that there has been 

some added market information that the people doing the study 

felt it should be included. So that is going to be included, and as 

I say, approximately around the end of the year, we expect the 

study to be completed. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I would ask for some 

preliminary report but I know, at least I feel not very optimistic 

that we would receive a preliminary study. If you wouldn’t be 

willing to give it to this side of the House, I would certainly 

hope that you’ll be in contact with some of the people in 

Carlton and in the Fort Carlton-Batoche area, some people who 

you maybe trust to share that information with, or at least write 

to the members or the people of that area who have been 

involved in tourism development, who have been lobbying your 

government, who talked with the former member and indicate 

to them at least that it’s going to go ahead. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to turn to the industrial incentives 

program. We’ve questioned the Minister of Economic 

Development earlier on as to who got the funding. He has 

indicated that it’s going to be coming to this side of the House 

— haven’t received it yet — but at any rate, I have some 

questions regarding that program. I would like to know what 

percentages of the businesses receiving funding under that 

program really needed that money in order to do the 

development. I guess what I’m saying is: what percentage? Do 

you have any figures of businesses that developed under that 

program that wouldn’t have developed had it not been for that 

program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That was administered by the Department 

of Economic Development and Trade, and we have no 

information as to their figures on that. I think you questioned 

the other minister in quite some detail. That was their program 

and we do not have any information on that. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Rather unfortunate, Mr. Minister. I would 

have thought as the minister responsible for Small Business and 

a program that affects small business, you may have some 

understanding of what’s happening. 

 

I have a quote here from Mr. White of the Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business, and he indicated that their operation 

feels that only 10 per cent of the businesses actually use 

government programs and that only 30 per cent of those 

actually need the money. And I’m wondering if you don’t have 

some handle on how that affects the small business community 

in Saskatchewan and aren’t able to tell this side of the House 

and the  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2961 

 

people of the province how many people really needed it. But if 

you indicate you don’t have those figures, I guess there’s no 

way you can get them from you. 

 

The program — I have another question under the program — 

paid $7,500 for every new job created through business 

expansion or a startup. I’d like to know what your definition of 

a new job is and does it have to be full time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, you know, I think you are 

questioning in the wrong estimates. That is a program that we 

never administered or had anything to do with in that regard. 

But you asked what a new job would be; to me, a new job 

would be an incremental job that wasn’t there before. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, you sit at the same 

cabinet table with the Minister of Economic Development and I 

would hope you have some input into the kinds of programs 

that affect the business community. 

 

Let me ask you a little more specific: are all of the jobs at the 

North Battleford’s Gainers plant for which Peter Pocklington 

received money under this grant, and, as I said, as minister 

responsible for Small Business, can you tell me if this grant is 

paying for full-time jobs in that branch or in that plant, or for 

part-time jobs, or do you not know that either? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You should have asked those questions to 

the minister who was administering that program; you had that 

opportunity last night. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Oh, it’s a little difficult sometimes here. I 

don’t understand, Mr. Minister, when you sit at the same 

cabinet table, the same group of people making the decisions, 

that you haven’t informed yourself of the program, that you 

don’t know whether they can use part-time jobs, whether they 

can use full-time jobs in order to get funding under the 

program. 

 

It shows to me, Mr. Minister, of lack of interest in the business 

community, and I wonder if the former minister would not have 

been better fit in the small-business portfolio. I wonder if 

perhaps he hasn’t a little more interest in the department than 

you have. 

 

I’ll go on to another question — clearly I’ll get no answers from 

that. In terms of the small business interest abatement program, 

I’d like to know why you scrapped the program, and I’d like to 

know why you didn’t inform the business owners when the end 

of the program came on February 15 when you knew it was 

done. That’s what I would like to know, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Actually what happened is, under the 

interest reduction program, we had reached the cap of the 

amount of money that was budgeted for it, and when we 

reached that cap, the decision had not been made yet as to 

whether the program would continue or not. So that was why 

that period of time of some degree of uncertainty, I guess, was 

in there, is that we had reached the cap of the budgeted money 

and then had the decision had not been made as to whether to 

program would be  

continued or terminated. There was a period of time in there 

before the decision was made. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, you spoke earlier of cutting 

red tape and you spoke highly of the business resource centres. 

I want to say to you that on the outset that I think the business 

resource centres are a very good plan and I think that they can 

work. But, Mr. Minister, in order for the business resources 

centres to function, your department has to keep them in tune 

with what you’re doing. 

 

You may know that some 335 business owners applied after 

February 15, and many had their applications approved, set 

their budgets, made their plans, and then they were told by a 

dishonest and incompetent government, who they put faith in, 

that their applications that were approved were no longer 

approved. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister that that is unfair. How do you justify 

that kind of an administration of your department? Why don’t 

you get on top of what’s going on in your department so that 

these kinds of errors won’t happen and you won’t be putting 

small-business people in this province into what may be a very 

sticky situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I guess it’s the same as I told you 

previously. We had reached the cap on the program and 

unfortunately there were some letters went out to individuals 

which had to be rescinded. We didn’t continue the program and 

those letters were rescinded. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s pretty clear that 

you weren’t consulting with the business community, at least 

the small business community. But do you think that it’s fair 

that Peter Pocklington has approval for funding under that 

program for the next two stages of development of the Gainers 

plant, and small businesses who expected the program to be in 

effect, because you hadn’t announced that it was gone, are 

ineligible after February the 15 — after that cut-off date — and 

after you told them, or failed to tell them, that it wasn’t 

cancelled. 

 

They applied, got accepted; a week or so later you tell them 

they’re not there, but you’ve got funding for Peter Pocklington. 

Why don’t you scrap part of the program for Pocklington and 

make it right by the 355 businesses who applied under the 

program and were refused funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You know, it’s of interest to see the 

member, you know, again focus in on Peter Pocklington. He 

seems to have some type of fixation on that, not thinking at all 

— just completely negative — regarding the whole Gainers 

bacon plant in Prince Albert. Now obviously if he’d go to 

Prince Albert and if he’d ask his member who is there what 

they feel about the job creations that have been there, I think he 

would find out that the people are quite supportive of that. 

 

And also he focuses on . . . I’ll indicate to you that the cap on 

the program had been reached and then the decision to continue 

the program . . . to discontinue the program was made. But he 

doesn’t give credit to the fact that there were some 8,254 

eligible small businesses that accessed  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2962 

 

the program. There was about $18 million in expenditures that 

were there for those people in the program. 

 

But you see the member opposite would not look at that side of 

it — the positive side of it — where it came to help. But I 

would like to remind him. . . And I see the minister from Quill 

Lakes again is noisy from his seat tonight — the continual 

chatter, bantering and bleating from his seat that goes on in this 

House night after night. 

 

But I would indicate to the member opposite that you, again, 

will not focus on the positive things that have happened. And I 

will remind you of the record of the government that was in 

place before we came to power. The NDP, of which you are a 

member, and when interest rates were rising for small business, 

when interest rates were rising for home owners, when interest 

rates were raising for farmers, the chirping member from Quill 

Lake and the one from Regina Centre sat like stones and would 

not do one thing for either of those components of our society. 

They wouldn’t help farmers, they wouldn’t help home owners, 

and they wouldn’t help small business. Not one bit of interest 

reduction. Not one bit of it. 

 

And you will stand here and you will try to make a big thing out 

of a program that had been capped, and make light of the fact 

that $18 million in interest help went to small businesses in 

Saskatchewan, and that some 8,000 of them received help, 

when your colleagues sat there like stones and wouldn’t help 

the people of Saskatchewan when they were crying out for help, 

when they were losing their homes, and the people were crying 

out — I remember it distinctly in 1982 — asking for some help 

on their mortgages. No, there was none coming from the NDP. 

 

(2015) 

 

Well I guess the people of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member from Moose Jaw is back in the 

House again. The member from Moose Jaw is chirping again. 

 

That’s what the people of Saskatchewan asked for in ‘82. We 

promised them that type of help, and we delivered on that type 

of help not only for home owners but for farmers and small 

business also. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: Well, Mr. Minister, by your own numbers 

you’ve indicated that what you’ve done in scrapping this 

program is wrong. When 8,000 people can use it and use it to 

the betterment of their business, and you have to scrap it 

because you’re too busy subsidizing your big corporate friends, 

then, Mr. Minister, it tells me where you stand in terms of the 

small business community. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Minister, members on this side of the House have 

been and will continue to be standing up speaking for small 

business. When you’ve got money for your large corporate 

friends and you haven’t got money for a little business man in 

Moosomin because you’ve dumped all of the money onto your 

big buddies, you can be guaranteed that the New Democrats 

will speak on the small-business man’s behalf. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I also, Mr. Minister, would like to spend 

a few minutes talking about rate increases that the business 

people of this province have had thrust upon them, and I’d like 

to go to what to you may seem so terribly insignificant, 

something as small as the increase in the boiler rate for 

inspection fees. And I want to know why you haven’t been 

speaking out for the small-business people when that happened. 

 

And I’d like to know in terms of The Direct Sellers Act, why 

you allowed increases in ’84 from $10 to $25. And in April of 

’87 you made them pay their $25 for a five-year period as 

opposed to the one that they were allowed to pay for before, and 

invest another $100 to help you cover your deficit. 

 

And I’d like to know why you weren’t speaking to the car 

dealers in the rural areas and the auctioneers. And I wonder why 

your colleague, the Minister of Highways, didn’t come into 

your office and tell you that what he’s doing to the . . . what 

you’re doing to the small-business people who make their living 

as auctioneers, and you’ve increased their rates unfairly. 

 

I have here, Mr. Minister, some invoices, and I want to read 

them to you. I’m going to start in 1982: inspection fees on a 

thin-tubed boiler, no cost, but then again, you just got into 

power — 1983, no cost; 1984, $19; and you’re moving right 

along. You’re starting to see that your mismanagement is 

costing you money and you’ve got to pick up some dollars 

somewhere — 1985, $30; 1986, $60, but only 30 if paid before 

a certain date. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’ve been picking away at the business 

communities’ incomes, left, right, and centre. And I want to 

know where you were when these fee increases were . . . when 

they were made. Why weren’t you speaking for the business 

community and the small-business people out there? I think it’s 

your responsibility to ensure that those small-business people 

are able to have a decent bottom line. And when you pick a way 

. . . It seems insignificant, and the members on your side — is 

that all you can do? It means little to them, 30 or 60 or $50, but 

they maybe come from a different background. But you start 

multiplying the 30’s, and the 40’s, and it comes to an awful lot 

of money, and I want to know where you were when these 

decisions were made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, where I was is where I am all the 

time, doing my job, working at the cabinet table, in this House, 

across Saskatchewan, talking to people in the business sector. 

You come around with me for a few days and you’ll see where I 

am, and you’ll be tired out by the time night comes, my son. 

 

But let me point out to you, there are times . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the member from Quill Lakes again 

chirps and says we’re afraid to go out. I invited him; I 

remember inviting every member opposite to the business 

opportunities show in Saskatoon. I believe the member from 

Nutana showed up. But it was a fantastic show . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I’d just like to tell you what some independent 

people say about it. Just one  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2963 

 

moment. 

 

Seeing you’re so interested in finding out, we’ll just tell you. A 

tremendous success. Something that certainly the NDP could 

never talk about. This comes from the Saskatoon board of trade. 

And there may be some members opposite might be interested 

in hearing this. And I’ll read this letter to you. I think it would 

be interesting for the House to hear this. 

 

Mr. Chairman, with your permission, I’d like to read it. It’s to 

myself, the Minister of Tourism. It says: 

 

Dear Graham: (Dear Graham, it says) On behalf of the 

executive of the Saskatoon Board of Trade, I would like to 

extend heartiest congratulations on the outstanding success 

of the Business Opportunities Show this past week. 

 

Many members of our organization heard the positive 

comments from the exhibitors; most of whom indicated 

that the show greatly exceeded their expectations. 

 

Comments such as: I have more solid leads than I could 

have imagined; or in particular, I talked to someone from 

every city in Saskatchewan; were common reactions to the 

show. 

 

Some time ago as you will likely remember, some 

members of our organization expressed concerns about 

whether this show would interfere with other private 

sector trade shows, and in particular, whether the market 

existed to follow through with the concept of marketing 

franchises and distributorships, rather than products, as the 

officials of your department had intended. 

 

We congratulate yourself and your officials on the resolve 

which you displayed in maintaining the philosophy of the 

show, that being the promotion of business opportunities. 

Again, Graham, our congratulations to you and your 

department on a job very well done. 

 

Now I never heard a letter like that, and I never heard an NDP 

cabinet minister stand up and have a board of trade congratulate 

him and his department for taking an initiative and developing 

small business in this province, in Saskatchewan. Never once 

did that happen. No, you were more inclined to make the red 

tape, to put in the 1,400 needless regulations that have been 

removed to this date; 1,400 to 1,500 of them. 

 

And I want to tell you that I could go on reading letter after 

letter after letter to indicate to you the support of the people of 

Saskatchewan for that kind of initiative. There were 6,400 

people came through the doors that weekend in Saskatoon. Did 

the critic for the NDP who stands here and professes that he is 

interested in small business, who I believe has accessed grant 

after grant in his own business perhaps, did he come into there? 

He was personally invited. 

 

I remember standing in question period two days before the 

show and giving you a personal invitation. Your  

shadow never crossed the door of the place, and you stand here 

like a hypocrite and say, I’m interested in the development of 

small business. I believe only one member of your caucus 

came, and that would be the member from Nutana. He dropped 

in for a cup of coffee for a while. So I don’t think you’re fair in 

saying that we on this side of the House have not got an interest 

in the development of small business. 

 

And certainly I think you have to realize that from time to time 

in our society, that fees will increase. You stand here and you 

squawk about a deficit. You say, why have you got a deficit, 

and then if you do something to modestly increase some fees, 

you say, well why would you increase fees? Well, my dear 

friend, you can’t have it both ways, and the sooner you learn 

that, the better it’s be for you in this place. You can’t have it 

both ways. So there were some increases in fees and there will 

probably be more increases in fees as the world develops and 

goes on. 

 

So I think that should explain to you where I was. I’m 

consulting with the small businesses. We’re putting on shows 

that develop small business. I’ve had two consultation seminars, 

one of 400 in Weyburn this spring, one of 250 in Yorkton about 

two weeks ago, and I invite you right here and now to come to 

the one that I will have in Swift Current. Come to the one in 

Swift Current; see for yourself what will happen there; hear the 

dialogue that will take place and the suggestions. I offer that 

invitation because that’s where I’m holding the next one. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wish you success in 

this particular conference that you had, and any that you may 

hold. And I want to tell you why. Because the people of this 

province spent some $300,000 on an open for business 

conference shortly after 1982 that was a disastrous flop, and 

every economic indicator in this province in terms of small 

business will show that, and you know it. 

 

You stood tonight, you’ve used two different figures in terms of 

regulations, so you must have a list of the regulations that your 

government has done away with. One figure is 1,400, one is 

1,500, but I’ll accept the list of either amount. But I certainly 

would like to see the regulations you’ve done away with, and I 

think every other business man in this province would like to 

see it as well, because I don’t believe they feel that that’s been 

happening. 

 

If we can get off of your hype and your little rhetoric here, Mr. 

Minister, I’d like to ask you some questions in terms of your 

government’s position on the business tax. But before I go on to 

that, I want to know if you will agree to table that list of 1,400 

or 1,500 regulations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I can’t do that tonight. I imagine 

we’ll have to dig them up and I’ll try and provide them for you 

as fast as I can. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you can’t get it 

tonight, when will you get it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I guess at the first opportunity they 

can be pulled together. 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2964 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, that’s simply not good 

enough. You used the information; you used the number. The 

people of Saskatchewan have a right to know if you’re talking 

1,400 or 1,500 regulations that you’ve done away with, and I 

say to you, they don’t believe you. And I’m telling you if you 

can’t put that list together and give me some kind of a time 

frame as to when you can, I don’t believe you either. I’m asking 

you, when will you get that list to this side of the House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I’ll give you my commitment — as 

quickly as we can pull the list together for you, I’ll provide it 

for you. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, could you give us some 

kind of an approximate time frame? Are we going back to the 

same number? Would it be 1988, ’89, ’90, ’91, ’92? You know, 

in at least weeks or months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well as I say, as soon as they can be 

pulled together. I can’t tell you if it’s going to be five hours or 

three days. We’ll get it put together. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, you came up with the 

figure, so certainly if you came up with the figure of the 

regulations that you’ve done away with, you must have had a 

look at a list. Somebody must have completed them. So that 

would mean to me that t hey don’t have to come from this 

department or this department. That would say to me that as the 

Minister of Small Business you have that list in your office or 

one of your officials’ office. Now tell me this, is there a list of 

1,400? Is it a figure that you’re pulling out of the air, or is it 

real? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I indicated to you that we’ll pull the 

list together of regulations that have been . . . were in existence 

under your government that are not here now and we will bring 

that for you. I don’t know how long it will take to get it put 

together . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I said of regulations 

that were here when you left office that are not there now. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, Mr. Minister, you always speak in 

that term of business, and now you’re talking in terms of the 

whole global picture of regulations that you’ve done away with. 

I still say to you, if you know the number is 1,400, certainly you 

must have a list. Why don’t you tell the small-business people 

out there how many regulations that you’ve done away with 

that affects their daily lives, and why won’t you give a 

commitment as to when you’ll be able to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We will provide you with the list as soon 

as it’s available. I can get it for you. And certainly, as you 

realize . . . and I don’t think you listened when we started our 

discussions in that we had the Business Regulatory Reform 

Council is continuing at all times and they’re meeting regularly 

with my department, and from time to time from these 

meetings, there are more regulations that are stricken from the 

books. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, that is simply not 

believable. It’s another example of Tory hype and rhetoric. You 

pulled a figure of 1,400 regulations out of the air. You’ve been 

broadcasting that figure for the last two, three years when I can 

remember. So I just say to  

you, you’re not believable in terms of the 1,400 regulations that 

you’ve done away with. Otherwise you could submit a list of 

the people of this province through this opposition side so that 

we would better know whether in fact you’ve done what you 

said, and I don’t believe you have. 

 

(2030) 

 

I said we’ll leave it at that because I can see we’re going to get 

nothing from you in terms of that. But please don’t be going 

around insulting the people of this province, the business people 

who know they’re still dealing with the kind of regulations that 

they had for ever and probably will have for ever. Don’t insult 

their intelligence, because they know better, Mr. Minister. 

 

I ask you in terms of the business tax, if you’ve had any 

consultation with the business community over the last year or 

two years, and if you’ve had any discussion with your ministers 

and municipal governments as to how you might relieve that 

kind of a tax burden on the business community, and I would 

like to know specifically, Mr. Minister, if you have any plans to 

reduce that tax burden on the business community of the people 

of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly we’ve had discussions 

with the business communities, as I indicated to you previously 

that I’ve been around the province a fair amount, discussing 

with various groups in business, and often the whole aspect of 

business tax comes up for discussion. You well know that the 

business tax is allocated at the municipal level and varies from 

area to area. But in regard to, is there anything going on or 

taking place, there is a committee that has been formed — 

intergovernmental committee with a membership from my 

department and also from Urban Affairs, along with members 

from the private sector that are meeting and will be meeting and 

discussing possible ways in which the concerns expressed 

regarding business tax could be addressed. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, we’re all fully aware that 

the business tax is assessed at the municipal level, but we’re 

also aware, without some provincial aid, that that’s probably not 

going to happen. And I ask if your government has any 

commitment financially or is willing to put some financial 

commitment to the municipalities and through the 

municipalities to the business community to alleviate the 

business tax burden that they face that you know that they’ve 

been asking you to do something about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just mentioned to 

the member opposite that we have struck a committee of people 

from Urban Affairs and people from Small Business and people 

from the private sector who are sitting down and addressing 

this, and I’m sure we’ll be bringing forward some 

recommendations for consideration. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Can you give this House some indication 

as to when those recommendations might be forthcoming, or is 

it some time, somewhere, somehow, the same as the 1,400 

regulations that you’ve done away with in terms of getting a . . . 

I would like, Mr. Minister, a  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2965 

 

target date or a specific date as to when you feel that committee 

will come in with their recommendation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The committee has just been put together, 

and they’re having their first meeting in another day or two. So 

I think for you to try and ask for a target date when they come 

in with the recommendations is something that just doesn’t 

make sense at this point in time. They’re having their first 

meeting, so I don’t think it would be very fair to ask them and 

say, well when are you going to report. I imagine there’s going 

to be an awful lot of dialogue and discussion before they come 

up with a decision of how this rather difficult problem can be 

addressed. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, Mr. Minister, the business 

community are looking for some changes to that business tax, 

and they’re looking soon. And I would like if . . . I’m sure the 

business people of this province would very much appreciate it 

if they could see in the spring budget a move on behalf of your 

government to alleviate them of that tax, rather than more tax 

increases. 

 

And speaking of tax increases, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask 

you about the 7-cent-a-litre tax that has been thrust upon a 

number of small-business people. I would like to ask how you 

feel that affects them, and whether or not you agreed in taxing 

the 7 cent, putting the 7-cent-a-litre tax, on the small-business 

people of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In consultation with my officials, I 

understand we haven’t had a great flood of complaints. People 

realize that if we’re going to have many of the services that we 

have in this province, that it’s going to take money to run those 

services. I think any solid-thinking individual would realize 

that. And certainly the 7 cents a litre will go to help fund some 

of the programs that we in Saskatchewan feel are very 

beneficial — programs in health care and in education that we’ll 

lead the nation in. 

 

And so I think the majority of the people, whether they be in 

small business, whether they be people in the professions, 

whether they be people in the public service, or whatever walk 

of life they may be in, realize that the 7 cent is part and parcel 

of paying for the benefits and the values we have in our 

province. And I can say that we have not had a great flood of 

people writing in and saying that the 7 cents a litre was 

crippling their small business. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I would suggest to you, 

through dialogue that I’ve had with sales people, independent 

truckers, that some of them are very concerned and very upset. I 

spoke a week ago with a small independent trucker and that gas 

tax has cost him some $7,000 . . . or some $3,000 a year. And I 

would suggest to you that he’s not alone. There are a number of 

his colleagues that are a little upset with that gas tax — and not 

even so much with the gas tax, Mr. Minister, but the fact that 

the Premier of this province promised that as long as this 

government was around, there would never, ever, ever, ever be 

a gas tax in this province. 

 

And I want to say to you that some of the people that supported 

your government in ’82 and in ’86 — not expecting to have that 

gas tax thrust upon them — are not  

very pleased. And I want to say to you as well, they feel 

betrayed by your government. 

 

I asked if you were in favour of the implementation of that 

7-cent-a-litre gas tax on the small business community. And 

through your answer, you’ve indicated to me that you seem to 

be quite in favour of it and that we have to pay for programs. 

And we all understand we have to pay for programs in this 

province — for health care that you’re cutting back on, and 

dental care that you’re cutting back on, and the drug 

prescription plan that you’ve cut back on. But also we’re paying 

for mismanagement. And you’re betraying those that trusted 

you in 1982 when you said there would never be a gas tax in 

this province under your administration. 

 

I remember it well, Mr. Minister, and a lot of independent 

truckers in this province remember it well, too. And I’m going 

to tell you that through rate increases to every retailer who has 

stuff hauled around this province, they feel betrayed as well. 

And that spins off to the consumers who buy from those 

retailers who are going to have to increase their freight rates 

because you put the 7 cent a litre on that you promised would 

never be there — that they feel betrayed as well. And I think, 

Mr. Minister, you’ve been remiss in not speaking up for the 

consumers, the retailers, and those that haul those goods around 

this province, and I would say to you, you should be ashamed 

of yourself. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have more questions of you this evening and 

I’ll pass it over to my colleague. He has some questions to ask 

of you and we will carry on a little later. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, 

under the business development grants, I noted earlier this 

evening that you had cut the grants to tax-exempt bodies under 

venture capital credit programs from $1 million down to 

three-quarters of a million dollars. I’m wondering if you can tell 

me why it is that that was done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The reason for that figure, or for that 

money in the budget, is that under the venture capital 

corporation there are some that invest in the venture capital 

corporation that are non-taxpaying types of organizations. I 

guess the best example I could give you is perhaps a pension 

fund, something of this nature. So that money in the budget is to 

pay that grant whereas the other person, the venture capital . . . 

say if it was yourself or someone that invested in a venture 

capital corporation, because you’re a taxpayer you would get 

the 30 per cent tax break. 

 

The reduction is that we didn’t feel in this year, in this 

budgetary year, that we were going to have that much of that 

type of investment in the venture capital fund. So that was the 

reason for the reduction. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you. What was the level this past year 

for pay-outs in grants, two tax exempt bodies under the venture 

capital tax credit program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, last year we budgeted 1 million and 

I think we required 1.5 million. But I should indicate to you that 

there was a very large one in there last year,  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2966 

 

and that was the Regina trade and convention centre. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, this is very curious, because I 

note that in ’85 . . . Okay, you say that last year you had 

budgeted 1 million and you had a demand of 1.5 million, is that 

correct? Yes, you acknowledge that’s correct. 

 

(2045) 

 

The previous year you had budgeted 1 million and you had a 

demand of one and a quarter million. In fact, your revised 

estimate in Public Accounts reflects that you actually had to 

increase the estimate by a quarter of a million dollars. This year, 

this past year then, the demand increases by yet another quarter 

of a million dollars and you cut the level of funding in half, to 

three-quarters of a million dollars. How can you explain that, if 

you have the demand there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t think you understand exactly what 

we’re discussing here. In the previous years, and I mentioned in 

the last year there was the Regina trade and convention centre 

which is a very large VCC of that nature. The year before there 

was one also very large of that nature. My officials in this year, 

as striking the budget, did not feel that that type of venture 

capital corporation would come into place this year with that 

non-taxable large component. 

 

So in striking the budget we thought that we would be 

satisfactory at the $750,000 figure. All indications to date 

would show that perhaps that figure will be satisfactory. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well perhaps you could tell us, Mr. Minister, 

just how large this Regina trade and convention centre draw 

was on the funds. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the one last year, the total VCC 

(venture capital corporation) for the convention centre was 5 

million, and the grant was 1.5 million towards that. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Am I to understand, then, that the grant to the 

Regina trade and convention centre was 1.5 million last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the grant to the pension fund in the 

Regina convention and trade centre was 1.5 million, but to the 

pension fund. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I’m told that you had budgeted, you said 

earlier, $1 million for last year and the total draw was 1.5 

million. So now the only conclusion I can deduce is that the 

Regina trade and convention centre pension fund was the sole 

application for a grant under the venture capital tax credit 

program. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the only one last year that was 

completed under the non-taxable portion of that pension fund 

was the Regina trade and convention centre. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Do you, Mr. Minister, have any problems 

with one pension fund being able to exhaust, more than exhaust, 

all the budgetary allocation under the program? 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. The officials indicate to me that 

usually any of the very large ones is where the pension funds 

would kick in and take part in it. And I want to add this to 

indicate to you, for your information — and I hope you would 

support this — that I think this was a good thing because that 

keeps our pension funds, our Saskatchewan pension funds, right 

here in Saskatchewan doing things for this province. Otherwise 

they would probably be investing in other parts of Canada or in 

other areas. I support this type of investment right here in 

Saskatchewan, building the type the tourist facilities that will 

attract more conventions of a larger style here to Regina, and 

will certainly help the cash registers of this province. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I certainly support Saskatchewan pension 

funds and investing in Saskatchewan, too, Mr. Minister, but that 

prompts my question. Why, when you have two successive 

years of draw or demand more than you have budgeted for 

access to this tax credit . . . or these grants rather, why you 

would cut your level of funding to three-quarters of a million 

dollars? How can you explain that if in fact your genuinely are 

concerned with keeping pension investment here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I guess the reason for that is that my 

officials who are with me here tonight are working daily with 

all groups who are wanting to either start a VCC (venture 

capital corporation) or develop one. And they have . . . I don’t 

think there’s anybody more knowledgeable in the province as to 

what is going to happen in VCC within the coming year. And 

over the last two years we have had two very large ones come 

into place. From their intelligence and their contacts across this 

province they felt in this year that we could reduce that amount 

because we wouldn’t have another one of those large types 

coming in this budgetary year. As of now, it appears that their 

judgement was correct. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — You speak of the two large ones in two 

successive years. Perhaps you can explain what the large one 

was in the ’85-86 year, that placed such a heavy demand on the 

grant structure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, as I said, the one in the last year, and 

we’ve talked about that, was the Regina trade and convention 

centre. The one the year before, and it’s our largest venture 

capital corporation in Saskatchewan, is called First Merchant 

Equities. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Did First Merchant Equities receive funding 

under the grants for tax-exempt bodies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, there are pension funds invested in 

First Merchant Equities, and then the grant goes to those 

pension funds. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well this is again curious, Mr. Minister, 

because I’m looking at Public Accounts ’85-86, page 559, and I 

note that of the 12 pension funds indicated there to whom grants 

were given, I don’t happen to notice First Merchant Equities as 

having received any grants under these grants to venture capital 

tax credit program. How do you explain that? Maybe I’m 

missing something. Maybe you just aren’t clear; I don’t know. 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2967 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, you’re just not understanding. It isn’t 

First Merchant Equities that receives the grants, it’s the pension 

funds that are invested in First Merchant Equities. So therefore, 

you wouldn’t see First Merchant Equities in the Public 

Accounts. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Okay, perhaps then you can tell me which of 

the 12 funds listed then did have connections to First Merchant 

Equities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — All 12 of them for varying amounts. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Okay then, when it comes to — and now 

perhaps I am understanding — when it comes to the $1.5 

million that you indicated for the Regina trade and convention 

centre fund, were there a number of funds who had tie-ins to 

that particular grant, to that $1.5 million? Or was that one grant 

made to the Regina trade and convention centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials believe there were two, but 

we will confirm that for you. Their best information . . . they 

don’t have the Public Accounts with them at this point in time, 

but their best information is two. But they . . . I will confirm 

that. That’s what they inform me now. They believe there were 

two, but to be absolutely sure, I will have them confirm that and 

get that to you. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Will you also have your officials indicate the 

relationship between these two firms, you know, fiscally in 

terms of if there was a tie-in to the Regina trade and convention 

centre grant — you know, what the level of tie-in was for each 

of those two companies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There is no tie-in or anything of this 

nature. I don’t know what you are insinuating at there. But if 

you want to know how much money they invested in this, yes, 

sure. I don’t have it with us right now, but we’ll get that for 

you. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Would it be too much to ask for your officials 

to give me a thumb-nail explanation as to how this grant 

structure works, as well? I’d find that very helpful if that would 

be possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Sure, to expedite the proceedings here, if 

you want to at the end of the session . . . What you’re saying, 

would my officials meet with you outside the House and 

explain all this to you — they’d be more than glad to do that. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — To shift gears a bit, I’d like to talk about the 

other dimension of venture capital and ask: what was the total 

of the tax credits authorized under the equities portion of the 

venture capital program, the individual shareholders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Did you want it by year or did you want it 

cumulative/ You asked for the total tax credits, and the program 

has been in place since ’84. Did you want it by year, or did you 

want it cumulative, or just what were you after? 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Koenker: — It would be helpful if you could give that  

figure by year, for each year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In ’84-85, the first year of the program, it 

appears to be $358,000; in 1985-86, the second year of the 

program, $8,538,000; in 1986-87, $8,358,000; which gives you 

a cumulative total of $17,254,000, but that would be to the end 

of last fiscal year. This year we haven’t paid out any at this 

point in time. So that will take you to the end of the last fiscal 

year. Okay? 

 

Mr. Koenker: — What assistance does your department offer 

in the establishment of venture capital corporations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think my best answer to that is 

depending on what the investors want. I mean there’s different 

degrees of sophistication in ventures, as you and I well know. 

There’s those who come and have never been part and parcel of 

anything like this before, and need virtually help every step of 

the way. And there are those who come and say, well I’ve been 

in a VCC; I’m looking at doing something, and they understand 

it or have studied it well. 

 

I have three individuals in my department that I know virtually 

will take a group of people, shall I say by the hand, and walk 

them right through and have them prepare, and indicate to them 

the type of documentation that they would want or need. 

 

So I guess my best answer to you is that if someone came . . . 

Let’s take a situation. Say someone came, two or three people 

say we want to form a venture capital corporation where they 

knew nothing more about it than they read in the paper that 

there were such things. The gentlemen in my department would 

take them step by step by step right through to where that would 

be complete VCC (venture capital corporation) at the end of the 

process. So I guess every bit of assistance that they would 

require would be provided. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — What assistance does your department offer 

to the individual investor who’s looking at investing in a 

venture capital corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If it would help you in your 

understanding and be of value to you, I have here a draft of a 

shareholder’s agreement. If you would want that, I would 

provide it for you, and it shows everything that they would do 

as some of the assistance to a . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — One type of assistance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. Just one thing. I mean, they will put 

these together for individuals. 

 

You mentioned . . . Now that’s in forming the venture capital 

corporation. I think your second part of your question was: what 

about the person who invests? Well we do not pass judgement, 

nor should we, on whether a project is a good project or a bad 

project. That’s not for us to say. 

 

The people in the department, if the investor comes and asks for 

assistance from us, will point out to them some of the  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2968 

 

things that one should watch for and some of the things that you 

should look at. I guess one of the major things that we all know 

— and we hear case after case of this — is that I guess it can’t 

be stressed too strongly that one has to read the document, read 

all the documents and understand the documents. And I think 

that’s about the assistance the fellows would give. But it 

depends on whether those investors would come. Now where 

towns or villages want to form a VCC, they work very, very 

close with the town and village in putting one together, they 

indicate to me. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I can understand how you might not pass 

judgement on the worth of an individual project in relation to an 

individual investor, but I do have some questions about giving 

$8 million annually in tax credits to individual investors where 

there is apparently no regard given to the worth of the project or 

even the likelihood of it succeeding more . . . being in existence 

even more than a month. 

 

If the taxpayer is being asked to put a 30 per cent tax credit into 

a flimflam corporation, certainly it would seem that your 

department has some modest responsibility to pass some 

preliminary judgement on the worth or the viability of a project 

in which you are going to issue 30 per cent tax credit which is a 

cost to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. Is there no provision for any 

sort of preliminary review of projects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Through the normal course of events of 

putting together a venture capital corporation, by the time it has 

gone through all the accountants, the lawyers, the people in our 

department, the securities commission, and so on, in most cases 

those that are not sound will usually fall by the wayside. 

 

But let me indicate to you, and I think you would realize this, 

that it isn’t ironclad; it is risk capital. You’re taking a risk when 

you invest in a venture capital corporation. And I guess it’s up 

to the investor to try and minimize or try and avoid any kind of 

investment that would not be a solid investment for him. 

However, as happens in any type of risk capital, sometimes they 

go down. 

 

You mentioned about flimflam or that kind of thing. I don’t 

think that is taking place. We haven’t evidence of that. And in 

Saskatchewan, if that were the case, an individual’s reputation 

would be pretty well ruined. It’s a smaller community, and I 

don’t think you would see that type of thing happening — 

certainly not happening a second time, if it did happen in the 

first occasion. 

 

The other thing I think you must realize is that if there are 

investment dollars, if we don’t have them being invested here, 

they will probably invest somewhere else outside of our 

province. So sure, there’s some risk there. There’s a risk to the 

person that invests; there’s a bit of a risk from our side of it in 

that you may be giving a tax credit for something that fails. But 

the statistics, as the department tells me, is about eight out of 

ten, if you were going to look at this type of investment, across 

the country are successful, and our record is equally as good. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well perhaps we could talk about a specific 

instance. My concern, of course, is not that there will be no risk. 

Life is full of risks, and venture capital is 

certainly that much more of a risk. My concern though is that 

you as the minister be responsible for not subjecting the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer to unnecessary or undue risk in giving a 

tax credit to a venture capital corporation. 

 

And so just as one example I’d ask you: what was the level of 

tax credit that was given with respect to the food factory 

Ambrosia venture capital venture? What was the cost to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers for that venture capital corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m advised that we can’t comment on 

that one at this time because the Securities Commission is 

investigating it, and it wouldn’t be right for me to give any 

comment, and I couldn’t at this point in time, with that type of 

investigation going on. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, that illustrates my point, Mr. Minister. 

There’s a company that is in existence for only a couple of 

months — two or three months. That certainly illustrates my 

point. 

 

I’d ask you another question, just one final question in this 

regard. How does the department view takeovers of venture 

capital corporations by outside interests? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Outsiders cannot purchase the VCC. 

However, if a business became ineligible, then we would go 

after our 30 per cent and recoup that. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Koenker: — My question concerns outside interests taking 

over a venture capital corporation. How do you view that sort of 

activity — acquisition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, they can’t take over the venture 

capital. They can take over the eligible business, but they can’t 

take over the venture capital. The venture capital doesn’t run 

the business, if you understand that. Okay. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Okay, I’m not going to belabour this any 

more. I’d like to turn to the product development management 

program. I’d like to know if I could have the information that I 

requested by letter and you indicated that you would release 

during estimates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — But we do. We have a contract with the 

Saskatchewan Research Council who really do consulting work 

for us. They make the decisions as to who this is with and then 

they charge it back to us. I would provide this for you if this is 

what you want. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t know what it is 

that you have to offer me. If you’d send it over here, I’d 

appreciate that. Is it the information that I requested? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I don’t have your letter in front of 

me at this point in time, but it’s a list of the people or the groups 

that received assistance in 1985-86 and 1986-878. It tells me the 

name of the firm, the location, the amount of money, and I 

presume it’s the date at which this took place, the total 

expenditures for each year. Is that what you want? 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2969 

 

Mr. Koenker: — If that’s what I requested, and I believe I 

requested that kind of information for you, I’d be pleased to 

receive it now if you could send it over. 

 

I’d like to ask about the product development management 

program, and I’d like to ask you why funding for that program 

was cut and the program itself was terminated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I believe that’s what you’re wanting. I see 

you have your copy of your letter here, and you indicate: 

“please indicate the nature of the projects funded and the 

amount of funding provided these firms.” So I think that is the 

information that you requested. 

 

You ask me in your questioning why we terminated the 

program. The program was one that was first brought in, was 

cost-shared with the federal government. About two years ago, 

the federal government pulled out of their cost sharing, and in 

this last year we decided with the restraint program, this was 

one program that we would eliminate. 

 

It may well be, with the western diversification fund and things 

of this nature that have now come to the fore, that there can be 

some assistance forthcoming for product development 

management. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — What was the federal-provincial split in terms 

of the cost sharing for this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — When the sharing was in place, my 

officials indicate to me it was 50-50 cost sharing. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I think that many 

Saskatchewan firms in the manufacturing segment of the 

economy are going to be very disappointed that there is no 

funding provided for this program. It’s a very important 

program, to provide engineering services and marketing 

assistance for strategies for small Saskatchewan firms. Some of 

them, I note on this list, are not so small. They export 

internationally, and they now no longer have the value of this 

engineering appraisal. They no longer have the value of 

government assistance to do product development and 

marketing studies. 

 

I further note that in the last year of the program, from Public 

Accounts ’85-86, that you spent less than half of the funds 

allocated for this program. And I’m wondering, did you stand 

with the federal government and plead for a continuation of 

funding for this program, or did you let it die a natural death 

and just accept it? Or did you actually initiate the termination of 

this program and approach the federal government and indicate 

your desire not to continue it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They tell me it was in ’82-83, they 

believe, when the federal government pulled out of the 

program, and there was consultation with SRC (Saskatchewan 

Research Council) and the federal government and the 

department. But they were not able to have the federal 

government reinstate or continue their commitment towards the 

program. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, as Minister of Small Business, what are 

your plans to facilitate engineering assistance for  

Saskatchewan’s small-business firms? The help isn’t coming 

from the Department of Science and Technology. We know that 

after those estimates. Where are you going to turn now for help 

— concrete, tangible, product-development help for 

Saskatchewan firms, now that you’ve terminated this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It may well be one of the options that we 

look at under the economic development diversification fund, or 

it may well be a suggestion that we bring forward to the western 

diversification fund that is headed by Minister McKnight. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — It may well be. It may well be. What you’re 

saying, Mr. Minister, is that you’ve taken no steps whatsoever 

to provide this kind of assistance for Saskatchewan 

manufacturing firms; that you’re leaving Saskatchewan 

manufacturers who need engineering assistance high and dry. 

 

The students in industry, graduates in industry program, also 

run by Saskatchewan Research Council — funding has been cut 

for that by Science and Technology. Your department cuts 

funding for the product development management program. In a 

word, you’ve taken no steps to replace the loss of these 

programs, unless you can get up now and tell us about concrete 

actions you’ve already taken in cutting this program to replace 

it with others. Can you provide any information in that regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I just indicated to you two minutes ago, 

this may well be something that is developed in the 

diversification fund. At this point in time I can’t give you that 

commitment. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well I think your words speak for 

themselves, Mr. Minister. We have yet another betrayal of 

Saskatchewan small-business firms when they cannot receive 

engineering assistance. I note that in the agricultural sector, the 

machine testing station in PAMI (Prairie Agricultural 

Machinery Institute) is going to forego funding because your 

government has announced its decision to pull out of PAMI, 

and that provides no assistance either for Saskatchewan 

manufacturing firms. So when it comes to product development 

and engineering assistance, technical assistance, it’s clear that 

Saskatchewan small-business firms are going to have to go out 

of province. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you very much. I noticed earlier, 

Mr. Minister, you listed a number of programs to the member 

from Prince Albert-Duck Lake for which people were eligible 

for through your department, but I noticed that you had not 

listed the youth entrepreneur program. I was wondering if you 

could tell me to date how many people have applied to that 

program and what you have granted in terms of assistance to the 

youth entrepreneur program. 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That program, although I’m responsible 

for it, it’s in another jurisdiction; it’s under Sedco 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation). When 

those estimates or discussions are up, I’d be more than glad to 

discuss that with you, but I  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2970 

 

don’t think it’s fitting for here. It’s administered by Sedco. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, if a constituent of mine or 

a constituent in the Prince Albert-Duck Lake area came into the 

office of Tourism and Small Business, would they, in fact, not 

provide that information to people who came in off the street or 

by appointment to their offices? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you had a young person in North 

Battleford come into our centre there and say: you know, what 

is there of assistance for me? We would indicate that there is the 

YEP program, the youth entrepreneur program, but it is . . . 

They would access that through Sedco, not through this 

department. But as an information, we would tell them that’s 

certainly available and consult them and tell them how it works 

and so on. But for questions from you asking me how many and 

so on, that’s best given in the Sedco estimates, as you 

understand. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, I can appreciate that, Mr. Minister. 

We’re getting into the specifics. If your people in the regional 

offices know that information, I’m sure that you do as well, and 

so I’ll ask you some specific information as to whether or not 

your offices provide that. 

 

I suppose the first one would be: one of the qualifications that 

the young people have to meet is that they have to be a 

registered corporation in the province of Saskatchewan. Does 

that mean if they were a proprietorship or a partnership or a 

business name registered in the province of Saskatchewan, 

they’d not be eligible for that program; they’d have to be an 

actual corporation, to pay the new $250 fee that your 

government just increased from $100? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If they came to the Business Resource 

Centre, and if the guide-line was that they had to be a corporate 

entity, then that’s what they would be told. They don’t have to 

come through the Business Resource Centre to access the 

program; many go directly to Sedco. And the rules and 

regulations and administration of the program is entirely under 

Sedco. At the Business Resource Centre, they would be advised 

that this program is there as with the Buy Saskatchewan 

program which is under the property management Crown. 

 

But if you come in — I’m giving you an example here — and 

wanted to know as a business man what the Buy Saskatchewan 

program was about, then they would indicate how it would 

impact upon your business and be of some assistance to you. 

The same thing with the co-ops now rolled into the business 

resource centres, if you came in and wanted to know how do I 

establish a co-operative, they would sit down and go through 

that type of information. So that’s what the resource centres do, 

and that’s what they do in the young entrepreneur program, too. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, with all due respect, unless they 

know how the program functions and what the requirements 

are, I don’t know how they can intelligently discuss that 

program with people coming off the street wanting information. 

In as far as I know, the youth entrepreneur program are one of 

the few programs that the province of Saskatchewan offer to 

business at the current times, especially people in that age group 

who  

don’t have a proven track record in small business. So are you 

saying to me that they don’t discuss the program, or you won’t 

discuss it here this evening, or they actually refer the program 

to Sedco without any discussion about the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m telling you that they will discuss the 

program with them, or they will say to then, you can go to 

Sedco and they will tell you the rules of it. But I’m telling you 

that I won’t discuss it here because it isn’t fitting for me to 

discuss a Sedco program under these set of estimates. 

 

When we’re in Sedco, I’ll be more than pleased to outline all of 

that to you. But if I start discussing an aspect of Sedco now, 

then that opens up the whole . . . we’d be into Sedco. So I will 

not describe a Sedco program under my Small Business 

estimates but in my business resource centres, certainly they 

would describe it as best they understand the program or they 

would refer the person directly to Sedco (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation). 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, are you not the minister in 

charge of Sedco? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I Said I would discuss this when we come 

up in the Sedco discussions. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well then I would have to assume that Crown 

corporations would be the appropriate place to discuss such 

things that fall under Sedco? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll look forward to that 

opportunity. I think it’s too bad that the small business office — 

the resource centres as you refer to them as — are quire well 

accepted. And I would not want to personally give you any 

credit or your government for the resource centres, but the 

resource centres are well received by people who attend those 

resource centres. I should maybe say, specially in The 

Battlefords, that the resource centre is a valuable service that is 

provided by government to people that are entrepreneurs or 

wish to enter into business in the are of The Battlefords. 

 

And I’m sorry we can’t discuss the youth entrepreneur program 

here this evening, but if you decline to discuss that, so be it. I 

hope to have the opportunity, although I’m not on the Crown 

Corporations Committee, to have that opportunity when Crown 

corporations come up and Sedco appears in that forum. 

 

Could you maybe tell us the, Mr. Minister, what programs 

specifically — and I apologize if you’ve answered this already 

this evening, but I don’t believe you have — what programs 

does your department, the Department of Tourism, Small 

Business and Co-ops, have to offer entrepreneurs, 

small-business people within the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

If I come into the small business office — the resource centre as 

you refer to it — in the city of North Battleford, what would 

your people in that particular office or other offices within the 

province of  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2971 

 

Saskatchewan say to the person coming in? These are the 

specific programs that we offer through our department, not 

through Sedco, not through some other department, but through 

your department. 

 

Specifically, what programs are in effect today, by statute or 

regulations, that you offer to small-business people and 

entrepreneurs in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Getting back to the question previously 

of, would I supply the information to you, I’d be more than 

pleased to give it to you in Crown Corporations, and if you 

can’t be there at any time, come and see me and we will go 

through it in detail. It’s just that I don’t think it’s fitting I 

discuss the detail of a program in another Crown during these 

estimates. And I think you realize that at the Business Resource 

Centre they would tell them about the program in detail. 

 

You asked me about programs that we would have within our 

department. Basically when you come into the . . . you ask what 

would happen if you come into the resource centre, and I think 

you understand they would tell you about a number of things: 

buy Saskatchewan, and so on and so forth. 

 

In regard to our own department, at this point in time we don’t 

have grant programs within our department of Small Business 

and Tourism, offered at this point in time. We have a 

diversification fund which we will be developing. And you 

asked something about the services, and I can go through these 

if you would like to know all the services, by maybe you know 

that. I’ll let you clarify. If you want that, I’d be more than glad 

to provide it for you. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well if you could maybe table that, Mr. 

Minister, to save time in the estimates. We don’t want to unduly 

drag out the business of this House, but what I want to know is 

specifically the programs that can be offered by your 

department, and I understand, the counselling service, and that’s 

very valuable to small business and entrepreneurs who wish to 

expand or to get into business. But you say to me that there are 

no granting programs through your particular department. 

 

I’m wondering if not the small — I don’t know the exact name 

of the program — but the interest reduction program that I 

believe was administered by your department, whether or not 

that interest reduction program is still in effect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My answer previously was basically on 

the southern part of the province. In the North we do have some 

specific granting programs — three or four of them in the North 

which I could certainly provide for you. 

 

The second part of your question that you were wanting . . . it 

slipped my mind at this point in time. What was the second part 

that you were wanting to know? We do have some granting 

programs in the North . . . Oh yes, the small business interest 

reduction program; it is ongoing for those that have qualified. 

But no, there are no new ones falling into it now. We 

terminated the program as to admitting new ones in this 

budgetary year. But there are payments still going out — you 

will see a budgetary item  

for it — for those who had qualified under the program 

previously. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think . . . I depend 

somewhat on small business for my livelihood, and just in way 

of advice, and your side doesn’t often take advice from this side 

of the House, but I would like to see more of the programs that 

do affect small business and entrepreneurs in this province who 

wish to either expand or get into business to come more under 

one department. Instead of people coming into your resource 

centre in North Battleford, or Yorkton, or Prince Albert — 

wherever that resource centre might be — instead of referring 

them to yet another agency, that the buck stops with your 

particular department. 

 

Because one of the things that Progressive Conservative 

governments have promised to do across Canada, and in 

Saskatchewan, is to reduce the amount of red tape that people 

have to go through in order to qualify and get assistance from 

the provincial government, who so often dominate small 

business by the amount of red tape that they have to go through. 

 

Mr. Minister, if I can get your attention for just a moment, you 

had a list there of the services that are provided by the resource 

centres. Instead of tabling that, or if you could table that as well, 

if you could send that by page over to our small business critic, 

I would appreciate that very much if you would undertake to do 

that. 

 

I want to close off, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate your 

co-operation by offering to provide some of the information that 

actually falls under Sedco in reference to the youth entrepreneur 

program. If you’d undertake through one of your officials to 

provide with the questions which I will ask you now, because as 

I said, I’m not on the Crown Corporations Committee; I may 

not have an opportunity to be present there. 

 

So I’m wondering first off, Mr. Minister, if you could tell us 

specifically if people who qualify in every other respect under 

the youth entrepreneur program have to be a corporation in the 

sense that they have go down or through a lawyer, go through 

the corporations branch of Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

and register as a corporation, or whether or not there are some 

other ways they can go about that, either by registering a 

business name or being a proprietorship or a partnership 

agreement in the province. 

 

I think it’s very restrictive and very dominating for a young 

person who has a good business idea and some initiative to have 

to go through the whole procedure of forming a corporation just 

for the sake of the program when maybe they don’t have to do 

that. So I’m wondering whether there are some other avenues 

they can go through. 

 

Secondly, the program in terms of the guide-lines has to be 50 

per cent owned by a resident who is between the age of 18 and 

30 years of age. I am wondering whether or not in the case of 

— say there are four people who are involved in a corporation 

which is to enter into this program, to apply for funds or 

assistance through that program, whether or not those four 

people, if there was one person who was involved who was a 

spouse of  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2972 

 

another person who was not in the age guide-lines, but the 

person themselves fell under the age guide-lines, and the other 

two individuals did not fall within the age guide-lines — 

whether or not that particular person could qualify. They may 

have a corporation, four people involved; three of those people 

are not within the age, one of the people are. Does that 

individual still have to own 50 per cent of the corporation, or 

can that individual and spouse own 50 per cent of the 

corporation and qualify for the program? And I’d appreciate 

clarification. 

 

(2145) 

 

When you talk, Mr. Minister, in the guide-lines under that same 

program, it says that Sedco will match the applicant’s equity 

contribution to a maximum of $20,000 in terms of the equity. I 

would like to know whether or not that equity has to be actual 

cash equity, so that the young person has to come up with 

$20,000 to achieve the maximum contribution from Sedco, or 

whether or not that young person can put that equity in in terms 

of the physical plant itself, the equipment that would go into the 

plant to operate the business in terms of supplies, equipment, or 

whether or not it has to be strictly cash that the person has to 

put into the program. 

 

There is also a vague area, Mr. Minister, in terms of the 

repayment of the principal and the guide-lines state that 25 per 

cent of positive net cash flow yearly have to go towards 

repayment of the loan that comes from Sedco. And I’m 

wondering whether or not there’s some leeway in that, or that’s 

a very strict guide-line. 

 

Secondly, in regard to that, I’d like to know what the actual 

interest rate is. Does the interest rate float? Is it a fluctuating 

interest rate? Is that interest rate locked in? Do the people that 

qualify under the youth entrepreneurial program, whether or not 

they know that from the actual application date. 

 

Mr. Minister, another thing that troubles me somewhat is that 

the principals, the total number of people who are involved in 

the corporation, their salary is limited to $20,000 per year as an 

aggregate. So if you had, say, five people involved, and even if 

they were all within the age of 18 years to 30 years, that would 

mean that five people would be limited to a salary of $20,000 

per year — that’s $4,000 per year each if there’s five people. 

That seems to me to be almost an unworkable situation, and as 

minister I’d like you very much to have a look at that and 

determine whether the guide-lines have some flexibility. 

Because if a young group of people got involved in this 

program, had an energetic and thriving business that was 

generating lots of revenue and they could pay back Sedco, I see 

no reason why they wouldn’t be able to draw more than $4,000 

each for a salary out of the company because they would be 

combined income entrepreneurs, I suppose, in one respect or 

another, because who could live off of that kind of a salary even 

if you did have a thriving business. I think that Sedco is 

providing a very unfair limitation on making that stipulation 

that the aggregate salary has limitations of $20,000 per year. 

 

Those are the concerns I have about that particular program, 

Mr. Minister, and I appreciate your  

co-operation even though these estimates don’t particularly 

pertain to that, that you would get that information back to me 

as an individual member of this legislature, and I would 

therefore turn it back over to the actual critic for Small 

Business, Tourism and Co-ops. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I want to being by saying to you, I 

was going to have my officials take down your questions, but I 

think it would be fair, and you would be in agreeance, if I lifted 

them from Hansard tomorrow and then had my officials in 

Sedco . . . 

 

I will give you this offer: if you want a written response we 

would do that, or perhaps maybe, with the interest that you’re 

showing in the YEP program, it would be advisable if an 

official visited with you. And if you would like that, I will 

arrange it for you. So you could just let me know after the 

House how you want it handled, and I’d be more than pleased 

to comply with your request. 

 

I also want to take this opportunity to thank you for the 

suggestion you gave me. And I don’t know if you were here 

when we first started the estimates when I mentioned to the 

critic — and I say this in all sincerity — that estimates — and 

certainly I’ve been on both sides of the House in estimates, and 

one questions things, and sure, one becomes critical of things, 

and that’s part of the whole thing. 

 

But there also is a place in this Chamber for positive 

suggestion, and you came with one, and I want to thank you for 

the comment on the business resource centres. I hear that across 

this province. I suppose I can be partisan and say, you know, we 

started them and fine; but they’re a good service, and they’re a 

good service to a lot of people. 

 

But I do want to thank you for the suggestion of kind of the 

one-stop shopping under one department. I think that’s a valid 

concern, and I’ve registered your suggestion. So if the critic 

would like to ask some questions now, I’d be more than pleased 

to try and provide the answers, but I want to say to you, the 

member for North Battleford, thank you for the suggestion. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I, 

too, would like to offer some suggestions, Mr. Minister. And 

suggestions come from your government’s record of 1982 to 

this present time. And when I look at the number of employees 

in this province and the lack of growth, I would say that — or 

employers under, say, 49 people in this province — I would say 

that there’s very good need for suggestions. And, Mr. Minister, 

what I want to suggest to you tonight is that your government 

has to change direction. 

 

And I’m saying this in a very positive fashion. I’m trying to 

present this as it’s presented to me by people in the business 

community. And what I’m saying is, Mr. Minister, that this 

government has to stop polarizing income. It’s known that in 

Saskatchewan since 1982 there are becoming more and more 

working poor in this province with less and less disposable 

income, income that they can use to shop at the small 

businesses throughout this province. 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2973 

 

And I say, Mr. Minister, that the number of people that are on 

unemployment, that weren’t prior to 1982, has increased 

dramatically, and I know you know that. And my suggestion is 

that, as government, you’re going to have to propose some real 

open for business policies that work. And I look at the figures: 

1982 to 1883, the number of business with 49 employees or 

less, 1.2 per cent increase — very, very minimal; ’83-84, little 

better year at an 11 per cent increase, and I don’t know what 

you might attribute that to. But I see again in 1984-85 — .01 

per cent increase. And my suggestion to you is, Mr. Minister, 

that you’re going to have to get some money into the hands of 

working people who shop in Saskatchewan and who support 

their local businesses. I’m afraid I can’t see that that’s 

happening. 

 

I suggest that your programs are going to have to be targeted to 

the 2.234 businesses that disappeared from the corporate 

register in 1986, businesses that just closed their doors. And my 

suggestion again is — because a lot of middle-income people 

don’t have the disposable income that they might have in order 

for them to support these businesses and allow these people to 

create employment. 

 

You know, and I know, that small businesses are one of the 

quickest ways to generate employment, not only in 

Saskatchewan but in Alberta and across the rest of this country. 

And I say . . . I’m trying to be positive about this because I’m 

trying to make you understand that that’s not been what’s 

happening. You’ve been polarizing dollars in this province, and 

the figures, I think, are very clear in that. 

 

The people of North Battleford, I’m sure, are pleased with the 

jobs that Mr. Pocklington has brought to their community, but I 

ask you at what cost? And why wasn’t that money spread about 

the small business community? Because if you look at the 

amount of dollars that this government has invested to create 

those jobs, the ratio is dismal. It’s not a ratio that you’re going 

to be able to continue. The investment to job ratio in there is 

just too high, and you can’t create jobs using public money on 

that kind of an enterprise because the private entrepreneur that 

invests, or that should be investing in there, has got to have 

something at risk, number one; and number two, we can’t 

afford to be subsidizing those kind of employers at the rate that 

you did that particular instance and expect to have a buoyant 

economy. You’ve taken money away from small businesses 

who would reinvest in the province and create those jobs. 

 

And again I say to you that small business is the best vehicle 

you have for an employment generator, but you’re not using it. I 

know that members in your caucus and in your cabinet want to 

see low unemployment rates, but we’ve been consistently, in 

this province, losing ground. We’ve been having more and 

more of our working people who can be injecting and being a 

positive part of our economy, but we’ve had more and more of 

those people relegated to the roles of what I call the working 

poor. 

 

And that’s a direction that I urge your government to change 

because you’re not going to have a buoyant Saskatchewan 

economy unless you do. I mentioned the  

bankruptcies. The jobs in manufacturing in 1981 — there were 

25,000 jobs in manufacturing in this province, and it’s my 

understanding that there is still 25,000 as of — and I’ll just look 

it up here, but I believe it was 1985 or ‘86. It was 19986. And 

that’s not the kind of moves, those kinds of things . . . The hype 

and the rhetoric is fine, but you’ve got to get into the real world, 

and you’ve got to understand that you have to have people 

working in order to have a buoyant economy in this province. 

 

We all know — it’s been said a hundred times; we’ve said it 

before, and we’ll say it again — that small business generates 

employment. And I’ve indicated tonight that if only the 30,000 

small businesses in this province were to average one more 

employee, just imagine what that would do. 

 

And I’m saying to you that we on this side are trying to be 

positive in terms of that. We’re asking you to get off of the high 

horse; stop the rhetoric; deliver some meaningful programs for 

small business. You can’t keep taxing them into the roles of 

bankruptcy. That can’t happen. There’s got to be some help for 

those people. 

 

The revenue-sharing grants to the municipal governments has 

been decreasing, which means higher municipal taxes, which 

means more of a burden on those small businesses. And, Mr. 

Minister, that has to change. 

 

In closing, I just want to indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that we 

on this side of the House want to work with you, and we want 

to work on behalf of the people of this province, the business 

men and women, because that’s why we believe that we were 

elected. 

 

We don’t always have the solutions; I’m sure you know that. 

And we know that you don’t always have the solutions. But 

what we’ve been doing is asking you to change direction. If at 

any time you want some advice, we’re here to listen as well, 

and we’re here to offer our suggestions. But we ask you to 

change your direction, understand your direction is wrong. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’ll close on the Small Business portion of these 

estimates by thanking your officials and thanking you as well 

for the answers that you have given. I am hoping that we have a 

good co-operation when we do the Tourism estimates in the 

days to come. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you. I just want to point out 

though — and I listened intently as you were giving me your 

thoughts. I just want to go back over this because I think it’s 

really what we’re talking about, certainly what we’re talking 

about from this side, and I think you would support this. 

 

I want to cite just once more the business opportunities show 

that took place in Saskatoon. It was completely self-financing. 

We did it on a break even basis. There were 182 franchisers 

there, 6,400 people interested, a possibility of 300 businesses 

starting, good solid type of leads; some of them with an 

investment — and you’d be interested in this — in the health 

food business at about 500 bucks. And I don’t know, you’d be 

better qualified that I am to say what they could start with $500, 

but that was one of the franchisers there. There were other ones 

in  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2974 

 

fast food chains up to a half a million dollars. 

 

(2200) 

 

So it was there for all walks of life — young people, women in 

business, retired people wanting to start a business. And I 

believe that’s what we should be doing, and I think you would 

support that type of initiative. 

 

So with that, Mr. Chairman, I think we’ll end this part of the 

estimates tonight. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 

 


